
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 27 October 2021

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Is the microphone working properly, Sergeant-at-Arms? Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting this afternoon. Yesterday, we heard a report on one of our Members, who had some difficulties with his health and has been in a situation where he cannot fully do what he wants arising from situations that he has found himself in, which you are aware of. 

I was told here yesterday that he has been hospitalised and the circumstances of the hospitalisation, as was described by a Member of this House, were difficult and, so, we needed to take some action. My response was, and still is, that some of these things are not for the House. They are administrative in nature; you inform the Speaker, who will take action. 

Immediately after I finished the session yesterday, I called the leaders of the hospital where the honourable member is and talked to them. I said: “You have one of my Members there. What is his condition?” We talked, changed tones and came to an understanding that whatever was not right should be rectified. 

We also heard a complaint that the Member was handcuffed on a bed. I did not say this in the House yesterday but we have seen everywhere in the world that when somebody is in custody, especially in a formal government custody, when they are hospitalised, the standard procedure is that they are secured. By making them secure, they normally put the handcuffs on the bed where the person is. The police also post another guard outside because, temporarily, that becomes part of the custody area except that somebody is unwell. The treatment goes on but the condition of temporary incarceration is maintained. That is standard practice. 

We agreed, as the leadership of the House, that we will be going to check on the Member this afternoon. I will not be able to do it myself but the Deputy Speaker will go, since I am here with you. Let her go and look after the Member, who is not here with us. Let me be with you. 

Honourable members, we try behind the scenes - without making it public - to have engagements each time a Member is in trouble. We do this all the time. Sometimes by trying to show that we care more than others, we jeopardise the channels others are trying to use to deal with the situations. 

This is because here, you come and make big statements, the consequence of which is to block all other channels for other people to do what would be best for the person concerned. For you, you will have got your mileage on the day in front of the TVs and cameras. You walk home very proud but you would not have done any service to the person you intended to help. 

Therefore, we are going to have debate as to whether you really speak for the Member or yourself. If you intend well for a person who is in trouble, you do not do things that will make the trouble continue. You do things in a way that puts the people who are doing the wrong things to shame, by engaging them.

I discourage these – and you see my reluctance at accepting some of these things. It is deliberate. This is because the minute things happen, we call the “big people” and the “small people” concerned with these things. We talk to them. Some of them come up to the office and we talk to them, saying, “Now, what do we do”? You then come here and the spanners are thrown in the works and you then do not know what to do next. 

Members, we are leaders. We are human beings and we are deeply concerned about every one of us and the people of this country. None of us can condone something that is improper, illegal or inhuman to be done to anybody else. We care more than you do, except that we do not go around showing it every time we get an opportunity. I would like to discourage these public shows that we like doing, honourable members. Even when we know that is where it will end, we still come and do it. 

That is how we have chosen to handle the issue of hon. Ssegirinya. If you want to spoil it again, stand up there and spoil it so that the people protecting the Member in the hospital stop anybody from accessing him, arising from your “proper conduct”. Let us do this as a partnership. We help each other better when we do this. 

I thought I should raise this today because it is becoming a habit that puts other people in worse situations than they already are. We do not help them by saying the kind of things we say sometimes. We help them better if we do things a certain way and find solutions to some of the problems. There are many problems and they will come and we should be prepared to deal with them in a smart way. This is a smart House of smart Members of Parliament. Let us do things smart. Thank you. 

Prof. Elijah had some issues to raise. 

2.19
MR ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. On 26 October 2021, a staff block accommodating 12 families at Kitagata Hospital in Sheema District was destroyed by fire and a lot of property was lost. There were no fire extinguishers to support the workers to put out the fire quickly. 

The fire brigade van in Bushenyi had no active battery to start the engine and come to support the hospital management. However, thanks to Kitagata Town Council community, particularly the boda bodas; they responded with water buckets and put out the fire. 

Mr Speaker, Kitagata Hospital serves clients from five districts of Sheema, Buhweju, Rubirizi, Mitooma and Bushenyi. It also serves patients from other neighbouring districts of Rukungiri, Kanungu and Ntungamo. In practice, it is a regional referral hospital of some sort but with inadequate facilities to meet the demand from our citizens.
 
The medicine supplied to the district by National Medical Stores barely lasts for a month. The old ambulance available is always in garages around Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality. This could be a similar situation around the country, with other general hospitals established at the same time, 1969. The situation at Kitagata Hospital requires urgent attention. 

Now my prayers are that the Ministry of Health should urgently supply fire-fighting equipment at the hospital; at the minimum, fire extinguishers should be supplied. 

Secondly, I pray that staff who have lost property be urgently supported by relief items including tents for temporary accommodation. 

Three, the hospital urgently needs an ambulance to respond to emergency referral cases to Mbarara Regional Hospital. 

Lastly, we request the Ministry of Health to send a team to Kitagata Hospital to assess the needs of the hospital in relation to the overwhelming demands from patients. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Government Chief Whip, do you have something to say?

2.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Prof. Mushemeza, for raising this issue. Last night, we shared this report with the Prime Minister; I happen to have received it early. The Prime Minister immediately directed the Minister of Health to go to Kitagata Hospital and do an assessment. 

However, the clarification I want to make to the House is that it is not true that the fire brigade in Bushenyi was not working at all. Yesterday, hon. Robert Rukaari told us that the little that was saved in the market in Mbarara was by the fire engine from Bushenyi. So, you can see! Anytime your car battery can fail to work not that the car isn’t working. And so, it is not that the fire engine is permanently not working. 
Anyhow, we are going to handle that issue immediately and we are going to deal with the leaders. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the concern being raised by the Member is that those were fire brigades from Mbarara, yet the record shows that the honourable member who raised the matter is from Mbarara and said the rescue fire engine that saved the situation came from Bushenyi; that is what we got yesterday - now you want to raise clarification with me? I am just helping you, please. I am just being generous to you. If you are standing up to say, “Thank you” I would allow you but - please sit. I know you; no point of procedure today. 

Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have guests – and they are watching you behaving the way you are doing - from the Parliament of Ghana; they are watching us, hon. Ssewungu. (Laughter) They are watching us. 

The delegation was set up by the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Ghana to coordinate the drafting and other related processes, leading to the passing of the Budget Private Member's Bill in that country. 

The delegation is composed of former MPs and staff of Parliament. They include:

    i) Hon. Magnus Kofi Amoatey - Head of Team; 
    ii) Hon. Mahana Shaibu; 
    iii) Mr Muhammed Nyangsi; 
    iv) Ms Sena Atsu; and 
    v) Dr Abraham Ibn Zakaria - do I know Dr Abraham? I think I do. 

They are here to share experiences and observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Part of what you are seeing now is not how we normally do business –(Laughter)– so, please do not record that. You are very welcome. Please join me again in welcoming the honourable delegation. (Applause) Can we now go to the Order Paper?

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON INCIDENTS OF TWO BOMB EXPLOSIONS: ONE THAT OCCURRED IN KOMAMBOGA, KAMPALA; AND ANOTHER ON A SWIFT SAFARIS PASSENGER BUS IN LUNGALA, MPIGI DISTRICT, ON KAMPALA-MASAKA HIGHWAY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister of Internal Affairs.

2.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker - (Interruption)

MR EBWALU: Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 82 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament that clearly spells out how we should dress in this Parliament. I see the honourable minister dressed in a shirt not even tucked in. Is he in order to dress in that manner, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: What the Minister is about to deal with: “Statement by minister on incidents of two bomb explosions…” and we are about to start discussing his dress code! It is key and I agree. But I am wondering what is more key? (Laughter)

That aside, modern dressing these days, if you go to countries like Fiji - yes, I have been there - and Malaysia, you will realise these are the formal dresses they wear at work. They are traditional kinds of clothes that they wear. If you appear in your kanzu without a tie, it would still be acceptable because it is cultural. (Applause) No, I am just illustrating to those of you who have not been able to leave your villages and see how other people do it.

For example, you might want to find out what my honourable member there is wearing – and even hon. Ssewungu. (Laughter) You might also want to find out what very many of us are wearing. 

Therefore, for the purposes of the matter we are going to handle now – If he cannot go back, why did you raise it? If it was not because I care so much about my people, I would have said that he is not properly dressed and he would go. It would be the easiest way. I would shorten the Order Paper and I also go home. 

However, these matters are very critical and the minister is appropriately dressed except that for me, I have to put on these “things” but one day, I would have showed up like that as well. This is standard African wear; in South Africa, some people even call them “Presidential Shirts”. The late Nelson Mandela wore them for the whole of his term, except for him, he has not buttoned to the last button. (Laughter) 

Therefore, really, honourable members, stop waving at me the rules; these clothes are worn by presidents, who are you to wave at -(Laughter)– Honourable minister, please, proceed with the substance of this matter.

GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Hon. Nambeshe rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, resume your seat. I will deal with this statement first and then, I will deal with your procedure. Unless you do not want to receive this statement. Let the country receive this statement and then, we deal with it. -  I know that and you do not have to remind me. Please, resume your seat.

Okay, let him raise the point of procedure and I will deal with it.

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, with all due respect, you were even constrained on interpreting this Rule 82, which was raised by the Member.

THE SPEAKER: Who told you I was constrained? (Laughter)

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, if you could extend to me courtesy.

THE SPEAKER: I wish you had done the same to me.

MR NAMBESHE: This ruling is going to set a very bad precedent for this House.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not a bad precedent.

MR NAMBESHE: The dress code in a Parliament that respects the practice of the Commonwealth cannot be compared to other parliaments that do not follow that practice. I know the discretionary powers to determine or even rule are resident in your Chair. However, it is my considered opinion that given the fact that you are the custodian of the rules, if we allow this to happen because the minister is a General, it is going to set a very bad precedent for this august House.

THE SPEAKER: Is he a General?

MR NAMBESHE: He is.

THE SPEAKER: No, I did not consider that.

MR NAMBESHE: I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter you are raising? What have you said that requires me to rule?

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, it is not right and fitting for the Member –

THE SPEAKER: Is it right and fitting?

MR NAMBESHE: Therefore, is it procedurally right and fitting for the Member to address this House when he is inappropriately dressed? 

THE SPEAKER: I have just said he is properly dressed. If you are challenging the ruling, the rules, which you wave very diligently, instructs on how to challenge the Speaker’s ruling. You do not just show up as if you are going for a meeting in Manjiya and then, you start challenging the Speaker’s ruling. The rules are clear on how to challenge the Speaker’s ruling. 

Yes, you know it. How do you challenge the Speaker’s ruling? The rules are clear. You are the same one saying my ruling was not proper and that I did not look at the rules properly and then, you did not look at the rules properly in challenging the Speaker’s ruling. Two wrongs do not make a right – assuming the other one was a wrong. I think there is only one wrong here. You are completely out of order. 

GEN. MUHOOZI: Mr Speaker, maybe, what we pick from today is – so that I am not accused of being let off the hook –

THE SPEAKER: General, do you want to start by commenting on the matter? No, I think let us deal with the substance.

GEN. MUHOOZI: Okay, thank you. Mr Speaker, allow me to say from the onset and off-script before I go into the details on the paper that what is contained here is the bare minimum of what we can afford to share – for obvious reasons, namely not to jeopardise investigations and on-going operations. 

I also want to inform the House that before these attacks, we have had disruptive operations and that is why the country has been safe this far. The terror threat remains alive nevertheless, for a number of reasons:

    1. Our proximity to the haven in eastern DRC, which allows for freedom of action and organisation of the terror groups. These ungoverned spaces need to be dealt with in a collaborative way with the other concerned states. 

    2. Global dynamics that feed into the growth of terrorism. We now have new groups in the mix; we have ISIS Central Africa and Al-Shabaab – both international groups to which now the ADF is affiliated.
    3. Expansion of the terrorist networks regionally with the attendant collaboration, recruitment, organisation and operations.

    4. New tactics and trends, including radicalisation, use of technology and the resort to suicide bombing like we saw in the bus incident – and we nearly saw at the burial of the late Gen. Paul Lokech. That is a new dimension, thanks to the new tactics of these terror groups.

From the onset, I would like to say that we are faced with a real threat. And in fighting terrorism, we need resilience, unity of purpose and strategic patience. That said, I think the paper is already circulated and I hope Members have scanned through it. 

I now take the opportunity to run through the salient points of the report.

Mr Speaker, this report is meant to inform Parliament about the attack that happened at Digida Pork Joint in Komamboga Parish, Kawempe Division as well as the one aboard a bus bound for Ishaka at a place called Lungala near Mpigi on 23 October 2021 and 25 October 2021 respectively.

Background

Regarding the Komamboga incident, on 23 October 2021 at around 8.00 p.m. at Cheers and Beers Pub and Pork Joint, Kwata, Komamboga, Kawempe Division, there was an explosion that left one person dead and three injured. 

The deceased was identified as Emily Nyiraneza, a bar attendant at the pub. The injured were identified as Ssengozi Peter alias Taata Africa, Annet Kiconco, Nandabi Derrick alias Mina J, and Nakitto Rose. The business belongs to a one Sam Lule. 

Similarly, an attack took place aboard a Swift bus registration number UAU 989T bound for Ishaka at Lungala near Mpigi in which one person, Matovu Isaac, otherwise known as Muzafaru, died on the spot and several others were injured. The antecedents and nature of injuries that led to his death were examined by the specialists to aid investigations. This led to the informed conclusion that the victim in that incident was a suicide bomber. 

Police actions thus far

The crime scene at Komamboga was cordoned off and preserved pending examination by bomb experts and the anti-terrorism team. That has been done. 

The victims were identified and evacuated for medical attention.

The exhibits were gathered and preserved for examination by the forensics people. 

Statements were recorded from the relevant witnesses. 

The second incident along Kampala-Masaka Road, the same rituals were done. The place was cordoned off to effect crime scene extractions and victims were evacuated. Others continued on their way. Investigations continue, including an audit of events from where the journey started up to the point of explosion. 

All the leads and threads of information gathered this far in the course of investigations will be exploited to expose and apprehend all the culprits. 

What are the revelations thus far regarding Komamboga to the extent that we can share?

    1. It was established that at the time of the explosion, about 30 people had converged at Cheers and Beers bar to watch a football match with the attendant accompaniments. 

    2. It was established that the explosion caused the death of Emily Nyiraneza, an adult female, 22 years of age and a resident of Kitala Zone, Kanyanya Parish, Kawempe Division.

    3. It was further established that some of the people at the scene sustained injuries and among these are Ssengozi Peter, Annet Kiconco, Nandabi Derrick and Nakitto Rose.

    4. According to eye witnesses, they sighted a red flashing light under a table which was surrounded by five empty chairs. At the table, there were some empty and un-consumed bottles of alcohol.

    5. The deceased, apparently had sat there to safeguard the drinks of what she called her clients.

    6. When a one Derrick Nandabi saw the flashing lights, he inquisitively asked Emily Nyiraneza about them. They both bent down to examine the item and this is when the object exploded killing her and injuring the others. 

    7. It was further established from witnesses that the empty table where the black flashing object had been located was initially occupied by two people. 

    8. The two men had reportedly been there several times, the last one being two days before the incident.

What security observes is as follows;

    1. There were no cameras at Komamboga but eye witness accounts afford a clear recollection of what took place and this is helping investigations.

    2. The bar – the scene of the crime – is patronized by many revellers, making it vulnerable. This is a lesson we may have to pick for purposes of preventive measures that we want for all public places.

    3. The security services are sieving through the available information and evidence, which is helpful in tracking down the culprits. 

Pending actions

    i) Retrieving expert reports from the concerned specialists.
    ii) Obtaining the Government Analytical Laboratory forensic analysis reports for both incidents.
    iii) Identifying, tracking and arresting all the perpetrators of these two heinous attacks.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that this is a threat to all of us. It is indiscriminate. We need every one in the fight. Public vigilance and cooperation is critical. 

The security agencies will do everything possible to apprehend the culprits and bring them to book. We have made good progress in this respect but I am not at liberty to share the details at the moment.

Vigilance levels will be decisively upped to ensure that we confront the threat. To this end, our anticipation levels should be stretched as far as is reasonable, especially for public places and vessels – meaning things like vehicles – that are most vulnerable in order for the necessary stringent alerts and preventive measures to be instituted. In this, we need the cooperation of everyone. 

We have faced this threat before, in its rural and urban dimensions, on bigger scales and we defeated it. Our resolve is, therefore, tested. We shall defeat this wave too.

We call upon everyone to avoid making inappropriate and unverified statements which only amplify public apprehension and anxiety, thereby complementing the desired intended aim of the perpetrators.

Let us stand together as a country and be each other’s keeper. We shall prevail. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these were a series of incidents that were not easy for this country. People died.  We do not know the extent to which evil people can go. It is only an evil person that can plan a grand massacre of people he/she has no grudge with and indiscriminately aim at destroying their lives. Such people are there and they are dangerous to all of us. We must be our first line of defence. Each time these things happen, or we pick information or a constituent calls and expresses some things that cannot be understood easily, we must, as Members of Parliament, take up the matter and inform the concerned people. 

I saw an alert from the British High Commission about a terror threat in Uganda. And it was in a matter of hours that this happened. 

The question is, how did they know what we do not know? Is their intelligence better than ours? Can we up our game as well? They do not have any better system in the country than we have. How can they send a terror alert for an incident that is about to happen and we have no clues? 

These are things that should interest us so that we are on top of our game. 

The debate on this matter which we are going to have now should not make an attempt to inflame the situation. We should raise issues, ask questions and make suggestions on how we can do better and agree to be part of the team that will be vigilant enough to engage with our constituents to source information and channel them to the right people so that we get to know these things a few hours -

The other day, I was talking to people about the East African Federation and some professor told us something that was shocking. He said, “The bureaucrats are still sitting in cold rooms, trying to find a solution to how the federation should go on but the thieves have already federated.” The criminals have already federated; they have networks free of tax or any hindrance.

Here we are involved in political discussions when the thieves have sorted that thing out. We are calling for unity of all us, as Members of Parliament when the criminals are fully united in their scheme of things. That puts them ahead of us all the time. We should up our game, come together as Members of Parliament and get the country together so that we can be very close to them. Each time they go left, we know and each time they turn right, we know. We cannot do that when we are not united for that purpose. 

My appeal to you, honourable members, is that we take this matter seriously. Let us engage and be a channel through which this information can be passed to the relevant authorities so that we can take action before things go really bad.

I am not allowed to debate; I just made a statement. You have a procedural matter again? (Laughter)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not want to be the one delaying deliberations on this very urgent matter. In our usual “Business to follow” there is a similar matter that I expected a concurrent response to, besides the statement on the twin bombings. It is an attack on our UPDF military facility in Zombo, which left Ugandans dead. 

THE SPEAKER: When did that happen? 

MR NAMBESHE: Some time ago and not once. It has happened –

THE SPEAKER: Since you are raising the procedural matter, I need to rule on it.

MR NAMBESHE: This is a matter that has been pending for donkey years.

THE SPEAKER: Donkey years – That is the difference. 

MR NAMBESHE: It should have been disposed of by the same minister or even the Minister of Security because it carries with it similarities and commonalities. It is taking too long on the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the next time we review the Order Paper, it will be removed because a lot of activities have taken place. As a result, it no longer stands the way it is as of now. Things have changed too much about that same situation that you would require a whole new statement to deal with that. Probably, we are just saving the wastage of time to discuss something which is over a year old when things have changed too much. We need to have it updated. 

We received the statement on that bombing but when a statement is talking about an urgent matter and they are quoting dates of 14 January 2021, this happened and in December 2020, this is what was happening, it stops being the kind of thing you want to engage Parliament in debating. This is because in June, so many things shifted and that makes the events of January a complete history. This is not a House of history although its records are historical. We do not want to engage in discussing matters that are not relevant anymore to our discussions. That is why that matter has not yet been discussed.

Can I start the debate with the Member for Otuke? Let the Member for Otuke speak and then I will see if I can entertain your procedure.

2.53
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the time. I thank the minister for the report that he has just given. Any sense of terrorism and loss of life of a citizen is a very bad thing. I really want to appreciate the actions so far taken by the security forces to dig into the matter and bring the culprits to book.

The point I really want to raise and emphasise is around community policing. We had a system of the RC system and the security system that went with it but over time, we have kind of ignored it because every stranger that would come into our homes was reported through the RC system. They would know the new stranger. 

I urge the Ministry, Office of the President (Security) that educating and empowering our people around community policing will go a long way to ameliorate and identify some of these things in time.

I also would like to emphasise the aspect of a special police bureau that we used to have to investigate matters such as this one. I know that as Parliament, we have given sufficient tools to the ministry to do work such as this on matters of investigation and making sure that we keep the country safe. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the gentleman with the point of procedure? He can change it into a debate if he would like to.

MR SEKABIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I wanted to raise is that on 19 October 2021, a Member, hon. Betty Nambooze, was also attacked. I expected this issue to be addressed by the same minister because it is still a security concern. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Was it brought to the attention of the minister? Am I expected to rule on that as a point of procedure? You see, honourable members, why I hesitate to allow points of order and procedure is because I know when they are genuine. I am here looking at all of you. I am looking at the proceedings and I see the direction it is taking. There is no point of order or point of procedure that I do not anticipate. So, the ones that come when I have not anticipated are not correct ones. (Laughter)

When you rise on a point of order and I do not allow you, it is because I know what you are going to say. (Laughter) Therefore, be very careful before you raise a point of procedure because I am following the proceedings; I am here with you. I watch you all the time you sit there and then all of a sudden, you hear, “Procedure”. 

You see, I asked this Member to sit down and he refused. What happened? Can we now proceed with hon. Nsamba? 

2.58
MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the statement. However, there are issues I heard when this happened. For example, when the Komamboga incident happened, on social media, we heard that ISIS claimed responsibility for the attack. The ISIS is an internationally known terrorist group. The social media reported that ISIS claimed responsibility for the attack that sent a lot of fear among Ugandans.

Honourable minister, I expected your statement to allay the fears of Ugandans on the claim by ISIS. Unfortunately, you have not mentioned anything about it. 

Mr Speaker, at that time, the Police denied the claims by the ISIS terrorist group. Yet, when the bus incident happened, the Police said the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) was responsible for that. The ISIS claimed responsibility for the Komamboga bomb attack while for the attack on Swift bus, the Police claimed the ADF was responsible.

In these two incidents regarding the claim by the ISIS and that by the Police that the ADF was responsible, the minister does not say anything. At this moment, it is not a usual statement that the minister should bring before the House. The minister should just tell Ugandans the right situations so that Ugandans know how to respond and what to do.

Mr Speaker, I thought the minister should have arrested the doubts of Ugandans who may be in fear about ADF and ISIS. In the minister’s statement, there is nothing about those two situations. Yet, the Police Spokesman, Mr Enanga, has continued to say whatever he wants to. Therefore, the minister should respond to those key questions for the benefit of the people of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I heard the minister saying that there are things he can say here and those he would rather not say here. That is what he said. [Member rose _] He is a smart Member of Parliament because that is not what he said previously. (Laughter)

When I was looking at him for a possibility of reprimand, he shifted immediately. That is a smart way of doing things. Let us continue with the debate. 

3.02
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Internal Affairs for the statement. I would also like to join him and the rest of Ugandans first to condemn this unlawful act but also to pass our message of condolence to the bereaved families and wish the injured a speedy recovery.

These acts caused a lot of panic in the public. The public is not sure whether we are in charge of the situation. I understand that this bar is a place where high profile Ugandans go to. Even one of us - it is unfortunate the Member is out but I wanted to say it when he is present.

One of the ministers posted that this is a place he usually goes to. This can tell you that the motive of the attackers was to hurt high profile Government officials.

This statement itself has contradictions. We know that it happened at a place called Digida Pork Joint, yet the minister is telling us about Cheers and Beers Pub and Pork Joint. I do not know whether this is the same place. Otherwise, you are opening paragraphs and yet, it is clear that it happened at Digida Pork Joint. Honourable minister, in your statement, you are explaining something else about Cheers and Beers. We would like you to clarify that.

Secondly, we are also told that this bar is owned by Sam Lule. Who is he and where is he now? Clearly, the operation of the bar was in breach of the Standard Operating Procedures we put in place to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Therefore, you cannot come here and explain to us, without telling us where Sam Lule is. Had he not operated his bar at that time, there were chances that these terrorists would not have reached there.

This investigation must be conducted very professionally. I would like to say that for the first time, I feel an element of professionalism. (Applause) In the past, the spokesperson of the Uganda Police Force, Mr Enanga, was known for saying many things but this time, he measured and he was very careful. He is not blaming anyone and I think that is what we should do. When things happen, we should not carelessly throw blames about colours before we reach a logical conclusion.

THE SPEAKER: Is that the same officer, where they draw a cartoon saying some incidents happened and then, he said this photograph was taken tomorrow? (Laughter)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, you can see what I am talking about. I feel that the communication that has been coming from the Police and the authorities is very professional. This is what we should maintain, if we are to defeat terrorism.

Lastly, this incident happened but we do not have any information from the Commander in Charge of that area. Social media reported that a Police patrol truck is parked in that area everyday but in this report, we have not heard the steps that have been taken against those commanders. I really do not think that can jeopardise security. We need assurance that the police are in charge.

Of course, I cannot leave the Floor without thanking Gen. Muhoozi for coming. I was afraid that he would not be here because I read in the social media that today, the 27th is a “Gen. Muhoozi day” somewhere. Therefore, thank you for coming here to be with us. (Laughter) Looking at the way he is dressed, it is appropriate for that occasion. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, he is going there after here. 

3.06
MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the first time, I have caught your eye. I would also like to thank the minister for the presentation. 

We are tasked not to create any microscopic gap that can put the people of Uganda at a risk. The Constitution makes it clear under Article 213 and it stipulates clearly the command of the Police.

It is now many months since we lost the Deputy Inspector General of Police (IGP). It is also clear that the framers of the Constitution knew we needed an IGP and a deputy. We would like to think that the honourable minister in his presentation did not clearly tell us how far he has gone in guiding the appointing authority to appoint the Deputy IGP. Perhaps - 

THE SPEAKER: No, it is because he was talking about the two bomb incidents; that is what he was talking about. He was not talking about appointments. You are crossing the line of relevance and I am going to ask you to resume your seat. Please resume your seat. These matters are serious. 

3.08 
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement presented. I would like to take this chance to also pass my condolences to the families that have lost their loved ones. 

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time we have been hit by terrorists. We are a target of terrorists because of our involvement in securing peace in other countries. 

I remember in 2010, we were hit by terrorists; the Al-Shabab claimed responsibility just because the UPDF had gone to Somalia. We have also been to the Central African Republic and other countries. Therefore, this could possibly be the reason we are being targeted by the terrorists this time as well. 

My issue here is about the measures that were put in place after the 2010 terrorist attacks occurred in Uganda. Government came up with measures that people were supposed to observe. For example, when entering a bus, all civilians are supposed to be thoroughly checked. All public places are supposed to have checkpoints. However, it appears like all these have been relaxed because as Ugandans, we tend to forget. 

I remember around 2004, the then Speaker, the late Rt Hon. Francis Ayume, lost his life in a motor accident. The reason for this was that he had not wearing a seatbelt. At the time, the police mounted serious operations to ensure every vehicle had seatbelts and the people travelling wore them. 

I see that we have relaxed in all this. Terrorism is a war without a frontline. It can attack anyone and so, I think we need to take responsibility, as a country. We also expect the police to go back to the previous terrorism guidelines that were issued to ensure all these places adhere to them. 

Mr Speaker, there was an issue you raised regarding investigations. We have talked about investigating cases many times in the House. Most times, we tend to be hit by issues before we get to know them. 

There has been a lot of “professionalisation” of the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force personnel. However, I have seen a bit of weakness with the police. It is good to recruit graduates and promote them but they need time to gain experience. For example, you find someone passes out of a police training school and he is immediately appointed an officer in charge of a station, leading officers with 10 to 20 years of built experience. Nonetheless, you find a junior officer commanding seniors; academically this junior officer is a graduate but he has never built experience on ground. 

In my opinion, this affects the transfer of knowledge. For example, a graduate from a police training school is supposed to be trained as a CID officer but the person supposed to instruct that person is a sergeant. By the rank of the army, it is the senior who commands the junior. That affects the transfer of knowledge. 

Mr Speaker, we need to build capacity in terms of forensics and others. In other places, when this kind of situation happens, investigations are done very fast and cases are looked into. As much as we have built some capacity, terrorism is a new challenge to this country. We need to build more capacity to look into it. 

I think with the nature of explosions and the magnitude of damage - when taken into consideration - we could be lucky that these are not serious terrorists. I still imagine how an explosion hit a bus and it didn’t explode. That means that these must be local terrorists with low levels of experience. If it were like in those other countries where a bomb explodes and probably 50 persons die in a mosque, we will have lost many people. This bus would have exploded and many people would have died in it and at the pork joint. 

It is my humble appeal that we take responsibility. This might possibly be a home grown kind of situation that we also need to investigate; it might not be an external situation. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The point made by the Member about Ugandans being forgetful once things ease out a little is true. Even in my own House this afternoon, we have agreed that we should wear masks but I have seen some Members not wearing them. Before I call your name, please put on your mask and ensure it covers both your mouth and nose. I will not mention your names. Take that as a debt from the Speaker, which you will pay one day. 

3.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to send my condolences to the families that lost their dear ones in these two bomb incidents that happened on Saturday and this week, respectively.

Allow me to also thank Gen. Muhoozi, for the statement presented. However, like my colleagues have stated, I think there are things that we know would not jeopardise the investigations but would have beefed up the general statement in clarifying some issues. 

One of them is the issue of the ISIS and the ADF. Mr Enanga, the Police Spokesperson, stated that this is an act of domestic terrorism. Could the minister clarify whether this is domestic terrorism or something else as claimed by the other terrorist groups? 

The minister should also come out clearly to tell those that are violating the SOPs yet curfew guidelines still stand in this country. It is not only that bar that operates. I told him yesterday about a place called Chamber in Ntinda near the checkpoint at Ntinda Centre. There is a highly connected gentleman operating a bar there. On Independence Day, they went trans-night yet the police post is nearby. I say this because I live near that place. I think your commanders have either been overpowered by the operators or you make some of us believe that such places are run by people in the Forces. Therefore, you need to step up your game and deal with these people and not deal with people selectively. 

There is another place called Ku Mbuzi along Kampala-Gayaza Road, as you go to Kasangati, just one kilometre from Komamboga. It operates and you even find police officers directing traffic, instead of arresting. It is very disturbing that this happens; I think we have relaxed so much. 

There is another place in Kabusu in Rubaga there. I understand it is run by a former Member of Parliament. You find Local Defence Unit (LDU) personnel and the police patrol car – mobile 999 – parked there -

THE SPEAKER: Just to clarify the record. You witnessed the traffic police officers directing traffic - If the records stay the way they are, it could be taken that you are one of the people who was directed. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, one, I am a national leader and I have friends across. They call and tell me. However, for the one of Mbuzi, the day we came back – I think we had gone for a burial in Gulu – we passed by as we drove in and that is what we saw in that place.

THE SPEAKER: I am just saying you should be very careful not to self-implicate. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: I am very careful, Mr Speaker. I think our people need to take up this. 

On the issue of cameras, I think the public should not only leave it to the Government. The Government cannot provide cameras everywhere. I think there are Ugandans who can be able – in that place, when you see the type of houses, people there can be able to install cameras and help the Government, in case such incidents happen, to arrest such people. 

It happened to us in Ntinda one time when someone came and burnt somebody's home. It was us the neighbours who had cameras who helped the police when they came and they were able to pick up the person who had set fire in that home. Therefore, I think there should be a call to the public also to help the Government. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I think a strong warning should come from the General to the public who violate the SOPs. The Ministry of Health has done its part to protect us from COVID-19 but we are becoming very big-headed to the extent that it has cost us lives. 

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, you are the chairman of the Parliamentary Commission. Our team here, without talking too much, must step up its game in securing the precincts of Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will have Col Charity. The shadow minister, who I always allow to speak towards the end so that I hand over, has some issues. So, he wants to speak at this time. Therefore, he will speak after Col Charity and then I will have the Member for Nyabushozi to speak on this matter and then we continue.

3.20
COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to appeal to colleagues to always comply with security personnel that we find at checkpoints. Many times, we are a little arrogant when they ask us either to identify ourselves or to go through the checkpoints. It is for the good of all of us. 

A case in point is that when we were going to Jinja on Monday as the Committee on ICT and National Guidance, while we waited outside the main gate of Parliament, a gentleman walked into the bus, did not say hello to anyone and took his seat. 

I asked colleagues who were near me whether they knew him and they did not. So, I walked to him, greeted him, identified myself and asked him who he was. He said, “You do not have to know me” in a bus the MPs were boarding to take a trip to Jinja. I said: “Can I have a look at your ID, Sir?” He said: “I do not have it.” That was really strange. It was not until the clerk to the committee came and identified – actually, he said: “Let that one identify me.” 

I found that very unnecessary and arrogant. Therefore, in the event that a bomb went off in that bus where MPs were, that would be a big loss. So, let us be humble enough that when a security person asks you to identify yourself, please, do it. It does not cause any harm. 

Lastly, we have audiences of the people that we lead out there. Let each one of us go and sensitise them about this threat because security is the business of all of us. We are part of the intelligence system – all of us here and the wananchi out there. I appeal to all of us to go to our constituencies and sensitise the people about the threat that we have. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Shadow minister. 

3.23
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Abdallah Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have attentively listened and perused through the statement of the honourable minister. It has some gaps, which need to be filled for our hearts to get to normal. 

First of all, I commensurate with the families of the deceased and may their souls rest in eternal peace. As my colleague indicated, when we look at this statement, it becomes hard for us to know which area we are discussing. It talks about two places: Digida and Cheers. Which place is the report about?  Honourable minister, as the Speaker said that he gets alerts sometimes we also get those alerts from the same sources.  

On the 14th, we received an alert from UK and France and the Daily Monitor the following day – on the 15th – carried that story. Actually, more than a week from that day, we started getting these attacks. 
Mr Speaker, one word to a person prepared to fight terrorism is enough to make him prepared. What our colleagues in police did – they said “they need to give us details” they do not need to simply stop there. 

However, as you are aware, we appropriate money. Defence and police get the biggest portion of our budget. When you look at this statement, apart from talking about Samuel, the Minister is falling short to tell us where Samuel is right now. Is he in police custody? This is because without any doubt, he was contravening the laws. We are aware – some of our colleagues take that route. This place has always been guarded by two patrol cars; one this side and the other the other side.

Why are you leaving this important information out of this report? Why is it that you cannot tell us that the nearest police station to this place is Kawempe, Komamboga and Mpererwe? Where is the DPC? What were they doing? Where are they right now?  Where is the OC Station of Mpererwe, Komamboga or the DPC of Kawempe?  Are you going to redeploy them? Are they still on duty when they slept on duty and Ugandans lost their lives? 

We need a thorough explanation about this because since Saturday, when this event happened, we expected these three people to be in court. You cannot tell us that they are still in detention, because this is a clear thing; they slept on duty and we expect them to be in court and you should deny them bail.

Mr Speaker, going on the way forward, in the previous attacks, which we faced years back, by this time, several adverts were already running across the televisions: “please, do not move closer to the bags; please, be aware of your neighbour and please, do not go in restaurants where there are abandoned bags. What actions have you taken this time? We need to know all of them so that Ugandans can return to normal.

However, all the above is missing in this statement. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I had already picked the next member.

3.29
MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I thank the Minister of Internal Affairs, for the statement and updating the country, after the two unfortunate terrorist attacks. Terrorism is bad and it must be fought. 

This is not the first time that the Republic of Uganda has handled terrorism. We have been attacked before but our security forces have been so vigilant and they have fought terrorism both domestically and internationally. We applaud you for that and you actually need our support. This august House should give them the support that they need. 

I would have liked the minister to state how they want us to support them. Let me start with the bomb attack on the bus. Public transport is very important to this country. The taxi park has one entrance and one exit. Therefore, it should not be a problem to secure the public transporters.
 
I would have liked to see what happens at international airports being done with our public transport people. Whoever is going to board a bus should be checked thoroughly: his or her name should be recorded and shared by the Police. It seems inconveniencing but it is better than having dead bodies. The same should apply to the luggage both in hand and that kept away.  Even on the highways, we should have designated parks, where people stop these buses. 

Public places for entertainment

I like the observations made by the honourable minister. He fell short of saying that they contravened the Standard Operating Procedures. However, in my view, every public place must have a camera and a metal detector for walkthrough. 

Mr Speaker, we are subjected to a thorough search every day. We enter the premises of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda as Members of Parliament. That too should happen to public places and it should be implemented. Therefore, the bar owner must have a digital record for the bar attendants - it is not proper to call them so – but people who come for entertainment. Their luggage should also be checked. 

I applaud the vigilance exhibited so far and I call for more of it both from the security forces and us. If there is any other support that they need, the minister should call upon us. If it is for the budget, this august House should give them the resources they need to defeat terrorism, both internally and externally. 

I conclude by commiserating with the bereaved and may God rest the dead in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I have Kumi District?

3.32
MS APOLOT CHRISTINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister, for that statement.

Mr Speaker, you are aware that certain categories of students are reporting on 1st November for institutions of higher learning and there is now panic across the country; parents have a fear for the security of their children as they are going to report back. I expected the minister to have included some preventive approaches for the rest of Ugandans. It is my plea that the Minister of Internal Affairs summarises the key points for the media stations. If possible, we could have simple messages in the local languages across the country because this situation is very bad. 

Thugs are also going to take advantage of the situation. We know that there are thugs across the country. In Teso Subregion, we have seen situations where army related clothes are sold in the markets. Many times, we wonder how these clothes reach the markets, and wrong elements in the communities are going to take advantage of this and also begin doing wrong things worsening the security situation in the country. 

My plea is that this current situation of terrorism should be considered and spot messages be taken to the local radio stations in local languages so that everyone becomes alerted on the current situation. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I have Apac District? 

3.34
MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We know the motive of the terrorists is very bad; we know that they are funded, they have well-wishers and they are also connected.

We hear that the foreign extremist groups that are behind most attacks in this region, including Uganda are very hostile. Therefore, we should not take it for granted; we should be suspicious of everything. 

For you to do intelligence, you need information and concrete information. Politically, knowing what Kampala is, I urge our intelligence teams to step up in surveillance and use all their skills and expertise. Mr Speaker, if they do not tackle these bomb threats, Uganda will be painted as a country that is unstable. It is a big threat but I know our security personnel are doing their best. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable. Honourable members, these things happened last week on Saturday. I am not enjoying the trend of the debate because when things happen fresh and everybody is in that state, I expect us to put our brains together to try and find solutions the best way – to make suggestions. Do this. It is not a debate. It cannot be a debate. There is nothing to debate. The thing is, this has happened; how do we mobilise to make sure it does not happen again? That is the direction I wanted us to take. Let us have hon. Ssewungu.

3.38
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, I have solutions. I thank the minister for the report he has given although it has some missing areas. 

Mr Speaker, we have had these problems a number of times. Whenever time passes, people tend to forget. What happens in other countries is that for example in buses, there must be disclaimers written on the buses that as you enter, make sure you find out what the person seated next to you is holding. That is what is done in other countries.

The other solution – and Gen. Muhoozi knows this, as my former supervisor and boss. There are things you do not have to reveal in public after such an incident has happened. For example, you hear the police spokesperson defining the type of bombs that were used – that it had nails and so on. That is your confidential information –(Interjection)– Yes, that is confidentiality because you are investigating. 

As you carry out your investigations, sometimes it is us or you that is giving more information to these people because you are not keeping your first information to yourselves – but it is revealed very fast. If I had power in this country, I would be dismissing or stopping a number of spokespersons because they confuse many people. 

Let us avoid statements that can give courage to other criminals. This was a pork joint and Ssewungu enjoys eating pork regularly because he is not a Muslim, but someone comes out and says that the killers are pigs. But the killing was at a pork joint. People start turning this information into a joke on social media. 

We need continuous education and sensitisation of the masses. This is failing. That is why even now, in this House, you, Mr Speaker, were asking Members to put on their masks. I do not know whether some of us do not know how to read because there is information everywhere – even where they are seated. But you must continue sensitising them. 

Can we avoid politicising this matter? (Applause) Gen. Enanga – if he is a General – asked, “Why do you think the people who were there were wearing red or yellow at that particular time?” If they were in red, is it an issue? Is it necessary to tell the press at the media centre that they were wearing red? 

In our minds, once you talk about red, yellow or blue, we go to political parties. Can we stop that? 

As I conclude, these are the solutions we are giving: Let us go back and continue talking to our people. You see what is happening even in this COVID-19 era; people are moving. 

Can you give us an evaluation of the continued lockdown as a solution, vis-a-vis what is happening at the bombing? People are complaining. Police men – Gen. Muhoozi, if you do not move at night – your policemen on roadblocks are crying. They are getting tired of guarding and keeping out at night. 

What is the relationship between keeping the lockdown and what is taking place now so that people go back to peace? You saw what they did in Kenya; the President came out openly. 

Do not fear the President; tell him. If you are seated on the front bench and you cannot tell the President what is exactly happening and you are a senior in the intelligence and the army, then you are not helping this country. Thank God that the Speaker saved you and you stayed here because of the other mischief that was raised. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please do not involve the Speaker in your debate. (Laughter)

3.42
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Independent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for giving us information on what is happening. It is good you said that we should give solutions rather than lamenting. They announced the curfew as one of the COVID-19 SOPs. 

Yes, I like the way the security has been lenient because sometimes a time comes – as you caught my friend, hon. Elijah Okupa, when he asked, “Where were you when those people were guiding?” Of course he was also among the people who had been taken up by the curfew time. The security agencies have been doing it very well. They ask you and if you introduce yourself, you go. 

However, let them also look at the timing. When you go beyond 9.00 p.m. that is when things go wrong. 

These bars were stopped – I would like to tell you, Mr Speaker, that bars are open. Security, why don’t you go to these bars? In the alert, they say that we need to check on these gatherings; that is where they target. I would like to tell you that the bars are open at night and even some go on till dawn. Can we now deploy properly? 

Also, going back to these functions – both burials and weddings - people have gone back to normal. We were given a maximum of 200 people but we are beyond that figure. So if the terrorists are targeting gatherings, then we are yet to see more deaths. 

Can we also talk to His Excellency – people might listen to him – that we strengthen the rules on some of those gatherings? With that, maybe we might sort out some of the terrorist targets. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: General, the operations that take place at night – the activities that take place are very loud. The music systems boom. Where I live, there are three different places. If I want some noise, I go up to my upper balcony and I am entertained. 

I keep asking, what is happening to the people who are responsible and are listening to these things with me and they are not doing anything about it? These things are happening. 
If it can alert me, who is law abiding, it can alert another person who may not be that law abiding and they look at it as an opportunity to do harm. 

Is it possible to deal with these things in more firm terms? When you do, these same Members will show up and say, now they are becoming very tough but we should not fear to deal with things that could cause our people problems. 

3.46
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and also condole with the bereaved. 

The minister stated that some of the implements gathered at the scenes of crime have been transferred to the Government Analytical Laboratory (GAL) in Wandegeya. It raises a lot of questions about the GAL. This is a place that conducts a lot of analytical evidence that is eventually tendered in court. But as we speak, this place is understaffed. It has a land title in question and they are supposed to begin construction. They are in dire need of assistance. Honourable minister, in this place, to go to court and sustain a case - they are supposed to go and even be witnesses. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to be relevant to the debate? 

MR OKEYOH: Mr Speaker, the minister was very clear. The reason I am raising the legal issue is that – 

THE SPEAKER: No. Just proceed, but be relevant. 

MR OKEYOH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The area I am trying to emphasise is that the Government should move a step further to assist this institution to do a better work. If it is not done, then we are going to hit a snag in collecting data and evidence that we may tender in court to sustain our case. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Now the conclusion is very good. (Laughter)
3.48
MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my fellow colleagues in offering my condolences to the people whose relatives have passed on during the last terror threat we had in the country. For those who were injured, I wish them a quick recovery. 

Most of my colleagues have already raised very good points and solutions regarding this matter. However, I would like to add one more thing; it would be wise if we instructed all public transport, especially those moving on long routes to have CCTV cameras installed. This is happening in other countries, whereby anyone entering any bus – For example, for the incident that happened in the bus, we would have easily found out the perpetrators because the CCTV would have the recordings of what happened and how many passengers entered this bus.
I do not understand why we failed to take the advice of some of our companions seriously. The UK Government advised us. I do not think they were raising a false alarm. What do we lose by raising terror threats? We do not lose anything. We should have just raised the terror threats we have. Maybe people would have become more vigilant.

I thank the Government for all the efforts they are making in protecting our country. I think we should not step on the brake just yet. Let us continue making announcements on radios and sensitise our communities on how to protect themselves. Thank you. 

3.50
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement because the country was looking forward to hearing what is happening with regards to the security of the citizens. We condole with the families of those who died. 

As a country, I do not know why we cannot introduce the Mayumba Kumi. It has helped Kenya in fighting terrorism. When you look at the – Why is the microphone disrupting me? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whom are you asking? (Laughter) 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: The microphone is on and off. I was saying the Mayumba Kumi helped in fighting terrorism in Kenya.  Since the minister said these are locally made bombs, I believe that when people are making them, there should be some suspicion around the place. 

We have relaxed here a little bit. People rent apartments and we do not know what happens inside them. They do what they want to do and the next day, you hear they have done something. 

I thank Members who have talked about the cameras, especially with regards to private businesses. Much as we want those cameras, are they connected to the national grid? Are they connected to the CCTV house in Naguru? How do we do this? Can we come up with a law that is going to enable Ugandans who run private businesses to get connected to the national grid? Much as we have our private cameras in our private premises, especially the businesses, it will not be easy for police to monitor what takes place there.

I would like to urge that we should come up with a Bill that will guarantee Ugandans –(Interjection) - Can I take the information, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: It is your right to do so. You do not have to –

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Member for giving me way to give information. The information I want to give is: much as these cameras may not be connected to the national grid as you said, in the event of an occurrence, they can be used to track the victims.

We had an occurrence in Bugisu Cooperative Union, where we installed our local cameras, but when thugs came and took away the coffee, we were able to engage the police and the intelligence who came and used the same cameras we installed, which are not connected to the national grid. Because of those cameras, they were able to get those thugs. As I talk, they were taken to prison.

Even without the CCTV camera in the bus, if we prevail over private operators as a conditionality to install those cameras in their premises, they can be of great help. Thank you. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you for that information. That is now a post mortem. 

When you go to the CCTV camera room in Naguru, the police sit 24 hours on those cameras to monitor what is happening. This is why the minister said that in Komamboga, there were no cameras. Therefore, let us encourage people who have businesses to install CCTV cameras. They can help like he has said. Also, when they are connected to the main grid, they can easily be monitored from the centre. 

I know Members of Parliament are yearning to have security since these incidents happened. The policemen are overstretched. I am speaking as the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Right now, when you consider police officers who are guarding the high profile people in Uganda, they constraint the human resource of the police that would be doing lots of work.

Mr Speaker, if we want to be guarded privately, can we allocate more funding to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to recruit more policemen and policewomen; then we can have adequate numbers to guard this country adequately rather than pointing fingers and saying “why wasn’t the police there”? The police are constrained; they cannot be everywhere.

Honourable members, let us also be security conscious. Let us help the public. When it comes to elections, everyone is up in arms including those local voters because they know everything. Why can’t we inculcate security consciousness into our people so that –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA ATIM: Thank you, for giving way. You said the police are constrained because they are guarding high profile personalities in the country, and you are now calling upon the Parliament to make resources available to fund that aspect of responsibility. I would like to find out from you, whether the people who are now targeted are only high profile persons. I thought we were talking about the security of people. When we are talking about security of persons, an ordinary person is just as much at risk as the high profile one. That would now mean that Parliament must come up with a classification. Who is classified as high profile and requires police engagement or protection? Who is he? Is it you? Is it me? What about my voter in Dokolo who will be caught up in a bus?

Therefore, I request the Chairperson, Committee on Defence not to overburden the Parliament of Uganda. What I would like you to say is that each and every Ugandan is entitled to protection of life and property. Can you clarify on that?

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you very much. Every Ugandan has a right to protection by the Police because that is their role. However, you very well know and you might even be having a security person at your home or with you. Therefore, right now, even amongst us - I know there are Members of Parliament who have security. What did I mean? That this security that would be protecting all Ugandans is constrained because they are few. That is why I am requesting Parliament to support the recruitment of more police officers so that we can have security in all corners of this country.

Mr Speaker, issues of terrorism affect all of us; the high profile people and lower people at the grassroots. I would like to say that police officers cannot be everywhere. Let us all be security conscious and support the institution to do its work. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the record should be corrected. The honourable member said that the demand on the police force that we have is big. High profile people take a big number and other categories also take big numbers. This leaves a deficiency in the number that is left to deal with other matters.

Therefore, Parliament should help to make sure that more money is made available to the Police to recruit and fill part of the gaps taken by high profile people. She was also making reference to some of us so that there is more to deal with the general security of the country. That is the point she made and the records had captured it that way until you raised that which made it look like it was something else. That is what she said.

The call on Parliament remains valid and we should do something to strengthen the force more and give them better capabilities to make sure that they can respond each time there is a crisis if they can detect it early. Thank you.

4.00
MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Honourable minister, thank you for the statement. Mr Speaker, you told us to look for solutions to the problem. The UK Government warned us in advance and by doing so, I am sure they have some clues.

What we would like to ask the minister is whether they have had time to share with the UK Government so that we get more information from them because by the mere fact that I warn you, that means I know something.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we have seen other countries that could be having the same dilemma as Uganda but they have prevented these challenges. Is our security aware why this is happening? If we know why it is happening - This is free information to the General and the minister. When this happened, there is a group that contacted me - We have a gadget -

THE SPEAKER: Can you discuss with him privately because you are now exposing everything?

MR MUZAALE: I just wanted to bring it to his attention that if possible, he can give me an opportunity and we discuss.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that is better.

MR MUZAALE: General, there is a gadget that can help us to do surveillance in a radius of 50km -

THE SPEAKER: Now, you are going – Please, we have just agreed that you discuss that privately. (Laughter)

MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I submit.  

4.02
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I re-echo my condolences to the people that were affected by the two bomb strikes. However, as you said, let us look forward and see how best we can sort this. First and foremost, every vice starts with a motive and over time, radicalism has been a push to terrorism. We should be able to identify the motive of the terrorists. Is it religious? Is it political? What is it?

We should then come up with a list of the potential targets. We have the PISOs, DISOs and GISOs that could help us get to know the potential targets such that these get more security or we can get a deeper understanding of how best we can protect these areas.

I would also like to get an assurance from the minister that we have the capability as a nation to fight terrorism. We have enough intelligence, technology; something that we can give the public for them to feel safe in their country. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this matter is critically important. That is why we have exceeded the time that the rules give us to discuss ministerial statements. Normally, we are given an hour and you may notice that we have gone beyond that, recognising the importance of the discussions. However, we need to draw it to a close so that we can handle other matters.

4.04
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My condolences to the families that have lost their loved ones. In fact, one of the victims was a former DPC of Katakwi called Mr Adrian Kwetegyereza.

Mr Speaker, you told us to give solutions on what the country can do to solve these kinds of attacks because a terrorist is a terrorist. Their work is to make a name by killing innocent people. The most important thing that should be done is to sensitise the local communities about security issues and how they can identify what a threat is.

I remember in 1986 to 1988, I was the Chairman Resistance Council One and in my village, which has now become three villages, what we used to do is one, no visitor could come to the village without identification. He would be known from where he comes, the number plate of his boda-boda - The identity card has now simplified everything. If it is a car, he would give all the details of where he comes from and the number plate of that car –(Interruption)

MR EKUDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to the House is that it is not only sensitising the community or the locals but also we need to carry out community policing for our people to know what is good and bad. More so, there is another dangerous group of people that smoke opium. 

I would like security to also take very strict action, especially these guests who go to these small hotels. They should liaise with those hotels and get a list of all the occupants that stay in those lodges; both in the urban and rural areas. Those are the people that do harm to the communities – (Interruption) 

MR AOGON: Thank you very much. He is my neighbour and he has done well in giving me an opportunity. Based on what he had submitted, I would like to say that it is easy for us to ask people for identification in a civilised way. 

However, when it comes to other approaches, terrorists do not give you time to check and know who they are. They act in a way that you just realise that a bomb has blasted. That is the information I would like to give my colleague; there is a difference. They just run over and you only see a blast. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Koluo, would you like to save us from this inaccurate information? 

MR KOLUO: Yes. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Lastly, I think we should take action on getting the mobile numbers of everyone, especially those strange people. It will help us to identify the wrongdoers. Thank you very much.

4.09
MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Members who have spoken to this matter. 
As we continue to live in a scary environment, Ugandans out there are not happy. For example, in Kabale, there are many areas where the communication network is unavailable. In this situation, I wonder how we can implore people to always communicate in case of any danger. 

In the far end areas of the country, the police might want to provide services but they do not have manpower; even transport is becoming a challenge. Security is also wanting in the country and they claim to be many, carrying out their services. 

I urge the Government to improve on the communication services. They should give more manpower to the police for them to work on this issue. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying power to mean electricity?

MS NDAMIRA: Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: This is because the power is in the Constitution, unless you are saying the one in the Constitution is not sufficient. Are you talking about electric power or something else?  

MS NDAMIRA: Mr Speaker, allow me to tell you that security is not only about checking private transporters. They do not know who has entered or moved out and where they are going. I remember when the issue of IDs was being introduced; we expected them to always check the people coming and going in to know what they are going to do. We need to revamp our sectors and work on the threatening environment. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oseku? I was advised that he is a corporal. So, I was trying to find out which village post he belonged to.   

4.12 
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement because the country expects some form of strengthening for us to stand resilient against terrorism. 

The National Resistance Army, now UPDF, started as a popular resistance army. I would like to remind Members that its success was mainly out of popular intelligence from the communities. Therefore, to some extent, I think there is a failure in tapping and consolidating this popular intelligence network. 

This is what I would like to say now; that in order to effectively strengthen our fight against terrorism, there is need to revamp the popular intelligence network in the country, especially in vulnerable areas like in the city and some parts of the countryside. 

Mr Speaker, on that note, therefore, I would like to appeal to the security agencies to ensure that at this particular point in time, they provide a specific channel of communication to the public to report any suspicions of terrorism activities. They should provide hotlines in the respective areas according to the zones, so that people can be able to call and inform security about a possible security threat in those respective areas. 

There was a Member that was developing this point but it did not come out clearly; we need to put the registers in place. We have structures in the LC system that includes the secretary for defence, the PISOs and the GISOs. We need to put registers in these areas so that there is a system to register the presence of whoever is in those areas; whether they have rented in those areas for long or are just journeying through them. 

There should also be routine checks conducted by the security because this is what used to happen. They would visit the hotels, check the areas and check the records of the visitors. After they are satisfied, they would either leave or carry out some surveillance where there might be some suspicion. This is something I think we need to fall back to. 

I saw some gaps in the minister’s report because whereas it is true that there is what we needed to know and what we might perhaps have to know later, the newspapers are awash with the arrests that have so far been done. For that matter, I think the minister also needed to have pointed that out because it strengthens and gives hope to the population that indeed the security is doing something. 

Otherwise, if we do not talk about it, the public might begin to imagine whether something is being done or not yet the security is doing something towards combating these terrorism threats. I think, honourable minister, if you do not mind, you should fill in some of those gaps at the end of this discussion so that we strengthen our public and give them more resolve to fight this terrorism, because we have done it before. I am sure this one will be combated and put to rest. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I have the Leader of the Opposition? - [Hon. Nambeshe rose] - you have already spoken. Can you delegate?

4.17
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am operating under delegated powers. 

THE SPEAKER: And you cannot delegate delegated power.

MR NAMBESHE: Yes, so to speak. I want to join colleagues to thank the Minister for the attempt he has made to submit this statement to the august House. 

Mr Speaker, our refugee open door policy may be good because with the refugees, it is an international shared burden. However, we have another element, which is disguised as refugees; immigrants, with whom Uganda does not share borders and their countries are peaceful.  We have Ethiopians here and they own property and they are doing business; it is not wrong for them to be here and do business. We have Eritreans; those are not refugees. So many Somalis are not under the status of refugees; there is nothing wrong doing business here. 

However, on scrutiny, and it is under the docket of Internal Affairs, not the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. We have so many immigrants in Uganda, who do not even have work permits. The protocol that was signed in the East African Community removed restrictions for one to have a work permit only to the member states. 

However, the immigrants I am making mention of, own property, they are doing work here, but have no work permits. Now, when we get terror alerts from UK Government, we should take it seriously because this world is a global village. Therefore, it is very easy for these terrorist groups to have networks. 

In the face of those warnings, even if it did not happen anyway, the police should have been on a sharp alert and should have put up serious undertakings to ensure that these places - because you do not just dismiss it. You cannot say that because the bombs were manufactured using local materials, so it is a domestic terror act perpetrated by domestic terrorists. 

The truth of the matter is that what you call “domestic” could be immigrants who are here and who could be hired mercenaries of militant Islamic States that has already claimed responsibility of the explosion in Komamboga.
 
Mr Speaker, lastly, we do not condone businesses operating beyond curfew time. However, the truth of the matter is that businesses beyond curfew time are operating selectively - (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving me way. What the acting LOP is saying is very serious. 

In Uganda, we have drinking joints owned by big people in Government. The case in point, in my district, if you are not big in this Government, you can never work past 7.00 p.m. They rush; they send soldiers, police officers to close your business immediately. However, for those who are big in Government, people dance from morning to morning with no restrictions. They drink the way they want. Mr Speaker, there is selective implementation of the directives in this country. I beg to report.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much for that information. As I conclude, I would like to make a clarion call to the honourable minister that we should rethink and re-examine the curfew standard operating procedure by borrowing a leaf from the neighbourhood. Kenya, for instance, has lifted curfew after realising that the night economy is hurting. Well, we could not actually lift curfew at the expense of lives or even at the expense of the hurting economy. 

However, given that those who are supposed to enforce it are violating it, why not consider lifting it so that maybe you have better ways of securing the lives and the property of Ugandans other than allowing something that is already compromised and selectively applied? I beg to submit. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition for giving way. I was expecting the Minister of Security to come up with a prescription of what Parliament should do to strengthen his position or the position of security to give us better protection. 

To an Acholi, once an alarm is given, you have to make sure your wife and children are hidden somewhere and then you hold a spear. Now, you should have told us how you hid the wife and children. How did you hide the citizens once you heard that there was a security alert? We should have been alerted country wide, how to take care of our lives. 

Members, whether you like it or not, on matters of security, there is no tribe, there is no politics, we are all vulnerable. We are also ready as Parliament to help.

THE SPEAKER: Are you still on information?

MS OGWAL:  I want to inform the Leader of the Opposition so that he informs Government and the Ministry of Security-

THE SPEAKER: The one we have here is Internal Affairs.

MS OGWAL: Yes, Internal Affairs; they deal with security, Sir. And they are so many, I do not even know which one is Defence but they all deal with security. 

THE SPEAKER: I am guiding you that the current one who is present is the one of Internal Affairs. So if you are addressing the Minister for Security, he is not in the House. 

MS OGWAL: I want the Leader of the Opposition to guide the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to Parliament and formally inform us on which area they could be reinforced in terms of budgetary provision, so that we can improve on our internal security and protect the general public not only the so-called high profile - I think on matters of security, we should not categorise. 

We know that ministers are entitled to police and what have you, but when it comes to the ordinary people and ordinary Members of Parliament like me, I am just as important as an ordinary voter. Therefore, Leader of the Opposition, can you please guide the minister accordingly. (Laughter)

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up.  Honourable minister. 

GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for your elaborate input into the end we desire, to improve security in our country in light of this current threat. Many contributions have been made - some are similar and others are different. However, I will give a summary of my response this way. 

Hon. Nambeshe talked about the issue of the Uganda Homeland Liberation Force (UHLF) as it relates to the attack in Zombo. I would like to inform the House that the leader of that group, Howard Openjuru, and seven others were apprehended and they are in custody. We have also established more information regarding that group but even before then, we know this group is linked to  CODECO; a militia in Congo and Allied Democratic Forces, where they have been coming to Zombo to carry out attacks. We also have links with our brothers in the DRC on how to tackle this challenge. 

Another Member talked about the panic - that the country is in panic mode and we need to assure the country to be calm. It is true but we also have a role in this. It is not just about the Government; it is you and me, to ensure that we maintain calm and reduce anxiety by the statements we make and our actions on vigilance that we have been talking about here. 

Regarding the Standard Operating Procedures and their enforcements, it is true that there are gaps. I do not want to defend mistakes. For the Komamboga incident, we noted the gaps and steps will be taken to take corrective measures especially about the proprietor of this place and the officers in charge of police in that area. Disciplinary action will be taken.

It is not the first time. Measures have been in place since 2010 but we have lowered the guard, not just in regard to terrorism but also in regard to COVID-19. Before Dr Okullo-Epak left, he eloquently talked about many places that defy the COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures and it gave me the impression that maybe, he is one of those who move around but it is good information – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Dr Okullo-Epak passed on many years ago around 2006 or 2007. Therefore, the one who was speaking here could not have been him. (Laughter) It could have been either – Even if he was there, he could not have been nominated because he is dead. It is hon. Jonathan Odur, who comes from around that area. You could have picked his accent being similar to that of Dr Okullo-Epak. The other is hon. Elijah Okupa from Kasilo. You might want your record to reflect the correct position.

GEN. MUHOOZI: Record corrected, Mr Speaker. It was hon. Elijah Okupa. 

Before hon. Kiwanuka left, he talked about the alerts by our friends; the British and Americans. Yes, we got these alerts but unknown to the House like I said at the onset of my submission, we have had disruptive operations over time, which is why I said we have been safe this far.  However, this remains a lingering problem; terrorism is not something you can write off; we are not an island. They have many dynamics, which I mentioned. Indeed, we share alerts with our counterparts and agencies in the neighbourhood from the British and the Americans. Using our own domestic intelligence, we are also updated on these. The only thing is maybe we need to improve on communicating to the public, when we think the threat levels are a bit higher. Therefore, we need to do more communication strategy, as far as it relates to this threat.

The Member for Kumi talked about schools reopening and the preventive measures. Thanks to this dark cloud, it has come in time. I think as we go into the phase of reopening schools, it should also be informed by the necessary preventive measures to secure our children, when they go to school. 

Hon. Betty Engola talked about information, intelligence and the need to step up surveillance. Indeed, we need to step up on those and I cannot say more. 

Hon. Ssewungu made a very good submission – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why don’t you just accept the recommendations made to you and see how to implement them?

GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. We have heard it all. We shall improve and cap it all with a submission of what we think Parliament can help to make us perform better. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, when Members raise issues to you, it is because they have received information and they come here because they cannot raise it in any other way and they try to raise them within the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. However, you take a lot of time responding to them and it presents a situation that becomes very complicated. 

For example, there was a question that was asked and it is not dated. Clerk, we should start dating our questions so that they are traceable. It is question No. 35/01/2021, raised by hon. Allan Mayanja, Member of Parliament for Nakaseke Central County. He was asking about the selective application of the Presidential Directive on COVID-19 by security officers apprehending motorcyclists, leaving out other categories of persons that move beyond curfew hours. 

If you had responded to this question or prepared to respond to this question, you would have discovered that other COVID-19 regulations are being violated and partially, this is what has led to this. This is because the condition became ripe for people with bad hearts to gain access to the population. Otherwise, these hours are ordinarily already regulated by the COVID-19 regulations.

Sometimes, if you respond to some of these issues that look small, when they are being raised - they form part of a sequence of events that could lead into bigger things. This question has been here for a long time, honourable minister and several others that we have asked. 

Honourable minister, the Member has said: “we have this issue, can you investigate and give an answer?” However, you do not respond. I wish the Leader of the Government Business was here. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, I am referring to you for the case, which was for your docket. Otherwise, there are several others. 

I will now put it on hon. Chris Baryomunsi, who is the spokesman for the Government, that this conduct makes it difficult. You were a Parliamentary Commissioner so, you know what I am talking about. They complicate the work of these Members. They struggle. Now, you are calling upon them to get active but each time they give you information, you do not act on it. If you do, you do it after a year and by that time things would have changed very much. 

Look at this Zombo incident. A question was asked, I think, last year. Was it last year or at the beginning of this Parliament? Many things have happened. If you had responded to them quickly, we would not be having it on the Order Paper. Now, I am going to remove it from the Order Paper because it is old and it is not necessary for it to be there. 

Therefore, help us when these Members come and raise issues. It is a partnership. When they inform you, please, take action – let me know because my people sent me to ask questions. Let them know that this is taking place. It helps us to do this public work. 

I am going to look at this Order Paper again. Honourable members, if you see matters disappearing from the Order Paper, those could be the reasons. These things of “business to follow”, which business is never following anything because it is never coming back to us, cannot be business to follow. We will remove them so that we deal with more active matters on the Order Paper. 

4.38
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are right that when Members raise these questions, they are usually urgent and answers are needed. For example, when a Member raises a question about the curfew and observance of SOPs, it is urgent. To that, we concede.

I undertake to brief the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, the Prime Minister. I would like to request that you schedule all the pending questions for next week and they will all be answered by the ministers. We are going to mobilise the ministers to provide the answers to all the questions which are pending such that next week, beginning Tuesday, they will all be answered. 

My plea is that you do not strike them off the Order Paper. As Government, we undertake to have them answered next week –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the correct information I have about you is that when Members come to your office with these issues, you ring these ministers to find out whether they can come to respond. I have been following this thing from the Ninth Parliament. Whenever we come to your office with these matters, you ring immediately. Sometimes when you do not get the answers, you look for the Permanent Secretaries and the ministers of state to get that information. 

The clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister, who is trying to raise a defence on how they are going to handle this matter – we have been here. I saw you come in late yet you are near Parliament. Do you think there is seriousness in you as ministers, as of now, when it comes to these issues? They even send them to you so that you respond. The Speaker is held. We are looking at the Order Paper. We know what is happening. There is no business. Most of the business is supposed to come from you, ministers, to the Speaker. You are holding us here. 

Do you want to confirm to us, as a matter of clarification, that you are going to take up the duty of the Government Chief Whip, who is always here representing you on a number of matters when you are not around? Can you affirm that to us? 

You are one of those ministers, who usually discuss matters concerning Parliament from the media centre. 

Through the Speaker – Dr Chris Baryomunsi, do you want to assure this House that you are going to change the trend of behaviour, as ministers, despite the fact that you are given facilities to cater for you, including lead cars that make us stop along the roads and you pass us by with your sirens? (Applause)

Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Well, you have used many words to say what I do not understand. (Laughter) I do not know what clarification you want. You have used a forest of words but a desert of issues. 

When I stood here, I was assuring Parliament and then you asked me to assure Parliament. So, for the umpteenth time, let me reassure the House that I am going to work with the Government Chief Whip and the Prime Minister to ensure that questions, which are raised on the Floor by the honourable members, are answered as fast as they should be. 

In that regard, I would like to commit that on the Order Paper I see a question for the Minister of Security, question for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and a question for the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

I am requesting the Speaker that he does not strike off these questions because they remain important. Let them be scheduled for next week. The responsible ministers will be here to answer the questions. Thereafter, the questions shall be answered promptly. Thank you. 

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, on what matter do you rise?

MR AOGON: On clarification. Honourable minister, the issue is simple. You have responded very well and I know you for being one of those ministers who know how to speak properly. 

My question is: are you speaking to the aspect of ministers answering questions or actually acting on the problems in the questions? May we get to know what, exactly, you are talking about?

DR BARYOMUNSI: The first responsibility is that when a question has been asked and it is scheduled on the Order Paper, the minister should answer the question but – of course – most importantly, is to act on the issues which are raised by the Members of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to clarify that it is not true that I take matters of Parliament and communicate them through the Uganda Media Centre. 

What I usually communicate on Tuesdays or Wednesdays are decisions taken by Cabinet, which we feel that the public should know. Usually, those which require to come to Parliament, come through papers, motions, position papers and so forth. So, it is not true that I take matters of Parliament and communicate them through the Uganda Media Centre, as alleged by hon. Ssewungu. 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. There is a laziness syndrome, which could be eating up the Front Bench – 

THE SPEAKER: Have you diagnosed it? (Laughter)

MR SSASAGA: I am coming to that. We have a lot of business in our committees, which has stagnated and we are partly stuck. Ministers are invited to come to committees and most of them are not turning up. In this House, if there are issues requiring ministers, sometimes they are not there. 

From that point, Mr Speaker, procedurally, how best can this House prevail over these ministers to both attend committee sittings so that committee reports can be processed and brought to this House and to have them effective by attending the plenary sittings of this House? How best can we proceed and how best can you guide us so that these people start working? Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in terms of what we do as leaders of this House and Members of this House, we do our best. People should do their best. Where you have a mandate to do something, should you be reminded to do it? It might not be a good idea. Let us do our best. Members of Parliament are doing their best. We started from the tent where people used to sweat. We are now here and we are a little more comfortable. The space is small but we are doing our best. Let us all do our best. 

These reports have come to the Commission and to me. As the Speaker of the House, I have received concerns about reluctance of ministers to appear. We have discussed this matter already and that is why I do not want to repeat the content of our discussion. Let us just do our best to make us look what like we should. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. The standing rule on the side of Cabinet is usually that at least one minister from the ministry should attend Parliament because most ministries have two or more ministers. We also have a challenge of space in this era of COVID-19. Therefore, ministers first check the Order Paper and those whose businesses are reflected usually have to come. You must have noticed that the space is limited. What I have seen is that when ministers see that they do not have business – I am explaining what has been happening. (Interjections) Do not be anxious. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, I am not allowing you to speak until you smile. You have to first smile. Lower the mask a bit, smile and then put it back. It is because I do not want you to get to the microphone when you are angry. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, Dr Baryomunsi is my good friend by the way. We talk a lot. I am rising on a point of order. Yesterday, about six Members of Parliament raised matters of national importance here. Indeed, it was the Government Chief Whip, hon. Tayebwa, who responded on behalf of all the ministers because they were not around.

Dr Baryomunsi, my friend with whom I speak the same language, is here alleging that ministers are not coming due to limited space and that they first read the Order Paper to know whether they have a matter therein. As I have stated before, Mr Speaker, you ring them and it is a fact. Members, those of you who have not yet gone there will see that. 

Is the minister in order to defend his fellow ministers at his own expense when he also came in late today, that they are failing to come because they do not see matters that concern them on the Order Paper yet we do not see them even in committees? 

Is he in order to continue misleading this House in front of the Speaker who spends time to find out the whereabouts of the ministers, on matters of Members of Parliament before you give those Members permission to raise the issues? On the parliamentary Whatsapp group, they show us the Members and ministers who are designated to appear for every sitting every day. How did he come here to respond in defence of others when he had no matter on the Order Paper? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Is he in order to be in Parliament? It is because you have said so many things.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, those many things I have said is to know whether it is in order for the minister to defend the indefensible.

THE SPEAKER: The point of order is, is the minister in order to defend other ministers? What else can he do? (Laughter) It would be a complete let down if he did not. Dr Baryomunsi, you have done very well in defending your colleagues. However, the substance of the matter remains that we need to find solutions that are effective for the purposes of our –

DR BARYOMUNSI: In a nutshell, the pledge we are making as Government is that we are going to do better by ensuring that members of the Cabinet attend the sessions of Parliament, answer the questions and act on issues raised by the Members. I will work with the Government Chief Whip and the Prime Minister to make sure that there is an improvement. You will judge us starting next week. Thank you. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure. I have observed in the recent past that we have been receiving Order Papers a day or two before the sitting. Therefore, there is no minister serving this Government who can pretend that he does not see the Order Paper every day. At least they have their personal assistants and other staff who are serving ministers.

I do not know whether the minister defending his colleagues would be procedurally right, aware of the fact that all these ministers are supposed to know the business which is coming on the Floor of Parliament almost on a daily basis. If you will allow, I would like to procedurally find these ministers out of procedure.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order to my senior sister because you ruled on the matter on whether –(Laughter) No, the Speaker allowed me. A matter was raised on whether I was in order to defend the honourable ministers and the Speaker ruled on the matter. Is hon. Cecilia Ogwal in order to raise a point of procedure as if she is challenging your ruling? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is risky business to try and play with the Speaker’s ruling. That is why the procedure is there; so that the Speaker also feels satisfied that it was a grave error and he understands that the mistake might have been big. If all these Members can rise at the same time to cause a challenge to the ruling, it will be humbling for the Speaker to say, “Okay, I think it could have been a mistake so, proceed to challenge the order.” That is why it is put that way; to maintain the decorum of the House but also to respect the authority of the Speaker. 

However, if you just showed up as a Member of Parliament from Dokolo and you challenge the Speaker’s ruling, it is not good practice to do that. I think the point she was making was different from that. Her point was on the procedural issue where the Order Paper is given in advance and as a result, there should be no excuse from the ministers. 

I think the point that the minister made was that when the ministers look at the Order Paper and they do not see any active matter affecting their sector, given the limited space - of course it is an excuse – they would rather create space for the ministers whose businesses are active on the Order Paper. I know it is an excuse. I know that there is enough space. I know that sometimes the ministers wait in the lobby so that when their matters come, they drop in. Sometimes, honourable members wait in the lobby. As soon as there are empty spaces created by Members who left after their businesses have been handled, they come in because they are interested in participating in the discussion of the House. Dr Wayne W. Dyer has written a book entitled, “Excuses Begone”. So, let excuses be gone. Let us do work. Thank you.

Honourable members, the time is not sufficient for us to deal with the subject matter coming next on item four. It is one of those important things urging Government to address challenges facing the girl-child and children in general in this digital era.

You will remember that we had a discussion about this and we said that for us to have a more substantive discussion - the House then was on a statement on some international day and we made an attempt to debate without making a decision. We said, no; for us to have - since the matter is current and serious, we needed to have a good debate. So, we suggested that a Member comes up with a motion and that is the result of that concern. Now we have a substantive motion.

However, the time we have is not sufficient and even the numbers now will not give us a robust debate. It might be a good idea for us to stand over this matter until tomorrow.

Now that was the only business that we could have handled today plus what we have already done. 

Honourable minister, thank you very much. Process the concerns and the suggestions that you have received. We might also be thinking of how we can have wider discussions with senior people in this country to see if we have a broader debate on this matter so that information can be passed directly to Members of Parliament; instructions on what to be done with clear guidelines so that the population knows that instead of sitting and waiting for something to happen, you are part of the solution. We should find these solutions together so that we prevent things from happening.

House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 October 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)
