  Thursday, 20 October 2005

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

National Anthem (Two Verses)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency General Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Your Excellency the Vice-President of Uganda, hon. Members of Parliament, members of the diplomatic corps, Mrs Miria Obote and family, all mourners present today in Parliament. Parliament is holding a special sitting for the purpose of paying tribute to the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote, the former President of the Republic of Uganda and a former Member of Parliament, who used to take part in parliamentary proceedings in the very Chamber we are sitting in today. 

I convey very deep condolences to Mrs Miria Obote, the family, and all people of Uganda for the demise of Dr Obote. May his Soul rest in eternal peace.  

Honourable members, under Article 101(2) of the Constitution of Uganda, the President, in consultation with me has come to Parliament to address us on this occasion when the nation mourns the demise of Dr Obote. I, therefore, take this opportunity to warmly welcome His Excellency the President of Uganda to Parliament and invite him to lay a wreath and make his address. Your Excellency. Sorry, first let the casket be entered.

(Entrance of the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote) 

 National Anthem (One Verse)

Laying of Wreaths

ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA, 
MR YOWERI KAGUTA MUSEVENI

THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): The Rt. hon. Speaker of Parliament, Edward Ssekandi, His Excellency the Vice-President of Uganda, members of the bereaved family, especially Mama Miria Obote, hon. Members of Parliament, on behalf of the Government and people of Uganda, I extend sincere condolences to the family of the late President Obote.  

The hon. Members of Parliament need to know that after our special Cabinet meeting on Tuesday the 11th of October 2005, we decided to accord the late former President a state funeral as well as assist the family in all possible ways. During that lengthy meeting under my chairmanship, we reviewed the turbulent history of Uganda and the continued need for reconciliation and healing of the old, physical and emotional wounds to our society. (Applause) It is those considerations that guided us to do what we are doing in respect of the late President Obote and how we are doing it. 

The Bible says in the book of Ecclesiastics, chapter 3, verses 1-8: “To everything, there is a season and a time for every matter or purpose under heaven: a time to be born and a time to die; a time to plant and a time to harvest; a time to kill and a time to heal; a time to tear down and a time to build; a time to weep and a time to laugh; a time to mourn and a time to dance; a time to scatter stones and a time to gather the stones; a time to embrace and a time to refrain (from embracing); a time to search and a time to give up; a time to keep and a time to throw away; a time to tear and a time to mend; a time to be silent and a time to speak; a time to love and a time to hate; a  time for war and a time for peace.” 

Hence, there was a time for fighting to end the hemorrhage in our society. Even in recent times, there has been the need for a time to fight for ending the barbarism in north central Uganda orchestrated by Kony. However, according to the NRM philosophy strategy and tactics in conflict resolution and management, we always believe that all conflicts must be followed by principled and rational reconciliation in order to heal them completely.  

Even during the conflict, we make the distinction between the misleaders and the misled; we make a distinction between the inevitable acts of war and war crimes. We in fact mostly grant automatic forgiveness to the misled or people who were acting on orders. If they are soldiers, we automatically integrate them into our own forces. 

By the time we captured Kampala, we had the following large size forces whose description as battalions was a misnomer because they were quite big in size. 1st Battalion, 2nd Battalion, 3rd Battalion, 5th Battalion, 7th Battalion, 9th Battalion, 11th Battalion, 13th Battalion, 15th Battalion, 19th Battalion and 21st Battalion. The following persons led these Battalions:

1st Battalion	–	Pekosi and Mugisa;
3rd Battalion	–	Lumumba;
5th Battalion	–	Kashaka;
7th Battalion	–	Kyaligonza;
9th Battalion	–	Kyanda;
11th Battalion–	Sheffu Ali;
13th Battalion–	Ivan Koreta;
15th Battalion–	Samson Monday;
19th Battalion–	Peter Kerimu;
21st Battalion	–	Benon Tumukunde; and Special Forces led by J. Tumwebaze.

Even before the capture of Kampala we started organizing the following battalions out of the forces that had been on the opposite side in the conflict:

The 23rd battalion was from the UNLA from the forces that were on the other side, the 25th battalion from UNLA, 27th battalion from FEDEMU, a group that was led by one Nkwanga, some of you may remember him. There was also the 29th battalion, former Teso militias that had been organized by Col. Omario, 31st battalion, former UNLA; 33rd battalion, former UNLA; 35th battalion, UFM that had been led by the late Kayiira; 37th battalion, former UNLA; 39th battalion, former UNLA; and the 41st battalion this was constructed by new recruitment from the villages, the fresh people we recruited.

The 45th battalion had new recruits; 47th battalion, new recruits; 49th battalion, new recruits; 51st battalion, new recruits; 53rd battalion, new recruits, and so on and so forth up to 71st battalion - this was FUNA. These were soldiers of the former army, which some people call Amin’s Army; the 73rd battalion, UNLF that is Moses Ali, who is sitting here with us, etcetera.  

It was through that prompt bulk merging of the forces of the two sides that we on the one hand created a nucleus of a new national army and on the other hand rescued away from potential mischief a large number of former soldiers. It was easy and correct to deal leniently with the bulk of the forces because they were not the authors of whatever mistakes that could have occurred; at worst, they would have been mere executioners. 

That left us with a task of dealing with the former leaders of the other side. There was the need to engage in a serious dialogue with that level of command and control, both on the side of politics and on the side of the army. We in fact succeeded in talking to some of the leaders. The late Gen. Tito Okello; the late former Prime Minister, Otema Alimadi; Charles Alayi, former minister in the NRM Government; Lt. Gen. Moses Ali, current Deputy Prime Minister; the hon. Aggrey Awori, former presidential candidate and Member of Parliament for Samia-Bugwe North; Maj. Gen. Bamuze, etcetera. We were similarly ready to engage into a principled and rational dialogue with the late former President Obote. A number of opportunities were unfortunately lost.  

I would like to end by re-emphasizing the need for continuing to search for a national consensus and reconciliation. (Applause) We have not had time to deal with all aspects of our turbulent history mainly because we were in a continuous fight with Sudanese-sponsored terrorism. Some of the actors, myself included, did not appear before the Commission of Inquiry of Justice Odel. This was from 1986 to 1993. I wanted to appear before that commission of inquiry, however, the former Attorney-General, Joseph Mulenga, said a President could not appear before a commission of inquiry. But my inner feeling was that I should appear so that I should answer questions but in any case I was busy with other things.

There may be need, therefore, to look at additional forums of interaction that may help us to close this sad chapter of our country. (Applause) We could think of some forums, a truth and reconciliation commission like the one of South Africa, a reconciliation national conference, or a combination of both. We could think about all those options that could make us talk to each other and be able to come out finally with one position.  When we are less busy, we need to look afresh at this subject.

As I stand here speaking on this sad occasion, people who are here may not realise that especially during the anti-Amin struggle we tried several times to forge a common front with the late President Obote. When I was in Tanzania, on several occasions we made certain attempts. However, unreasonable or greedy elements would frustrate those efforts. In particular I remember two occasions, which I would like to share with you here because I do not think anybody knows about this. 

After the Tanzanian and FRONASA forces captured Mbarara on the 28th of February 1979, I was summoned by the late President Nyerere and told to go to Dar-es-salaam. When I got to Dar-es-salaam I went straight to see Mwalimu at Musosani, his home. Mwalimu told me that I should meet former President Obote and agree on a united front. I spent the whole of the following day with President Obote at his house in Musosani. Mama Miria was there; we even had lunch there. We agreed on a joint structure where the former president would be the chairperson and I would be the deputy chairperson, with a total membership of seven people. Then I left again for the war front, passing through Bukoba town of Tanzania near the common border. 

There was a certain UPC supporter or official in that town in the same hotel I was staying – I will not say his name. I briefed him on what we had agreed with former President Obote because he was in Bukoba; I was in Dar-es-salaam. Since we had agreed on a formula and this was a member of UPC, I briefed him on what we had agreed. He pretended to be happy. There was a Tanzanian Internal Security Office in the town that we used to frequent. The following day I went to that office while this UPC official was on phone with former President Obote. The UPC official did not realize that I was within earshot. I heard the UPC official shouting, “Milton, do not agree, we do not need unity, we are strong on the ground. This young man is on cloud nine.” That is when I first heard of the term “cloud nine,” I do not even know what it means up to now. That is the time I heard this phrase; I had never heard of it – “This young man is on cloud nine because of the agreement you entered with him.” 

So here was this fellow encouraging the late president to get out of the agreement I had made with him. I have never told this to anybody; this is the first time because I will not have time to talk about it again. When I knew they were talking about me, I quietly withdrew to the hotel; the man did not know that I had heard what he was saying. After his phone call, the UPC official came back to the hotel. I asked him, “Mr so and so, have you got in touch with Dar-es-salaam today to know the latest news there?” His answer was, “No, I have not talked to anybody, it is only what you told me yesterday that I know. Because I had arrived the previous day, it is only what you told me yesterday that I know. I know nothing about Dar-es-salaam.” 

When I get time I will mention to Mama Miria who this person was and I am sure she will have her opinion about this person. I was so disappointed! I am bringing this up because sometimes you may heap all the blame on this leader but you need to look at the structure of their organisations. 

The other incident was when the late Obote came to Kampala for the first time following the defeat of Idi Amin from Tanzania in May 1980. I decided to pay a courtesy call on him in his room in the Nile Mansions where he was staying. I found the room full of UPC supporters. I told him that I had come to welcome him because I had been here for more than a year. As we were starting to converse, Rwakasisi threw in a remark that annoyed me so much. I have tried to remember what it was without success. I stormed out of the meeting. I believe that was the last time I met face to face with the late President Obote; I have never met him again. 

We should take it as a patriotic duty not to squander opportunities for reconciliation. (Applause). Before the constitutional problems in Uganda started in 1966, the late President Obote played his role by contributing to the fight for Uganda’s independence as well as the economic development of Uganda. A number of new hospitals, 22 of them were built, which are still in use today. (Applause). A number of new secondary schools were also built –(Applause)- (Interjection)- not Ntare –(Laughter)- the UPC are mixing up things as usual -(Interjections)- that is a presidential candidate for DP –(Laughter)- Ntare was built much earlier by the British. As I was saying, a number of secondary schools were built just to mention some of the projects. 

Coming to the Ugandans who are alive, as you heard from the Bible in the book of Ecclesiastics, there is time for everything. The time for reconciliation has long been here but we have not taken advantage of it. However, we have not always fully utilised it, let us go and fully esteem for principled reconciliation. (Applause) When I talk of principled reconciliation I do not mean covering mistakes. When we get time we should sit down and talk; “why did this happen?” Quietly, not emotionally; “Why did this happen, why did that happen?” And then we solve it. The other temptation is for those people who say, “No, let us just cover up everything, let us forget the past.” If you forget the past, you do not correct it properly; then it will occur again. That is why I always use the words “principled reconciliation” not “opportunistic reconciliation”, just coming to cover up. 

I would like again to appeal to Ugandans that are living in self-imposed exile outside Uganda to come back. (Applause) I do not know what those Ugandans are doing abroad. Uganda is very prosperous, we are moving ahead; our economic growth rate is very high. We still have problems but we are scoring a lot of successes also. It is, therefore, strange to see Ugandans living outside; what are they doing? For many of them there is no case to answer because they never committed any mistakes. If you belong to UPC that is not a problem. That was - somebody belonged to some group all of us belong to different groups so that is not a problem. Even those who are engaged in some opposition - armed activities since about 8 years ago, we have put in place a law of amnesty. You just say that “I was engaged in these activities and I have given them up.” Immediately you are given a certificate and you come back. 

Therefore, the people who are living abroad just need to do two things. First, if they are simply refugees they should simply walk to the Ministry of Home Affairs wherever they are living and hand in the refugee card and come back and they will be given their passports. Even those who are engaged in rebellion activities, we put in place a law eight years ago, of amnesty for all of them without distinction. The only need is to come and say, “I am no longer involved in those activities”, and that is the end of the story. 

Finally, since the resolve for reconciliation is growing stronger, we may have to review the question of the late former President Idi Amin. You remember that issue - we did not have time to discuss it. Well, we may have to review it again irrespective of the position that we took then. (Applause) May the soul of former President Obote, who was a long time Member of this Parliament from the 1950s, rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to sincerely thank His Excellency the President for the address he has made to us under Article 101(2) of the Constitution. Since we have other items relating to today’s programme on our Order Paper and His Excellency the President has other schedules he has to meet, we will suspend the proceedings to enable me see him off. At this juncture, I ask that the National Anthem be played so that His Excellency can leave.

National Anthem (Two Verses) 

(The proceedings were suspended at 3.06 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.10 p.m._)

Laying of Wreaths 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote has since 1986 been living in Zambia until his death. In the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon we are honoured to have a delegation from Zambia headed by hon. Kabinga Pande, Member of Parliament and Minister of Tourism, Environment and Natural Resources. He is head of the delegation that includes Mr Peter Mumba, Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Mr Shangaki Mwale, Office of the President, Mr Jacob from UNHCR and Mr Sande Kichoti, First Secretary of the Zambian High Commission in Dar-es-Salaam accredited to Uganda. You are most welcome and we thank you for coming.

Also present is the former head of state of Uganda, Mr Godfrey Binaisa. You are also welcome.

Honourable members, I have also received condolence messages. One that has just arrived from hon. Abdu Katuntu reads: “It has not been possible for me to be in Kampala to pay tribute to my fallen hero as I am currently on duty in South Africa chairing the Committee on Legal, Justice and Human Rights of the Pan African Parliament. 

Dr Obote was an inspiration to millions of people, including myself. It was an honour for me and my family to know and work with Dr Obote. Milton, go well, you are the good fighter and this country will forever remain indebted to you for your achievements. God be with you. 

Abdu Katuntu from Midland, South Africa.”

There is also a condolence message from the Action Party addressed to me. It reads: “We are saddened by the death of Dr Apollo Milton Obote who was a committed leader of Uganda Peoples’ Congress and father of our nation. He will be missed. His passing is unfortunate as it comes at a time when the country is experiencing the challenges and pains of political transition. His experience would have been instrumental in overcoming some of these challenges. We pray that his death marks the beginning of reconciliation between the membership of UPC and the rest of Uganda. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.” 

Signed by Nelson Ocheger, President.

This is another message from the East African Community. It reads: “On behalf of the East African Legislative Assembly and on my own behalf I wish to express our sadness upon learning of the demise of Dr Milton Obote, the former President of the Republic of Uganda. As Uganda mourns the former President, the East African Community mourns the last pioneer of our regional integration of 1967/77 together with the late President Mwalimu Nyerere and the late President Jomo Kenyatta. 

Today this regional integration is a keystone and model worldwide for regional economic blocks that have formed the basis for the globalised market. Africa mourns one of the founding fathers of the Organisation of African Unity and a gallant son of Africa for his conviction and commitment to the liberation struggle of the African continent. We look back to the intellectual debates of the 1960s and early 1970s, which debates draw inspiration to many of our leaders today. 

The issues discussed in those public debates shaped the policies and direction of our continent. We mourn a true East African and the challenge for us is to ensure that the fast tracking of the East African Federation as envisaged by among others this son of Africa lying before us is realized in our times. The East African Legislative Assembly renews its commitment to this agenda. 

The late President Apollo Milton Obote belongs to a group of leaders who in the words of the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere led Africa to political freedom and demanded that the current generation of leaders and peoples of Africa pick up a twinkling torch and refuel it with their enthusiasm and determination in moving Africa forward. 

On behalf of the East African Legislative Assembly I wish to convey our condolences to the family of the late Dr Obote, the Government and people of Uganda. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.” 

Signed, Abraham Kinani, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly. (Applause)

Another message reads as follows: “We have learnt with grief of the demise of the former President Apollo Milton Obote. The nation and Teso in particular knew the late as a committed leader of the Uganda People’s Congress and father of our nation. He will be missed. His demise has come at a time when the country needed his vast experience in Ugandan politics. Now that we are experiencing challenges and the pains of political transition, what a loss to the nation! His experience would have been instrumental in overcoming some of these challenges. We pray that his death marks the beginning of national reconciliation among Ugandans. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.” 

This is signed by hon. Samuel Anyolo, MP Soroti County and Soroti Chairperson, Teso Parliamentary Group. That was the last of the messages.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO PAY TRIBUTE TO DR APOLLO MILTON OBOTE, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

3.27
THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Mr Speaker, Mama Miria Obote and family, hon. Members of Parliament and fellow mourners, may I first of all ask you to stand up for one minute’s silence in honour of this good President?

(Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

PROF. BUKENYA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the former President of Uganda, the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote.  

“WHEREAS Parliament notes with deep sorrow the untimely demise of the former President and first Prime Minister of the Executive of Uganda, Dr Apollo Milton Obote, which occurred on Monday, 10 October 2005 in South Africa; 

AND NOTING THAT the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote was the first Executive Prime Minister of Uganda and twice the President of the Republic of Uganda; 

AND AWARE THAT the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote received the instruments of power for independent Uganda; 

NOW THEREFORE this Parliament resolves as follows: 
1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda. 
2.	That it expresses its appreciation for the contribution that the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote made towards the political, economic and social development of the people of Uganda.
3.	That it takes cognisance that as a President and Prime Minister of Uganda and as a member of the Mulungushi Club fought for the rights and freedoms of the African people on the African continent.” 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Seconded. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to proceed with your motion?

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Fellow Ugandans, it is on a sad note that we are converging here to mourn a fallen former President of this country. It is sad because he died away from home in exile and most especially now when we are still grappling with the desire to make this country a home to all of us.  

We gather here to mourn the man who received the instruments of power from the British and who has twice led this country as President. A lot has happened since then but allow me to say that as a country we need to reflect on our past and forgive those who made mistakes while at the same time try to rebuild this country by working out ways to chart out peace and reconciliation.

There have been mixed reactions following the demise of Dr Apollo Milton Obote. However, I must point out that we must not dwell on the past as it only creates more bitterness and sorrow. Instead we should work to correct the wrongs that were made so that our children and grandchildren will live harmoniously in this country. My appeal to all of us is to bury the past and reflect back to Kololo in 1962 when we had a dream of an independent and prosperous Uganda united for a common goal and destiny. Then we were a people who desired liberty and we all celebrated our independence.

The NRM Government is calling upon Ugandans of all political affiliations to unite and rebuild our country. Our desire is to work towards peaceful co-existence, respect for one another and social, economic and political development for all our people.  

Shakespeare once said, “I desire you in your friendship and I will in one way or another make you amends.” Let us mend our relationships despite what could have gone under the bridge, which is the past. We cannot undo what is already done. Instead as a country we can work towards an improved relationship. In this regard let us use the departure of Dr Obote as an opportunity to reconcile our differences and come together as a country. Let us initiate steps using an agreed way forward to find out where we started going wrong and what we can do to rectify the situation. In the meantime, similar mistakes should not be repeated.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to bid farewell to our fallen comrade who was a good leader and who headed this country on more than three occasions. May the Almighty rest Dr Apollo Milton’s soul in eternal peace. Thank you very much. (Applause)  

3.35
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, Mama Miria Obote and honourable members of Parliament, I must preface my remarks by conveying our condolences to Mrs Miria Obote, the children, relatives and the entire nation of Uganda on the loss of Dr Milton Obote, the former President of Uganda. 

In order to assess objectively the contributions of the former President of Uganda, we must be aware of the challenges and opportunities that he had to handle. (Applause) The first challenge was that during the colonial period the Kingdom of Buganda enjoyed special status. In fact it was almost a state within a state. As a result, Buganda’s special position that was enshrined in the quasi-federal independence Constitution of Uganda was resented. 

Dr Obote tried to solve the Buganda question by forging an alliance between UPC and Buganda’s political organisation called Kabaka Yekka. This arrangement enabled Uganda to achieve independence without bloodshed. (Applause)

Another challenge that Dr Obote faced was that of the elite of Uganda who were fragmented along religious and ethnic lines. As a result there was a major political clash between the monarchy and republicanism. Obote abolished the monarchy and introduced collective republicanism. (Applause) However, as a result the monarchists who were alienated resisted Obote’s leadership. When the monarchy was restored in 1993 under the NRM Government, a solution to the conflict between the monarchy and republicanism was provided under Articles 246 and 37 of the Constitution.

Article 246 forbids traditional leaders from participating in partisan politics because by so doing they may divide their kingdoms and the country. Likewise Article 37 of the Constitution states that, “Every person has a right as applicable, to belong to, enjoy, practice, profess, maintain and promote any culture, cultural institution, language, tradition, creed or religion in community with others.”  

In other words, everyone has a right to maintain one’s culture whether it is monarchical or republican and this is a protected fundamental human right. However, and this is a very important, as we promote our culture we should not antagonize other cultures. (Applause) Hence, the statement in the Constitution that states that when we promote our culture we must do so in community with other cultures, therefore, Articles 246 and 37 are extremely important when we are dealing with culture.

The UPC/KY alliance temporarily overcame some of the problems until that alliance was terminated in 1964. UPC then gained an overall majority in Parliament.  

The third problem was that Obote inherited a colonial partisan army whose level of education was very poor. (Applause) This army did not and could not understand the vision of political leaders and when the army captured power in 1971 under the leadership of Amin, life became brutal, short and nasty. 

Despite the fact that Obote’s energy was greatly taxed by the intricate internal problems of Uganda, he was able to pay attention to wider problems of liberating Africa from colonialism. (Applause) Indeed Obote worked with Nyerere, Kaunda and other leaders to liberate Southern Africa. (Applause)  

As regards opportunities, Obote inherited a well-remunerated and professional public service, which implemented government policies effectively. He also inherited a strong economy and a solid education foundation. These opportunities enabled Obote to solve some of Uganda’s economic and political problems 

However, like other political leaders, Obote made some mistakes. These included the abolition of the independence quasi-federal Constitution, a measure which undermined constitutionalism and the abolition of the cherished monarchy. Despite these mistakes, Dr Obote played a significant role in the history of Uganda. (Applause)

As we mourn Dr Obote’s death we must cultivate a culture of making political and other concessions to each other for stability and national identity. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved. I support the motion. (Applause)

3.44
MR AKAKI AYUMU (Maruzi County, Apac): Mr Speaker, Mama Miria Obote and hon. Members of Parliament, Dr Apollo Milton Obote was born and will be buried in Akokoro, Maruzi County constituency, which I represent.  

He was born in Akokoro, Apac District to Mr Adiwong Stanley Opeto Akake and Mrs Matipulisikira Acheno Opeto. At the time of Obote’s birth, Stanley Opeto was a chief in his own right, in the British colonial administration. Obote was the third son and child of his father of 13 children from six wives. He was born at the time when the British administration was assuming full control, what to them was a very rebellious and warlike Lango tribe.  Obviously, the British faced some resistance.  

Obote’s grandfather, Ibraham Akaki, fought alongside kings Kabalega of Bunyoro and Mwanga of Buganda in resisting British imperialism. He was considered an outstanding nationalist. Chief Ibraham Akaki was to become an everlasting mentor on the young Obote. This came about out of stark likeliness and resemblance the young Obote had with his grandfather. The characteristic sharp piercing look and long hair were the trademarks of the Chief Ibraham Akaki, which Obote inherited fully.

Obote started schooling at Ebujja Primary School where his first impression on his teachers was academic brilliance, his love for reading and open talk. Obote exhibited his characteristics throughout all the schools he went to, namely Boroboro in Lira, Gulu High School, Busoga College Mwiri and Makerere College, now Makerere University. His efforts to study law at Khartoum University were hindered by the British colonial authorities who cancelled the Lango Local Government Scholarship in 1948. Their reason being and I quote, “Lango does not as yet need a lawyer”.  

In disgust Obote left Makerere and went to work with a private construction company in Jinja. He then moved to Nairobi, Kenya where he worked for several companies. His love for reading and debating made him a permanent member of the Macmillan Library in Nairobi and Chairman of Kalolein Social Hall.

In Nairobi he also became very active in trade union activities. Obote was later to boast that though the British denied him studies in Khartoum, they nevertheless sent him to the best university, the Trade Union Movement in the then colonial Kenya. It is in Kenya that he met and worked with prominent Kenyan politicians like Jomo Kenyatta, Tom Mboya, Odinga Odinga and others. These groomed him into politics, governance and leadership, important assets on his return to Uganda where he suddenly became the political limelight first as the Chairman of Lango District Council and later the Member of the Legislative Council, Member of Parliament, Prime Minister and then President of the Republic of Uganda on two occasions.

Of course Obote was a family man. Let me only mention that members of his family have expressed love and pleasure in Obote the father, Obote the grandfather, Obote the relative and of course Obote the husband. We have here with us part of the family of Dr Obote and I want to recognize them. I recognize Mama Miria, Tony Akaki, James Emma Akena, Edward Engena, Benjamin Opeto and of course Adoko Nekyon the clan leader of Oyima where Obote belonged. 

On behalf of the family, my constituency Maruzi and the people of Lango sub-region, I wish to express our sincere thanks to the people and the Government of Zambia for looking after Obote, his family and other Ugandans who went with him into exile for the last 20 years. (Applause) We also thank them for receiving the remains from Johannesburg in a befitting manner, with respect and dignity. We take this opportunity to thank the people and the Government of the Republic of South Africa for the treatment of the body and keeping the entire family during the difficult time following Obote’s death. (Applause)

Finally, but quite importantly, we sincerely thank the Government of Uganda for according Milton Obote a befitting burial; a state burial. (Applause) The family and the people of Lango sub-region are grateful and thank wholeheartedly His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and his government. May the soul of Dr Milton Obote, former President of the Republic of Uganda, rest in eternal peace. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.57
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to express my condolences to Mama Miria and the family, to Mzee Adoko Nekyon and the clan. Dr Apollo Milton Obote, adwong me Uganda, chairman me East Africa, has passed on. Before I make more remarks about our departed leader, I would like to make a few comments about the address by the President. 

I am happy that finally we have come round to talk about reconciliation in this country. (Applause) Mzee Nelson Mandela, while still in prison and experiencing a lot of contact then that he should negotiate his release from jail said, “It cannot be for a prisoner to negotiate with his captors. Negotiation is for a free man; negotiation can only take place between equals.” I am not surprised that we are now talking about reconciliation because finally after 20 years some of us are now free in our country. Finally, after 20 years, the UPC can stand and talk to government as equal partners. It would not have been possible before the freedom we are experiencing now. 

In his own words the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote did say that he was willing to return to this country as long as this country was free. Unfortunately, although he has returned when there is a bit of freedom, he has returned in a coffin. Today, when I was coming to the Chamber I passed by the Independence Monument, which stands on the Sheraton grounds, which used to be called Apollo Hotel. That monument has a mother holding a baby very high and the baby expressing freedom by raising hands. That monument sums up the vision of Dr Apollo Milton Obote; the vision, which was heavily imbedded in the life cycle whereby God gives us life and children and in turn we hand over these children to Him for his blessing. 

When Uganda became independent that mother at the monument handed over Uganda to God for a blessing, so that in turn Uganda would grow up to look after that mother like all children grow up and look after their parents, for that child to be blessed in all aspects of life and live freely and happily in the motherland. That is the independence monument. If some of my colleagues have never been to the monument, I would implore you to visit it; maybe it will help us in our crusade for reconciliation.  

But it would be not sufficient for me to resume my seat before I share with you some of my close recollections in the life of our departed leader. But before I do that I thank the members of the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) who have stood by our leader throughout his time in leadership. (Applause) It is not easy after a government has been overthrown for one to stand up and say, “I am here, I am UPC.” Some of you who have not experienced it maybe will one day experience it. (Laughter) However, I must say that I was particularly impressed by the skeleton staff that remained at the party headquarters at Uganda House, because after the fall of government I went to the party headquarters and found there committed members of the party. I cannot mention them all but our brother the late Daniel Ochieng from Kaperebyong was one of those committed members at the party headquarters. My brother across, hon. Ben Wacha, was at the party headquarters and they were determined to keep that door open. Many times the headquarters was invaded but they would not relent. Mr Enock Kashunju and Prof. Kagenda Atwooki were also some of them that kept the headquarters open. It is still open up to this day. They kept it open throughout the last 20 years. 

I must thank my constituents of Bukooli North who have entrusted me with representing them even when it appeared that I would not be able to deliver much because I was in the opposition. They have kept by my side and because of their support; I have remained committed and unwavering to the Uganda People’s Congress. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, on 10 July 1985 we hosted Dr Obote in Bugiri. He came as he usually did to visit the people but little did we know that that rally was going to be his last rally in Uganda. Soon after we returned to Kampala on 27 July we were overthrown and Milton was never to address another rally in Uganda. On 7th, 8th and 9th of this month, I hosted a convention of UPC leaders in Busoga at my home and many people came from near and far. The whole of Busoga was represented and they sat in my home for three days. Little did we know that again that was the last congregation we would have as UPC members before the death of our leader. 

Here lies a great statesman; a lot has been said about Dr Obote already but let me just say that only the other day my son rang me from the UK and told me that all the British papers without exception - including the Sun - had given headlines to our leader. Of course historians know the troubles we have been through with some of the British opinion leaders but at this moment the British papers described Obote as one in a class of his own, a class of Kwame Nkrumah and of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere. Dr Obote is one of the great sons of Africa. (Applause) May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was given limited time for this programme because there are other programmes to follow. I have many members who have indicated to me that they want to make their contribution to this debate. I may not able to accommodate all of you but we will only have a reasonable number. I intend to curtail the time you take in making the contribution and this should not be more than five minutes.

4.06
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I stand here to support the motion moved by His Excellency the Vice-President to pay tribute to former President Apollo Milton Obote. I am happy that I am able to participate in this debate. 

First of all, there are facts, one that former President Obote received the instruments of power when Uganda became independent and two; he became President of Uganda twice. Therefore, those incontrovertible facts make him stand in a certain special place in the history of this country. It is a fact that former President Obote influenced the political, social and economic history of this country to a very great extent and for a long period of time. He was a human being and lived a reasonably long life, taking into account what the life expectancy of Uganda is. 

Life is a tortuous road full of barriers, full of blames, rivers to cross and you are bound, while you walk through life, to make mistakes. Therefore, it would not only be grossly unfair but also wrong to imagine that you can walk a straight road, take responsibility for so many intricate problems and not make any mistakes. There is not such a thing as an infallible human being. We are right to pay tribute to the man who is lying before us. 

You noticed that I did not address the former first lady because she is not a member of this House. However, I pay tribute to Mama Miria Obote, whom I have known at a distance for a long time. I thank her for standing by her husband and keeping her family together. She continuously behaved in a very dignified manner during difficult times. (Applause) I also pay tribute to the immediate family, the children, whom I do not know very well, but used to visit us in some of our residences in Kabale and many other places. The first family has had dignified people for all this time. (Applause) I pay tribute to Mzee Adoko Nekyon and his family – by the way one of his sons recently became the vice-president of the Ugandan Forum in North America, and we were happy to have a wonderful time with him. Therefore, we pay tribute to him and the entire clan for behaving in a dignified manner. 

I should also pay tribute to the party the fallen President led - UPC. In spite of the problems, UPC also has played some role in the history of our country. (Applause) I mean we cannot deny this. (Laughter) It is also obvious that the party members have conducted themselves in a dignified manner. Things could have been different but the orderly manner in which things have gone on so far is very good. It is a good gesture for this country. 

I pay tribute to Ugandans for having a reconciliatory spirit. When Cabinet decided that it is proper to have a state funeral for former president, a poll by WBS showed that 77 percent of the Ugandans supported the decision we had made. This showed that they valued reconciliation. (Applause) Therefore, I think Ugandans should take the statement His Excellency President Museveni has made this afternoon seriously. This country is ready for serious reconciliation. I, Prof. Kagonyera in character and in spirit, am extremely happy that Ugandans are ready for this. This country cannot afford to go on with what has been happening in the past. I would like to consider the death of former President Obote as the sacrifice for atonement in this country.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I do not want Ugandans to apologise for what has happened in the past in this country. It has never been an easy thing to build a nation. (Applause) Ugandans behaved the way God made them. The only challenge we have is to learn from the mistakes we have made in the past and do better. May the Almighty God rest former President Apollo Milton Obote in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us confine our contribution to five minutes.

4.16
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is a great honour for me to support the motion to pay tribute to the late former President, Dr Apollo Milton Obote. I would like to convey the collective condolences of the entire Members of Lango Parliamentary Group to the family of the late President Obote and the entire clan of Oyima. The substantive chairman of Lango Parliamentary Group, Dr Okullo Epak is out of the country just like another member, Dr Tom Odur.  However, the rest of the 12 members have actively participated to ensure that the late President gets a decent funeral.

Mr Speaker, immediately we heard of the sad news of the demise of Dr Obote, the Lango Parliamentary Group met and cooperated with the Government. We requested the Government for a state funeral, which was accepted. We later met the President in State House and called for the need for reconciliation. We proposed a national reconciliation conference, which the President referred to today. We also proposed that because of the complications and the controversies of Luwero, there is need for a national truth commission, which the President referred to in his speech too. We also proposed that there should be a return and renovation of the property of the former President, which the Government accepted. We further requested for the payment of all emoluments that are due to the late President. It is in this spirit that on behalf of the Lango Parliamentary Group, I pay our special appreciation to the Government for according the late President a state funeral. 

I want to thank the President in particular for making the final decision on this matter. We also thank you, Mr Speaker and our honourable colleagues for ensuring that this Parliament receives the body and pays last respects to the great leader. 

The emphasis of this state funeral is centred on reconciliation but I would like to add that in order for this reconciliation to be meaningful, we as leaders should create conditions for reconciliation. The leaders must be committed and positive in order to create positive attitudes for reconciliation. We thank the President for taking the lead in this reconciliation process. Reconciliation is a process of healing, which takes time, like any sick sickness or wound. Therefore, we may not have to be in a hurry but we must create conditions for this. One of the bases of this reconciliation is to speak the truth. Let us speak the truth and avoid lies, incitements, opportunism, politics and arrogance. 

Reconciliation is a matter for national survival and nation building. It, therefore, calls for statesmanship, no revenge and no hatred. We must accept blame where it is due and apologise whenever we are guilty. Even the victims who feel hurt should forgive and then tolerate. In Romans 14:7, it is indicated that the life and death of each of us has its influence on others. Therefore, the life of the late former President Obote touches us in different ways. 

There has been a lot of emotion, not based on logic. Let us listen to other voices that feel hurt, understand and reach them. There is already a good foundation for reconciliation. At the family level, there are marriages all over the country, across tribes. People carry out business across the country, irrespective of tribes. People have related on a personal level, gone to schools all over the country and there is settlement and migration. At the national level, the President and the Executive, Parliamentarians, party leaders, church leaders and education curriculum designers can build reconciliation. We must, therefore, promote reconciliation as a matter of national integration and equity.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we in Lango as an example of reconciliation have suffered for the last 28 years. From 1971 to 1979, for eight years, we were under the brutality of Idi Amin. From 1985 to date, we had the experience of the regime of Tito Okello, cattle rustling and unending wars. Our people are living in camps. However, this country should know that the people of Lango never celebrated when Idi Amin died. They never celebrated when Tito Okello died. We should keep the families and tribes of political leaders out of our political differences. 

As a tribute to the late leader, the greatest challenge for us is to move forward by building a united, peaceful and prosperous Uganda. May the soul of Dr Obote rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.26
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Paying tribute to a great man humbles me. As has already been said, he has been a President twice, the first Executive Prime Minister and indeed a great man. I have heard that the basis for the state funeral was for the sake of national reconciliation. I listened to His Excellency the President talk about national reconciliation and I want to state that this is a good move. This country, as we all know, has been bleeding for a long time. From the various responses that followed Dr Obote’s death, we have seen that this country is still bleeding. What are the lessons for us to learn? 

We are committed to a genuine reconciliation. I hope it is not going to be a matter of rhetoric, a situation where it is simply said. We are on the path to reconciliation and we would like to see some tangible, immediate steps on this path to national reconciliation. It is one thing for us to talk about national reconciliation now when there are people in this country – a month ago I asked about prisoners who are locked up in Makindye. They pleaded for amnesty, the High Court granted them bail and they are still in the military court martial. If we want to demonstrate reconciliation, let us begin with such people; if we are freeing them that is a step in the right direction. It will assure those whom we are inviting to come back because if we do not give sufficient assurance, how will somebody pack his or her bags when they are not so sure what will follow them when they get home.

I have also heard the responses of leaders of all levels from LCV chairpersons to ministers and some of them have made very unfortunate statements. My appeal is, if we are thinking of national integration the leaders should be exemplary. They should be the first to speak in the positive; they should not be on the list of people trying to rewrite history. For the last few days if I did not believe that Dr Obote was such a great man who had done all those things owing to what had been fed into my mind, I would have doubted all this because of what I have heard leaders talk about in this country. But when you saw the crowds, when you go back into history, when you reflect backwards you believe the truth and therefore we cannot rewrite history.  

My appeal is that, as Ugandans, we had better begin to be proud of our history; it is our national heritage, it is what gives us the basis for forging forward. Any attempt to rewrite history will definitely destroy our national identity and I am calling on everybody in leadership to be a person who appreciates.

There are countries, for instance if you go to Ghana you find Kotoka International Airport, and I am told that Kotoka was the man who tried to assassinate the former President, or did he even assassinate former President Nkwame Nkrumah? If that is the case and people think it is part of their history, we had better come to terms with part of our history as a basis for national reconciliation.

I want to pay tribute to Dr Obote because of the many tangible things that we the people of Teso still see. I am a product of the 1980 Obote II schools that were simply declared and every county got a school. I studied in Kamode Secondary School. I could have not made it to schools where the children of the rich were going but it was a good policy for orphans to access education. Today you go to our universities, if you do not have the money, if you are not from a good background, you will not get in there. We need to revisit some of those good policies for the good our country.  

Where I come from, the only secondary school in Serere County is the 1980 school, which Dr Obote declared at that time. I think we need to review some of those policies to help the children of the poor get where the children of the rich are.  

I want to conclude by simply saying that I appreciate the role the Government of Zambia did to our very own. It is possible that if Zambia had not taken the courage to house Dr Obote and his family and his kinsmen maybe he would have died in some forest long ago. So, we want the Zambian Government to know that we as Ugandans are very grateful -(Applause)- but at the same time we are ashamed of our own failure to protect our own and take care of them at a time of need.  

My other and final prayer is that the late Dr Obote, the great man who lies here, should be the last Ugandan to be brought back in a coffin. It is sad for this country, it is a curse, and it is an abomination to be lining up at the airport every other day to receive the remains of people to whom you attribute your history. I pray that that will be the last body to come back in a coffin to this country. May God grant the family the courage to go on! I thank you.

4.32
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion moved by His Excellency, the Vice-President of Uganda paying tribute to our fallen leader, former President of Uganda, Dr Apollo Milton Obote. I also want to associate myself with the speech given by His Excellency, the President of Uganda calling for intensification of reconciliation. Let me take this opportunity to convey my heartfelt condolences to Mama Miria Obote and the family, the clan led by Mzee Nekyon and to the country following the death of Dr Apollo Milton Obote.  

Dr Obote has been described in many different ways and he will continue to be described in many different ways by both admirers and those who do not support or who verify him.  But the fact of the matter is, Mr Speaker, I am happy to see this House essentially united in paying their tribute to this departed leader, Dr Apollo Obote. In fact, Dr Obote in that respect and his death has already enhanced and galvanized the process of unity and consolidation in our country from the remarks that have already been made. 

Dr Obote definitely was a patriot and he was clearly a nationalist who led Uganda to independence and it is true, as speakers have already said, he falls in the category of well-recognised African leaders like Kenneth Kaunda, Nyerere and Nkwame Nkrumah.  

It is true that the attainment of independence of Uganda was not an easy thing. In fact, many of us who were still young wondered what would happen to Uganda, there were even fears that Uganda would be fragmented, or would even disintegrate. So, I salute Dr Obote for having forged a practical alliance of different political forces to be able to lead Uganda to independence as one united country. (Applause)

Dr Obote was a friend of students and the youths. (Applause). It was common to see Dr Obote meeting secondary school students, university students and he gave them a lot of time and he was very accessible by them. He would be accessed almost anytime if students or youth had a strong case to make. He even in December 1969 had a programme of students of Uganda from secondary schools and universities being guests of the President for one month in Entebbe. I salute him because a number of us here benefited from that programme. (Applause) Actually it is true that that one month was used for intense discussions or about national and international and of course Pan African issues. And I must also say that Miria Obote played no mean role in that situation where her husband and herself hosted Uganda student leaders for one month in Entebbe. I salute her for that. (Applause)  

Through his contacts, the students of Uganda were able to easily interact with other African leaders. I remember, for example, we organised a Pan African conference and invited President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, and he easily came to grace this conference. I did not attribute that quick response to the invitation of the students alone, but definitely to the support of Dr Obote then as President and encouraging his friend Kenneth Kaunda to come and grace the activities of the young people of Africa gathered in Kampala.

One last comment about his support and really love for students and youth came to test when Idi Amin captured the reign of power, and it is true that the students of Uganda resisted the reign of Idi Amin and as a result they paid heavily. So many student leaders were forced to flee the country even before they completed their studies. I have seen some comments in the press and I really confirm that students then are now contemporaries like Ndugu Tumusiime Mutebile, Chapa Karuhanga, hon. Herbert Nuwagaba, Olara Otunu and myself -(Applause)- were assisted by Dr Obote in different ways to be able to complete the studies that we could not complete in Uganda.

Dr Obote was a Pan-Africanist and Ndugu Akaki gave a good history of how he started his politics in Kenya and then continued to play a big role in formation of OAU and support for the liberation committee and a number of other activities. I want to say that we should use the death of our departed leader to fast track the process of reconciliation. It is true reconciliation has been on, but we need to strengthen it and to fast track it so that we can get achievements as quickly as possible. (Applause)  

I would like to take this opportunity to salute all the members of the organising committee for the state burial of our departed leader, those who represented government, those who represented Parliament spearheaded by Lango Parliamentary group and family of Dr Obote led by Mzee Nekyon, made very substantial contribution and the leadership of Uganda Peoples’ Congress led by Mr Okello Okello and Mr Walubiri.

Let me say for purposes of the record that for the last several years there have been contacts between the family led by Mzee Nekyon and President Museveni and Jovino Akaki and myself trying to work out the mechanisms of the return of Dr Obote. In fact, it is also true as colleagues may know that there was a Cabinet agenda item to be discussed on Obote’s return because there have been substantial progress already made by our delegation and delegation led by Mzee Nekyon on this very fact of Dr Obote’s return. So, I commend him for the good work that he has done.

I want to take this opportunity also to really salute my own government, the Government of Uganda for its maturity -(Applause)- and for putting aside petty issues and coming in a principle manner to pay fitting tribute to a departed President of Uganda. I am glad that Zambia is represented here. They obviously deserve great tribute for doing the work of looking after our former President for us. (Applause)

I do agree with comments made by my sister Alaso that really we should never have another shame of our former leader dying in exile. I am glad in this debate we have Mzee Lukongwa Binaisa, the former President of Uganda, with us here. We feel energised and encouraged by your being here in this debate.

Let me make this point that Dr Obote could have gone to America in exile; he could even have gone to Europe or some other place. But on two occasions Dr Obote chose to flee or take refugee in Tanzania and second time he chose to take refugee in Zambia. It shows his confidence in Africa and his commitment for Pan-Africanism. (Applause)  

I must also salute the Government of South Africa for having taken care of Dr Obote in his last days, and also the Government of Tanzania, which gave Dr Obote a home at Musasani in Dar-es salaam during his first years of exile. May the Almighty God rest Dr Obote’s soul in eternal peace! I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: It has not been easy for people to keep time and I was given only two hours according to the programme. What I am going to do is to somehow try to be representative in my choosing. I will consider other interests, but let us please restrict our time to five minutes.

4.46
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion moved by government to pay tribute to the fallen former head of state of the Republic of Uganda.  

As a small boy in 1980, when I was in senior three, I registered with a party I will not mention now, and out of curiosity I thought we should be debating the issues of national unity.  But when my presidential candidate of that party visited in Mbale, I did not get impressed by what vision he had then for this country. When I heard the following week that the UPC President would be visiting Mbale, although I had then registered as a small boy in another party, I still ventured to visit Mbale and listened to what the former head of state then had to say.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to tell you that when the late President Obote spoke it had a permanent impression on what I thought a good leader should be for this country. (Applause) I was a small boy in senior three and two years later, when I became a NUSU President of Bukedi College Kachonga, I had an opportunity to meet in person with President Milton Obote at the conference centre. And his interaction with us as youths in a secondary school made me wish that if the children of this country could have an opportunity to interact with their leaders they would have a lot to learn from them.

We gather now to pay tribute to the fallen leader; we are grateful to his deeds. But as we do this, I want to remember the contribution of His Excellency, the President. Mr Speaker, my speech I had written has been tremendously transformed and changed because of the words that have been spoken by His Excellency, the President.  

Mr Speaker, when President Mandela came out of prison he chose not to look behind at what had happened before him all that time he had been in prison and struggling. He chose to look ahead and ahead they have moved a Republic of South Africa to greater heights, to an investing republic and to a united nation. The transforming power of the words of the head of state, of the leader of organisation are so powerful that I want to tell you that with the words of His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni, Uganda will never be the same again. (Applause) But while we remember and we forge unity for this country, I want to remember the words of the Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, when he recognised that our leaders are going through different challenges and different times, and while we judge history, let us recognise the challenges and the times that we have been going through.  

Mr Speaker, as a Christian and as I conclude, when we look at the people who die we remember that we are in this world like a race, that immediately you finish your race, you pass over the battle to another person. President Obote is dead but for sure somebody is holding that battle now. We do not know who and that is the secret that God retained.  While we are remembering our dead, let us learn to pay tribute and learn that death is not a question of choice, but it is a must that we must all go through to reach Heaven. May his soul rest in eternal peace! (Applause)

4.50
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to support the motion and pay tribute to the family members of the late President Dr Apollo Milton Obote and to Ugandans for such a big loss. 

I am not so old enough to talk with authority about a fallen comrade, Dr Apollo Milton Obote, but today I get up as an O.B of Gulu High School where I happen to be the head prefect and that is where Dr Apollo Milton Obote studied. I am so happy because you can see the products of Gulu High School.  

Former President Milton Obote inspired me a lot to join politics. In 1984 President Milton Obote visited Negiri Primary School and my memory is so clear and I want to tell this single event. I was in primary one, and President Milton Obote came to Negiri Primary School. And why I cannot forget that single incidence, the then head mistress of Negiri Primary School, an Italian called Sister Veronica, offered President Obote a plate of roasted ground nuts and a soda, which by then in my infant age looked like a Fanta, but it should have been Vimto or Tree Top. This is a very honesty recollection, Mr Speaker. But one thing is I saw this guest of honour that we were waiting to sing for declining the offer and yet as young children that is what we needed most in life. From then on, I started asking myself, what has this person done that he can be offered such a great thing that anyone else in primary one would want and he rejects it? Then years down the road, I came to realise that he tore the part of politics. 

Mr Speaker, as an old boy of Gulu High School, I want to say we should desist from being graveyard politicians. I want to thank the President for having come today in Parliament to echo the drums of national reconciliation. Yesterday I was in Gulu, he was in Gulu; he could have taken another option to be in Gulu but here he is today, although he had a tight schedule he came to Parliament to stand less than one meter from the person he had been talking about in the last 20 years to make such a passionate comment. This is very healthy for the direction the country is taking. 

But at the same time, apart from being good graveyard politicians, we need to know that there are other Ugandans who are alive and they are out of the country, Rtd Col Kiiza Besigye is out of Uganda. I am aware that he is coming on the 26th of this month, next week, and I think I want to thank the South African Government because apart from hosting Dr Obote in a hospital, it is hosting Rtd Col Dr Kiiza Besigye.  

I also want to thank the Zambian Government. I have never seen such a situation in Uganda where three former heads of state can stand together on one function. I saw them in the newspapers holding hands Kaunda, Chiluba and President Mwanawasa.  These are things, which have been practically impossible in Uganda. 

I want to appeal to the youth, let us not take political grievances too far. Never over hit your enemy because at the time when you get to the position of leadership you will still have the challenge like today to perform a constitutional duty. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, as I sit down I want to thank the UPC government and President Milton Obote for having built girls’ schools. As I talk now, after 20 years of democracy in Uganda under the NRM leadership, if you show me one single girls’ school I will resign from Parliament and walk up to Pader. (Laughter) I want to thank them because without such schools my mother would not have produced me and many other women. May the soul of Dr Apollo Milton Obote rest in eternal peace! Thank you so much. (Applause)

4.58
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am happy to rise and pay tribute to the founding father of the nation of Uganda. I would like to be very brief and I would like to start by thanking His Excellency, President Museveni, for coming today to this House to honour Dr Apollo Milton Obote. It takes a brave man to do what he did today –(Applause)- and it is exactly this that we have been asking that could we humble ourselves as a nation and heal! It is my prayer, like all of you who have contributed have said that we should heal the wounds that we have inflicted on ourselves as a nation.  

I am glad today that we are paying tribute to Dr Apollo Milton Obote in Parliament. The place where it all began is the place where it is all ending for him. I am grateful that as a nation we have humbled ourselves and done what we ought to do, to give Dr Apollo Milton Obote a dignified honourable tribute. I thank you all.  

The contribution of Dr Obote and UPC is written in our history in indelible ink. For the last 20 years, we have worked so hard to erase that, and I am glad that today we have recognised that you can never rewrite the history of Uganda and you can never rewrite it without Dr Apollo Milton Obote. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, as a young child, I used to see every eligible bachelor worth the name with a hairstyle that was so attractive to every girl in town and to impress an entire nation with a hairstyle like Dr Obote did, it is difficult because now the people who used to wear it are bald headed and they have become so clearheaded -(Laughter)- but to me it is a thing that talks volumes of who Dr Obote was as a young decent man who inspired even the dressing of a nation.  

There is so much that has been said that confirms the indelible ink in which the history of Dr Obote will continue to be read, and read for a long time.  I am happy that Dr Obote is finally free, free of all the words, acrimony and all the things that have been said about him. All those words that I am not permitted to say in my tradition because a great leader lies in state here, but we all know them. I am glad that he is a free man finally, and I am glad that he is home. 

I want to welcome his family back home and thank government for doing what they ought to have done long ago, but nevertheless it is done. May I only pray for him that his soul rest in eternal peace! And that for all of us in Forum for Democratic Change, we pray that we will live in a better Uganda where we do not have to live and die in exile.  I thank you.

5.03
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin paying tribute to Dr Apollo Milton Obote by appreciating the good speech His Excellency the President of Uganda has made. If there is any speech he has made in this year, the best is today’s speech. 

Out of his speech I would like to make two brief conclusions:  one, it is now a foregone conclusion that one of the distinguished sons of Uganda namely, Dr Besigye, should return home without conditions. Secondly, it is a foregone conclusion that after spending so many occasions contemplating on how we can go about the war in Northern Uganda, we have reached somewhere where we can conclude the war in Northern Uganda using the forces of reconciliation and doing so is now.

I would like to talk about Dr Apollo Milton Obote in two dimensions and very briefly. I would like to talk about Dr Apollo Milton Obote, the former President of Uganda, the former President of UPC, a brother-in-law - because he married from Buganda - and a former Executive Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, in Dr Milton Obote I knew a man of adventure; he was a man of character. He was also a fundamentalist; he was also an intellectual and to borrow the words of my Prof. Ali Mazuri, he was among those people sufficiently fascinated by ideas and had the spirit to handle those ideas effectively and even scientifically.  

Dr Obote knew what he wanted even if what he wanted was unpopular; he would pursue a line with perseverance to achieve it no matter how satanic it would have been.  

Dr Obote was also a debater of skills, an orator of talent only related to the lives of Tom Mboya or Kenyan Simon Kapwepwe, Odinga Odinga, and Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana. Scholars who have attempted to analyse Milton Obote have said on this sad note that he was a great man with some great mistakes.  

Obote also was a poet in his own right and a scholar and he drew his name Milton from a distinguished poet of English origin namely, John Milton. His lyrics in Paradise Lost begin in hell then it trout around Heaven and end on earth, Adam and Eve. One of the most exciting excerpts of Milton Obote from Paradise Lost was, “Better to reign in hell than serve in Heaven”; you know what that means under Obote. Even if something is very difficult, persevere to fight until you win even if you lose. That was Milton Obote.  

But what went wrong in Uganda? I happen to have been one of the people who studied Obote and I think Prof. Nsibambi is my witness –(Laughter)- my contention is that no one is perfect in life on earth not even Jesus Christ was perfect –(Interjection)- before he was crucified on the cross, Jesus was subjected to Herod’s court, which condemned him to death. So, anybody can do wrong and Jesus wanted us to go into a life, which has got experiences and adventures because if the world was so easy, things would not have worked out. So Jesus also experienced the hard time –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you trying to suggest that any time you are tried you must have been wrong?

MR LUKYAMUZI: No, you can be tried even if you are not wrong but you can be unjustly tried. So, what is the source of this content in Uganda? 

From the side of Buganda, we have forgiven our muko; things can always go wrong and I will make sure that no celebrations take place. Why should you celebrate when your muko is dead? Even if he is not a muko, but a fellow Ugandan dying and you celebrate, to hell with that! I will not tolerate that! (Applause) 

But what is the source of this contention about Dr Obote? Why are some people not happy especially the Baganda who are our in-laws? They are angry not because they hate Obote, they are angry because Obote wasted their hope. He wasted the hope they had in him, and to quantify what I am saying I want to quote a German scholar and a writer by the name of Herman Halts. He says: “The opposite of love is not hate, it is indifference. When you love one, you cannot hate him.” It is the indifference, which comes across that causes the divide. Otherwise, the Baganda do not hate Obote because they are indifferent. One may assume that they hate him but we do not hate him. 

Finally, I would like to reply Prof. Nsibambi –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think it is time, please.

MR LUKYAMUZI: This is my final point, Mr Speaker.  I think there is something, which Prof. Nsibambi should pick from my contention. Milton Obote in his letter to a London friend had the following to say - I was alluding to his remarks in regard to the Kabaka Yekka, KY/UPC Alliance - “We formed an alliance with Kabaka Yekka to avoid the repeat of the 1961 crisis where Buganda boycotted the elections.”  This assertion means that Obote knew what had gone wrong for him to have been persuaded to forge an alliance with Kabaka Yekka. Reconciliation started a long time ago; let us pursue it to a conclusive remark. (Applause) 

Finally, now that we know why KY forged an alliance with UPC, which alliance collapsed circumstantially, has this country recovered? The country is limping, the economy has crumbled, the time is now for us to develop a formula of reconciliation. That formula is a federal arrangement. Thank you very much. (Laughter) 

5.12
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like, first of all, to give the message of the Ugandan Women Parliamentary Association (UWPA) to the family of the late Apollo Milton Obote, the Oyuma clan, the Lango people and the Government and people of Uganda. 

The Uganda Women Parliamentary Association is deeply sadden by the death in exile of the former President of Uganda and father of the nation and a great orator. As UWPA pays tribute to our father and leader, we would like to express appreciation to His Excellency, the President of Uganda for according him a state funeral and for providing everything that they have provided.  

In particular, we want to appreciate the address of His Excellency, the President today during this motion. As we mourn the departure of His Excellency, the former President Milton Obote, let us search our minds individually and collectively to what message his death has for us, and especially a death that has occurred at this time in our history. That message is surely a message of reconciliation.  

Mr Speaker, 43 years after Obote received the instruments of power in Uganda. Uganda is still searching for durable solutions to a number of issues in this country. May the spirit of reconciliation that has been demonstrated by the NRM Government at this difficult time touch all our hearts including the heart of Kony so that peace, forgiveness and nationalism is ushered in by the death of the former President Obote.

Mama Miria Obote, UWPA thanks you for standing by your husband in the most difficult times in your life. UWPA also thanks the Government of Zambia for maintaining you and your family during those difficult times. Mama Miria Obote, while you were first lady, you were the most inspiring person then in this country. Perhaps a lot of us will remember that the last time we saw you, we had a public meeting with you, a cross section of women and men in this country met you when you hosted us on 8th March 1985 just before the Beijing Conference. You hosted and entertained us during the first celebration of Women’s Day in this country. We will forever remember that occasion. (Applause) It was during that occasion that the women song, which has now become a signature tune for the women movement in Uganda and the gender movement in Uganda, was launched.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say this to Mama Miria Obote: we have gone a long way since that celebration and we are looking forward to your input into the gender movement in this country, and your support. May the soul of the President rest in eternal peace.

Mr Speaker, allow me now to make a few remarks on behalf of the people of Kaberamaido. The people of Kaberamaido would like to express their sincere condolences on the death of the former President Milton Obote. The people of Kaberamaido will remember the President Milton Obote, among other things, for the efforts that he had in developing the people at the grassroots especially through the cooperative movement. Many people will not know that there was a time in this country when the co-operative movement was so great that it was a model in Africa to the extent that the co-operative credit scheme was actually copied in other countries in Africa, so the people of Kaberamaido appreciate those days and we hope that we are going back more to developing these grass root structures so that poverty can be addressed.

Mr Speaker, the people of Kaberamaido also say, reconciliation is the only route we must follow. There is no choice. We must reconcile, otherwise we do not have a future to talk about. 

While I wind up, yesterday while I was in the lobby as we kept vigil, I was watching the children; some children were even too young to see the coffin but they came in big numbers and a lot of them were seeing the body of the late President Obote. You could tell the curiosity in their eyes. I kept on asking myself, “What are they trying to confirm? Are they trying to say, ‘Is this the great man that we have been told about or are they trying to confirm is this the bad person we have been told about’?” I think today is the time for us to clean up what is in the minds of our children so that their future is strengthened. We should have reconciliation at the centre so that those children’s curiosity is no longer in doubt. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.18
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. After listening to colleagues submitting, I am so humbled that I now also have an opportunity to pay tribute to the fallen former President of Uganda. The man that I looked upon as my hero, a man whose speeches I would never miss. Even as a student I would carry the radio with me to listen to his speeches to the nation.

I would like to thank the Government for at least recognising that Dr Obote did a lot for this country - the good that deserved to be recognised. I know, Mr Speaker, that when lies are told many times sometimes they start sounding like the truth and that is what some leaders in this country have attempted to do. I thank colleagues who have warned against trying to re-write history and I must add that we should not try to re-write presidents as well. Much as we appreciate that Dr Obote is being accorded a state funeral, we should not re-write presidents. We have known what state funerals have been in this country.

In my culture you cannot say that you are mourning your father and then you continue digging in the garden. It does not make sense. In fact the musicians in my village would compose a song condemning you and your character and even ridiculing you. If Zambia, which was just a host country to Dr Obote, can accord him a public holiday, why can’t the Government of Uganda accord Dr Obote and the people of Uganda a public holiday for them to give a befitting farewell to President Obote? (Applause)

I know that there are colleagues with whom we have discussed the matter of moving an amendment to the motion moved by His Excellency the Vice-President. We are giving notice that such an amendment will come at the appropriate time when we are about to vote on the motion. 

Death is one of the mysteries that God has created and death has a way of uniting people. Death has finally brought the Movement and UPC to talk together and I think this is healthy for the nation. Death has united fellow congress men and women to talk and bury their past differences. I want to assure honourable members and the country at large that UPC is going to emerge out of this crisis stronger than ever before. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, as a young man, I felt very gratified that President Obote and the UPC Government came up with policies that were meant to cater for the majority of the people of this country. It will be recalled that it was the UPC, which declared war on ignorance, poverty and disease. So, if we are looking for reconciliation we should not be too economical on the truth. When you hear leaders saying that the lame children in this country are the responsibility of UPC then they are not only being economical on the truth, they are outright liars and they should be shunned.

We are grateful for the occasion that Parliament has at last recognised the presence of political parties in this Parliament and that parties have been able to bring flags bearing their party colours thus re-establishing themselves as viable entities that can legally vie for power in Uganda.

I would like to end by appealing to those who are in positions of leadership and those who aspire to go in there that Dr Obote’s life is a very big classroom for political leaders. He has been able to lead governments once and has been in exile twice. Dr Obote and UPC are the only entities that know what it means to hold power and what it means to loose power. Let those people who are for the time being in power use power as if they will never be out of power, time will come -(Laughter)- time will come when they will also be out of power. One thing is, once you are out of power you cannot stop other people calling you swine also -(Laughter)- I am glad that from today President Binaisa can now walk with his head high up. You will not be called swine any more. So we are happy that there is reconciliation coming and since it is not just a new event it is a process, let us be prepared to go through this process of reconciliation with truth because reconciliation can only go with the truth. You cannot go into perfect reconciliation if you distort the truth.

Finally, Mr Speaker, allow me to pay tribute to Mama Miria Obote on behalf of all congress men and women, for having looked after our party President up to his last minute in life. Indeed you have kept your marriage vows and gone an extra mile. But more than that, in 1985 I was with her in Nairobi to attend the women’s conference. This should tell the people of Uganda that claims that women have been only emancipated during the NRM Government are fabrications because the Beijing Conference and the follow up conference where Mama Miria led the Ugandan delegation have been processes leading to the emancipation of women and UPC should also partake of the credit for emancipating women in the country.

Even the lady who actually caused the anthem for women in Uganda, Mama Nekyon, is also here in this House. These are Ugandans, the unsung heroes of the women’s cause, so let us not distort history. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.29
PROF. EPHRAHIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really thank you for giving me this opportunity to say a word of farewell and pay tribute to Dr Milton Obote, the man who struggled for independence and we won it, a man who was at the forefront of fighting colonialism and apartheid. These now are matters of history but this is a man who led the foundation for development of this country and we are consolidating - a man whom I served or I served under as an ambassador extraordinaire and foreign potentially –(Applause)- in charge of the Ministry of Finance.
 
I want to begin by echoing the words of the Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi, in contributing to the contribution that Dr Milton Obote made. It is very important not to judge history through the eyes of the present. If you look back at the time these decisions were being made, you will appreciate the significant contribution Dr Milton Obote made to this country. I knew Milton as a student in the 1960s when we were at Ntare School. Ntare School gave freedom to students to attend political rallies in town and at the time I can recall the league of leaders at the time who came: Ben Kiwanuka, Kakonge, Nkutu, Bataringaya, Rwesiba, Grace Ibingira, C.B. Katiti and indeed Milton Obote.

What distinguished Milton Obote and made a permanent impression on us as students and young people at the time, first was the combination of things, reference has already been made to the style of his hair, which was very impressive; his walking stick was a hallmark and then the substance of his speech. The oratory and the credentials he could give to the speeches were indeed an inspiration to us as students at the time. It was not surprising that as students we would go back in our dormitories and people would begin to have walking sticks and comb their hair like Milton did at the time. So many children were named Apollo, others Milton and indeed others took the names to show the popularity of the man in the coffin. He made a permanent impression.

Later as a student at Makerere University, President Milton Obote invited us at State House for a get together with his visitors. The visitors were none other than Mwalimu Julius Nyerere and Kenneth Kaunda. We debated with these three Presidents as students about all topics under the earth: African revolution, fighting apartheid, socialism, and Pan Africanism and the Pan African government. The three enemies of development: poverty, disease and ignorance and the presidents were so patient with us. Mr Speaker, can you imagine when we returned to our campus, we tried to create a Mulungushi Club as part of the emulation of what we had been inspired! This made a permanent mark on us.

If you could allow me also to narrate my experience serving under Milton Obote as his ambassador extraordinaire; I was in charge of the Ministry of Finance. We made an economic advisory committee, which I chaired with Henry Makmot as deputy Minister of Finance, Governor Leo Kibirango, Permanent Secretary Joseph Okune, Richard Kaijuka as Chairman of the Bankers’ Association, Emmanuel Tumusiime as Chief Economist and Ekinu as Secretary to the Treasury. What I really want to share with you Members of Parliament is that we would formulate all these economic policies and we would formulate the debates. What inspired us working under Milton was that he would take a detailed study of our submission and whenever we came to discuss with him you would find nothing wanting. It was thorough homework, which made our work extremely inspiring.

Like we used to do at the time of budget, he would call us to the fourth floor and we would sit there almost the whole night. In the morning Milton Obote would come as Minister of Finance, read the budget in a parliamentary style that inspired us who were working under him. We miss him! I should really mention this for Miria because I used to lead delegations to Washington and because of the difference in time; at times we would ring the President to consult him on the decisions we were going to make - committing the country. There were no mobile telephones then, the time difference would be beyond midnight and you would ring the President. Mama Miria would pick the telephone and we would say, “Mama, I am sorry to wake you up, there is an urgent matter I would want to consult the President about before our meeting the following morning.”

Mama Miria, in warmth and kindness would pick the telephone and say, “Ambassador you are doing a good job for the country, you are not disturbing anybody, hold on for one second, I will get Mzee to speak to you.” I never told you, Miria, your word was a source of inspiration for us who worked for your husband. (Applause)

One concern we experienced working with President Milton Obote was that Milton had a nagging procrastination about decisions relating to army affairs. Whenever I came with documents whether it is army supply or army incidents these are things, which would never happen again. Mr Speaker, most of the time President Milton Obote would say, “Leave this with me.” And I would leave it there, one week, two weeks while pressure was building up. One incident I remember also very vividly was when UPC had won the 1980 general elections. When the results were announced and the figure was 64 seats that were won, 64 was a magical number because the total number of seats were 126, therefore, any party, which got 64 seats, would have won the majority in the House. So results were announced 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10 until 64 for UPC, when that number came through the radio, the whole of Kampala was rocked with guns.

I was sitting with Milton Obote and Shafik, in a moment of reflection, Milton Obote said, “Bazilio has overtaken power because he did not want government to win.” That was 1980 but can you imagine that in 1985 the same guy, who was suspected in 1980, took over the Government! At least when I sleep sometimes reflecting on these events, it is a sense of experience that you never share but what lessons can we learn from Milton Obote? Three things: the first one is as leaders, ladies and gentlemen, honourable members, for every question we resolve or for every decision we make, there are two sides to it. Whether it is a referendum for lost counties or a constitution for republicanism, there are people who would never have seen the inside of a school if republicanism did not come. Therefore, when you introduce it, there are those who lose and those who gain; whether it is introducing multi-party.

I also learn from working with Milton that we should endeavour to be truthful and just for all and indeed I appreciate the President’s address to the Parliament. Lincoln would say, “We should have malice towards none, the truth today revealed, the greatest men benefited.”

The last two lessons are: avoid being ambitious. My dear good friends there are leaders who are over ambitious and stepping into the shoes of a great man, you either accomplish double of what they did or the alternative is to demolish what they achieved. It is very painful because when Amin stepped in the shoes of Milton, he could not double his achievements. What he was left to do was simply to demolish what was done. This is a lesson, which we must learn.

The last lesson is never take the Hamurabi’s code: if a man destroys an eye of another man they should destroy his eye, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a hand for hand, burning for burning, wound for wound. We must forget this one and we must thank the President’s address today because we should avoid – Luwero Triangle caused sadness and anger – we should avoid establishing a rectangle in the North. 

Mr Speaker, shall I conclude by quoting Shakespeare now, “The quality of mercy is not strained.” Let us be moderate let us forgive. In essence the address of the President to this nation should be emulated. We want to thank government for leading the way in reconciliation and also thank the Government of Zambia for keeping the President. We thank you, God. The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

5.40
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Motion! Mr Speaker, having listened carefully to the debate for the last two and a half hours and in view of the fact that the debate is in one direction, I beg to move that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that I put the question as under rule 61; there is a motion that I put the question. I put the question to the motion that we close the debate.

(Question put and negatived.)

5.41
MR BENEDICT ETONU (Amuria County, Kumi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance to debate this motion on the Floor. I would like to start by first of all -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But please, I am appealing to you, we agreed on five minutes. Please restrict yourself to five minutes.

MR ETONU: I will be on the point. I would like to state here that I would only like to mention three things as regards to the late President Dr Obote. I want dispel the sayings, which have always been said in Uganda or in this House that President Obote during his two regimes killed very many people.

I had an opportunity to work under President Obote as one of his ministers but more importantly, I was the only minister who accompanied him to Zambia this time round in exile and I had a long time chatting with him. He did say, “If the people of Uganda believe that I killed anybody, I should be taken to court.” Indeed when a commission of inquiry was set up, which President Museveni mentioned today, led by Justice Oder, nothing was mentioned or alleged by anybody that President Obote had a case to answer.

I would also like to say also that during the two terms President Obote has been in the office, he never signed any death warrant for inmates who had already been committed. (Applause) I thought if he was a killer that would have been a chance for him to kill at least those who had already been committed to die. 

President Obote then had a problem of even resisting coups. I do recollect this last one of Tito Okello, where he had the opportunity even to call in foreign troops to help because the coup plot was known much earlier. You will recall honourable members that there was an incident in Mbuya in which the former Vice-President then, Paul Muwanga, alleged that there was confusion and uncoordinated movement of troops and this was indeed an attempt of overthrowing of the Government. President Obote would then have had a chance to bring in troops but while in Lusaka he told me, “My purpose of always running away is not to let Ugandans’ blood flow on Ugandan soil.” He told me this and I do respect the views he said on that because I have already explained, so I would like now that he is going to be buried, Ugandans to know that President Obote as a person never killed anybody. (Applause). I thought I would make this very important point.

I would also like now - but since I have a very little time - to pay tribute to Mama Miria. When I was in Lusaka with the late President I used to travel to Nairobi to deliver some messages that the President would send to Mama. She was very supportive and I know she has continued to support her husband up to the last moment.

Before I end I would like to thank the Government of Zambia and I wish all other governments in Africa would follow this, President Kawunda is the one who received us and gave us asylum in Zambia. The one who came after him, President Chiluba also continued to look after our late President. Even the third one, President Mwanawasi came and he has continued to do this up to day. We Ugandans should pay very high tribute to a country like Zambia and would like to thank people of Zambia for exhibiting this, which should be emulated by all African leaders and their countries.

I now wish the Government to continue with what it has started doing by first of all accepting to bring back the body, and I would like to request that the family be looked after properly so that they do not have to remember the suffering they have continued to go through for this country. They were in exile in Tanzania and then in Zambia, for heavens sake let them now rest in Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, motion, Member for Apac?

5.46
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise to move a motion for amendment under rule 42 in light of the debate that has ensued in the House considering the speech of His Excellency the President, which has ably articulated the spirit of reconciliation and also taking into consideration the fact that other states like South Africa and Zambia have already shown the way and given honour to the late former President of the Republic of Uganda.

I, therefore, beg to move a motion to amend the motion moved by His Excellency the Vice-President, to read in 4: “In light of the spirit of national reconciliation, Monday the 24th October, 2005 the day of the burial of the late President A.M. Obote be declared a public holiday.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, your Excellency the Vice-President, it is your motion. There has been an amendment and terms read by the Member for Apac, what is your view on that?

5.49
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Mr Speaker, I sympathise with the amendment. However, we had a five-hour debate in Cabinet. I would like it to be differed for about two hours for consultation and we shall announce.

5.50
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I think the most prudent thing to do in view of the fact that government had a very long, five-hour debate on this matter, is for the Vice-President and the Prime Minister and indeed the entire government to leave this matter to the House. In fact it will save their face in a sense that while the position of Cabinet is not to come openly in favour of a public holiday, but to leave it open I think the position of Cabinet was not to oppose the public holiday, but rather to say they are not coming to declare a public holiday. Now the matter has come to Parliament, which is a representative of national interests, the Government should abide by it and then it is a function of Parliament. So I urge the Vice-President that the most prudent thing to do is just to leave it to the House and Government should humbly accept the decision of the House. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I want to make it clear so that we do not go with a misconception that whereas we can make this motion advisory, it should not be misunderstood if we pass this amendment that we have declared that day a public holiday because that act is an Executive decision. So we can pass it but on the understanding that we are advising. I want this to be known. I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.51
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Further amendment, Mr Speaker. I wish to seek your indulgence. I have been sitting here the whole afternoon patiently and I wish under the same rule to amend the motion to provide that with effect from tomorrow, all the flags in Uganda will fly at a half-mast. In my view and considering –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You move that we recommend it?

MR MWANDHA: “We recommend that with effect from tomorrow the flags in Uganda fly at half-mast, until the former President is buried on Monday, 24 October 2005.” If you want me to defend my proposal –(Interruption)

PROF. BUKENYA: Again I sympathise with that because the former President is really a very important thing but we had decided that on the day of the burial all flags should fly at half-mast, which is on Monday. Again since this is also advisory, an announcement will be made two hours from now as to the first, as well as the second. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We vote on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exhaustively debated the motion and I think we should come to the end of it. I now put the question on the motion moved by His Excellency the Vice-President, as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you very much for the contributions –(Interruption)- yes, after the National Anthem, I will not talk. I will be adjourning the House to Tuesday, 25 October 2005.  

Honourable members, as I indicated to you before, we have very important Bills to dispose of. The House is adjourned to Tuesday afternoon but as I appealed to you yesterday, please, study those two Bills: the Presidential and Parliamentary Elections Bills so that you identify the key issues in those Bills and we do not talk generally on issues that are not necessarily in controversy.

(The National Anthem)

(Departure of the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote_)

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 October 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

