

Thursday, 4 October 2018

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As I communicated earlier this week, today let us do our best to finish the business that is on the Order Paper because at the end of this sitting, I will be adjourning for recess of one month and Parliament will resume after one month. Therefore, let us try and do as much business as we can so that we leave the business in good order. 

Honourable members, on the 20th of this month, there will be celebrations in Agago District in a place called Paimol, Wipolo, celebrating the lives of two martyrs: Daudi Okello and Jildo Irwa, who were killed by some people for their faith in Christ. 20th October will be 100 years since their martyrdom. 

You are invited to Paimol on that day at a place called Wipolo. Wipolo actually means ‘heaven’ in Acholi. Please come and be part of the celebrations, renew your faith and with faith renewed, we could feel stronger in the service of our country. Therefore, I invite you to join the people who will be there; the whole world will be there. Please join them on the 20th of this month. 

There will be two buses from the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and Parliament will also give two coasters to help transport members there. Paimol takes about six hours as you leave Kampala so buses will be leaving very early on the morning of the 20th. Some people will leave on the 19th to be there when they are rested. The place has now been properly organised to receive all the pilgrims that will go there.

Honourable members, yesterday when we received a petition for children with disabilities relating to their challenges with education and issues of teachers, I referred it to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

I would like to correct the record and direct the Clerk to act on it accordingly, that this petition should be sent to the Committee on Education and Sports because the petition relates mainly to issues of education so it can be handled there properly.

I also received communication from the Government Chief Whip who had not acted in time - She sent a letter this afternoon that she needs to designate some members. We will alter the Order Paper to accommodate the Government Chief Whip to do just that.

Honourable members, remember in my earlier communication, I mentioned something about the National Environment Bill, 2017. We received a letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development saying that we have a timeline within which to adopt this law. Parliament must finish by the 1st of next month. I repeat that I had a meeting with the chairperson of the committee and I would like to ask the chairperson to make a short request to you then we will see how to proceed with his request.

2.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Keefa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Bill was referred to the Committee on Natural Resources on 20 December, 2017 and generated a lot of public interest. Nevertheless, we managed to process it and proceeded to produce a draft report, which was actually being considered by members.

Unfortunately, just before we could report back to the members, the committee was reconstituted in July. Once again, we had to go through the same process that we had gone through earlier. However, we are now getting to the conclusion and we have a draft report. There are a few issues, which we still need to consult on and we are confident that we should be able to report within the next 45 days.

However, as we are out of the mandatory 45 days within which we are supposed to report, Mr Speaker, I am requesting the House to grant us another 45 days within which to present. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 45 days? You already had your 45 days and now you want another 45? No, we will give you a short extension of two weeks because we have to finish this law. We do not know how long it will take in Parliament here so we need to finish it by the 30th of next month. That means you should report earlier than that. 

Therefore, we give you three weeks. Is three weeks okay, members? The rules require that you are the ones to approve this extension. Can I put the question for your approval?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have three weeks within which to come back and report.

Honourable members, additionally on Monday, we have the National Prayer Breakfast at 7 o’clock at Hotel Africana. If you have confirmed, please be there. Let us pray for this country and pray for ourselves.

Honourable members, there have been questions that have been appearing on the Order Paper that relate to issues of education. Today, we have the mother of the nation to deal with all of those issues that are related to education. She has requested to use this time this afternoon to deal with all those issues that are pending; not oral questions but matters that have been raised previously but have not been dealt with by the other ministers. She should be able to handle them this afternoon.

Therefore, if there are any questions that we have not put on the Order Paper, we will recall them so that we can finish with all of them today. 

There were urgent matters that were going to be raised from Kampala Central MP, hon. Muhammad Nsereko.

2.09
Mr Muhammad Nsereko (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise an urgent matter regarding traders in this country; in this case, vehicle importers.

This year, this House resolved, through legislation, that by July, there shall be a ban on importation of vehicles that are above 15 years. However, an extension was given to importers that would run up to September 2018. Many people sent for their vehicles but they did not arrive on time as a result of factors that were beyond their control. At the moment, we have a total of 5,500 vehicles; some bonded in warehouses and others at Mombasa.

Honourable members, we have been devising ways of how to raise taxes in order to run Government. Shs 68 billion is the loss that we will incur in this matter. Countries like Tanzania have plugged their losses by saying, if Uganda blocks these vehicles, Zambia, Tanzania and South Sudan are willing to take them on for re-export. 

I am appealing to your conscience, honourable members, to realise that the people who import these vehicles use borrowed money and like I have always said, this is very expensive capital. I would like to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is a parent ministry that supervises the Uganda Revenue Authority, to give an extension for clearance of these 5,500 vehicles so that Uganda does not lose revenue to the tune of Shs 68 billion. Just recently, we were here trying to devise means of raising Shs 118 billion. If we added another Shs 68 billion, I believe it could do a lot for this country. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to seek the indulgence of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to save this situation and Ugandans who may walk out of business and yet they could raise revenue for this country so that we do not donate it to our neighbours. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker. I pray that my colleague on the other side; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives us a response to this matter and intervenes. 

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As hon. Nsereko has said, we legislated here and put a deadline. Honourable colleagues, you may also remember that you tried, as much as possible, not to leave any room for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give exemptions or any waiver; you closed all avenues. 

Therefore hon. Nsereko, we will look through the law and if there is anything we can do within the law, we will do it. If there is nothing, then I am sorry we will have to amend the law, if necessary. Thank you.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recall when we were passing that law, if my memory is still right, that we put an exclusion clause and said that the law is not going to apply on those vehicles that are already in transit and those already in the country. I do not know whether the three months’ extension was cognisant of how long it takes for a person to ship a vehicle from a particular point of purchase to here. 

If that does not apply then my prayer would be that those vehicles, including those that have not been allowed to come into the country or those that are in the bonds, should be given an exception. After all, we have vehicles that are 40 years old already in the country. I do not think that, that consignment is the one that is going to cause gross damage to the environment and to the economy.

I would beg that we look at the over Shs 60 billion revenue that we would like to generate from that consignment since we are limping economically. I beg to move.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to correct the impression created by my colleague that the Ugandan economy is limping. Certainly, it is not true. The economy is growing at six per cent and it is the highest on the continent. As projected by Harvard Research, it is going to be the second in the world in five years’ time. Therefore, we should be proud that our economy is growing. (Interjections) Borrowing is part of the dynamics of any economy; even great economies like the US are in debt of Shs 5 trillion. 

The second clarification he sought was whether the law allows it. As I said, if the law allows it, we will take action immediately. If the law does not allow it then we cannot break the law. However, I would like to remind colleagues that when we brought the laws here and we wanted you to give room for the minister to handle some of these things that come, you said no. Therefore, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has no room to exempt or waiver. However, we shall come back and amend the law so that we handle this situation, if need be.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I remember I was part of the proceedings of that meeting and the agreement was that whatever we did would not affect those that have already been purchased and are on transit. That was the cut-off. Therefore, if somebody bought after the passage of that law, that person would not fall within the exempted category of people. However, for those who had already purchased, we said they should not be affected by the new law. That was the agreement because it would have been very insensitive of us to lock out vehicles that were already on ship, vehicles that were already pre-boarded for shipment and those that were in bonds in Mombasa and various places here. We could not have done that. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, vehicles in transit or vehicles already purchased work within the law. There is a procedure to verify because you cannot wait for somebody to tell you, “Oh, I already purchased this vehicle in May.” Therefore, there is also a procedure. I request that I look at the procedure and revert to hon. Nsereko or take action. Actually, you can come to my office tomorrow morning and we follow it up.

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, the procedure for any purchase starts with an agreement. When you agree, you can then pass on the consideration. When you pass on the consideration, there is generation of what is called a bill of lading. All this evidence was presented to customs but not adhered to, to the extent that they even told the people that those that already have cars already bonded in Uganda have been given a deadline of about three weeks to sell them off. You heard all of them lamenting. We are not living out of this world; you all heard the commissioner –(Interruption)

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give hon. Nsereko and the minister is, as I speak, bonded warehouses where vehicles are stored in Masaka are ejecting vehicles on the pretext that the time has expired. Moreover, these cars have been in the bond for quite a long time.

The other issue traders are complaining about is, if you allow them to clear all these vehicles at the same time, there will be a loss because of the factors of supply and demand. The market is going to be flooded with cars and the surplus will create a fall in prices.

Therefore, we request that you give them more time so that these cars can be cleared gradually and the market is not flooded with cars. Thank you.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you. We passed this law in May and gave a deadline. However, what the minister and the Commissioner-General can do is, they have the discretion to determine when that law was effected and the time period. If those people are within that period, the Commissioner-General has the authority to allow those people to extend that period.

However, in the law as passed, we gave a deadline of September. How many months has it been? Three months. What is happening on the ground is, people delayed to submit money to their suppliers and these vehicles came late.

However, according to the law, the Commissioner-General and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have the discretion to determine so that we do not lose that money. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable members, for the information you have volunteered. Honourable minister, what we are faced with is the variance of reason. What do we need at the moment? Do we need the money to run our economy?

You always walk to this Parliament and ask us to let you borrow. The variance of what is important at the moment is what we should adopt. Do we need the money or do we need to use our discretion? Do Ugandans that need medicine in hospitals or schools built need this money -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the point is bigger than the taxes. The point is, so many people are going to lose so much money. Therefore, it is bigger than the taxes. Let the minister respond to those issues.

MR NSEREKO: I agree with you. Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Address the issue of people losing their businesses.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad to learn that hon. Nsereko is in support of raising more money -(Laughter) Given his comment yesterday, I hope today he will be cooperative so that we can sort out these issues.

Mr Speaker, I request that I go back, as I said, and look into this situation to see if we can take action and extend for maybe a month as we sort it out. Thank you.

2.24
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I rise on a matter regarding Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. This hospital serves the eight districts of geo-Teso, together with other districts surrounding us.

However, the hospital is in dire need of the attention of Ministry of Health. As I speak, the support staff of the hospital have been on strike. This has occasioned patients and their attendants to carry out cleaning of their environs, including the wards and where they live at a personal level.

This is compounded by the fact that the governance structure of the hospital, over the last four years, has never been sorted out. We have a hospital director that retired in April but as we speak, to date we do not have a substantive hospital director. I am told that part of the problem is failure by the hospital to meet its obligations in terms of wages of the workers. This has caused the workers to go on strike in order to cause the administrators to listen to them.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that this very hospital - I know that my honourable colleague may give an answer about the delay by districts but for the last three years, we have been asking Ministry of Health to appoint a hospital board for Soroti Regional Referral Hospital but up to now, no action has been taken.

This has caused untold suffering, coupled with lack of planning. Indeed, Soroti Regional Referral Hospital does not have a substantive surgeon, as we speak. Dr Kirya, who has been there, has taken up a job at Soroti University and the other two have gone on study leave.

Mr Speaker, I therefore request that the Ministry of Health regards the people of Teso sub-region as part and partial of this country; as part of those that contribute to the exchequer account of this country. We are talking about the economy being in dire need of resources. We contribute to the tax base of this country. Why has it been impossible or difficult for the Ministry of Health to listen to the leaders of Teso, the LCV chairpersons and to the cry of our people who are part of this country?

I request the Ministry of Health, and I am very happy that hon. Sarah Opendi is around, to give not answers that are meant to make us sleep; the usual rhetoric, but to give us answers with substance. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not send him to sleep.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter that is being raised by hon. Ariko is a matter that we have been handling for some time.

I would like to inform you that Soroti Regional Referral Hospital had a substantive director, Dr Batiibwe. The people of Soroti rose up against this gentleman. I went to the ground, carried out my investigations with my team and I would like to state before this House that the allegations that were put across against Dr Batiibwe were found to be un-substantive to have warranted the mass actions and street protests that came about.

We then had to appoint an acting director. Dr Kirya was appointed to act and in the meantime, he indicated his discomfort that he would act for a while but not forever. 

In the reshuffle that we had about a year ago, various regional referral hospitals got new directors, Soroti inclusive. Unfortunately, the person who was supposed to go there did not take up that appointment.

Mr Speaker, what I would like to indicate is that we are aware of the challenge of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital and we are handling the matter. Regarding the issue of the board, allow me to be clear. When we have a regional referral hospital, it is not for the district where the hospital is situated. This is not a district hospital but a regional referral hospital. When we requested for names for members of the board - because it must reflect the regional nature, indicating that at least we should have somebody from Amuria and Serere - the names we received were all from one district and we did not proceed with the appointment.

We came up with a new way and decided to write to the district chairpersons of the different districts to send us names to pick from. That is the process that we undertook. We have names that were received and I would like –(Interruption)

MS AMONG: Mr Speaker, I am happy that my brother hon. Ariko has brought up the issue of Soroti Hospital, which is alarming. The honourable minister is right. We had a director in Soroti Hospital who was doing a very good job but there was a lot of political interference in Soroti. Mobilisers from the town would come and disorganise the hospital. Do you want the names?

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very important issue that should not only be discussed in relation to Soroti because many of our areas have regional hospitals where our districts belong. There is Kiboga Hospital, which is a highway hospital, Hoima Regional Referral Hospital where Kyankwanzi goes for referral services, Mubende Hospital and others.

The practice has been that local entities have been handling issues of management and administration of referral hospitals. For example in Hoima, you will find Hoima District Local Government. If we are to handle Soroti Hospital in a special way, won’t it affect all the other regional referral hospitals? 

MS OPENDI:  Mr Speaker, I thought I was very clear that this had been the practice. For example, we have Mbale Regional Referral Hospital, which covers my district of Tororo. We have had a representative from Tororo to Mbale Regional Referral Hospital.

However, for the case of Soroti, it has only been the people from that area – [Hon. Ariko rose_] You are the one who raised the matter. Can I finish and then you ask, if you wish?

Mr Speaker, we have new guidelines regarding regional referral hospitals and we have shared them with all the districts; the DHOs, CAOs and district chairpersons and these guidelines clearly stipulate that regional referral hospitals must have local representation of all the districts in that area.

We are going to handle the issue in Soroti but allow me to also state that some of the people who were working in Soroti Regional Referral Hospital retired, although we are trying to ensure that those who may be willing to work can be retained on contract.

The Health Service Commission advertised positions for consultants and senior consultants. We cannot force people to provide labour; we did not get applicants. That is the challenge we are having and we hope the Health Service Commission can re-advertise.

We increased the salaries of these consultants and senior consultants but it is not attractive enough for these people. That is the reality that I would like members to appreciate. However, we will do our best to see to it that we resolve the issue of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital.

We have got submissions for the board from the districts – I was not fully in office last week but I will crosscheck. It is possible that by now, the minister could have appointed the board. Thank you.

MR ARIKO: Mr Speaker, it is important that I clarify a few things. It is not in my practice to speak of things that are not closer to the truth. In 2016, in a meeting where the LCV chairpersons of Amuria, Serere, Kumi and Ngora convened together with the LCV chairperson of Soroti, names were proposed and they were not from Soroti.

The minister must know that Soroti is the regional capital of Teso. Therefore, if a person occasionally goes to Soroti, it does not mean that they are from Soroti. These names were not from Soroti. 

When I spoke to the Minister of Health, she told me, “Hon. Ariko, do your work. I am doing mine; I will appoint the board.” It is now three years. The hospital has reached a point where six children share one admission bed. 

I know that the Committee on Health will come here one of these days and present their report because they were in Soroti three weeks ago. I beg the honourable minister not to take us as subsidiary citizens of this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not get that kind of sentiment from the minister’s statement. Actually, I thought that she was very concerned. 

MR OPENDI: Mr Speaker, such a statement is very unfortunate and completely uncalled for. The issue of children sharing beds in Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is not new; we had a similar situation in Mubende and Mityana. The problem is the non-functionality of lower health facilities resulting in overcrowding. 

In conclusion, I would like to indicate that we have been constructing a number of health facilities and regional referral hospitals across the country and we are aware that Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is one of those. If you go to Moroto and Mubende hospitals, you will see a big difference; we have increased infrastructure. We are on the way regarding Soroti and we are going to increase the infrastructure at this regional referral hospital. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to insinuate that the people of Soroti are being taken as subsidiary citizens when we are in the process? We must handle these regional referral hospitals one at a time, based on the resources that we have. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I thought that I had already given a comment on that issue. I was hoping that you would not bring it up again because I had concluded with it.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Jiako Primary School in Arua Municipality. They are represented by hon. Kassiano Wadri and hon. Osoru Mourine. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)
 
We also have students of Metropolitan International University in Rubaga Division. They are represented by hon. Moses Kasibante and hon. Nabilah Naggayi. They are here to observe the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, today being the last day for this particular meeting of Parliament, I have received notification from the Leader of the Opposition that she intends to make a short statement in accordance with our Rules of procedure, to cause an alteration to be accommodated later at the close of the proceedings. Next item. 
 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE GIVEAWAY TO INVESTORS OF GOVERNMENT RANCHES IN DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

2.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, unfortunately the ministers of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries are away. Hon. Joy Kabatsi has a very sick child, hon. Christopher Kibanzanga is in Senegal and hon. Vincent Ssempijja is representing the President to the coffee conference. I have been asked to request you, Mr Speaker, that they be given another opportunity to handle this matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, given the fact that we are going on recess today, we might not have an opportunity immediately. Can you arrange some steps to deal with these issues and find a way of advising the public as Parliament is going on recess? 

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, a proposal from Government, to borrow US$ 40 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the Strengthening Social Risk Management and Gender-Based Violence Prevention and Response Project. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you do not show confidence in this borrowing. (Laughter) You should speak authoritatively because – 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I was speaking very confidently but the House was speaking louder than me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This particular request stands referred to our Committee on National Economy to handle expeditiously and advise us on how to proceed with this matter. 

QUESTIONS UNDER RULE 42

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MUHAMMAD NSEREKO ON THE LOOMING STRIKE BY TRAILER DRIVERS OVER THE PRE-VERIFICATION LEVY

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we received this question yesterday. We have written to the Ministry of Works and Transport because this pre-verification of vehicles like trailers is done by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), according to the law. Therefore, we request that this matter be handled by the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

However, in the meantime, we are engaging with the traders to ensure that their issues are addressed. Thereafter, we will be able to inform the public, now that we are going on recess, on what we would have come up with. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. CHARLES ILUKOR ON THE STALLED OPERATIONALISATION OF THE SOROTI FRUIT FACTORY, LEADING TO WASTAGE OF FRUITS BEING HARVESTED

2.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. I am going to look for the ministers of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I expected one of them to be here. Now that the substantive minister has walked in, he should handle the question but he should also apologise for coming in late. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are just in time. 

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I apologise but I had actually come in earlier; I just stepped out. 

The question is about the Soroti Fruit Factory and when it will be operationalised. I would like to inform my colleague who raised this question that Soroti Fruit Factory is now ready and it will be commissioned on 20 November 2018. That is the day on which we shall be marking the Africa Industrialisation Day. We are using Soroti for the national celebrations of the Africa Industrialisation Day and we shall commission this factory. Therefore, we are set for 20 November 2018. 

2.47
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): I have a supplementary issue to raise, Mr Speaker. When I raised this issue, my prayers were: 

1. 	When will the factory open? This is because they have kept on shifting the deadline. That question has however been answered. 

2. 	There were about 300 motorised pumps stored in the factory for one year, and these pumps were supposed to be given to farmer groups to tackle fruit diseases. We have not been told about that. It was an issue and the Hansard can show this. There were about 300 motorised pumps in the stores of the fruit factory. They were being kept there, as if the stores are the fruits that are supposed to be sprayed. 

All our fruits are now yellow; if you see the orange plantations, they are all yellow. What was the aim of buying these pumps? I thought they were supposed to be used to arrest the diseases. Can the minister explain? 

MR WERIHKE: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that just two weeks ago, my senior colleague, hon. Kyambadde, was in Soroti and the motorised pumps were actually given out. Therefore, they have been distributed to the farmers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. BENARD ATIKU ON THE ONGOING DESTRUCTION OF THE FOREST RESERVE IN YUMBE DISTRICT

2.48
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Sam Cheptoris): Mr Speaker, I refer to the issue raised by hon. Benard Atiku, Member of Parliament, Ayivu County, regarding the massive deforestation of Mount Kei Central Forest Reserve in Yumbe District. 

I would like to respond as follows: Mount Kei Central Forest Reserve is part of the greater cross-border ecosystem to South Sudan. It is one of the critical sites in the network of protected areas for biodiversity conservation in Uganda. It protects the banks of Kaya River, which forms part of Mount Kei boundary. It is the origin of three rivers - Araga, Kei and Okomi - which serve Midigo and Kei subcounties. 

Mr Speaker, forests in this area are under serious threat by illegal timber harvesters, charcoal burners and people looking for firewood. The problem is compounded by the fact that local governments lack the capacity to control this vice. In order to address this situation, my ministry has taken several measures to save the depletion of some of these threatened species like afzelia and shea nut trees. These trees are widely distributed all over the country, especially around forest edges, protected areas and private lands.

Afzelia africana and shea nut trees are mainly found in northern Uganda and West Nile subregions. These species are highly threatened. In order to strengthen the regulation of trade in these trees and their products, I suspended any cutting, transportation and sale of the logs and their products in accordance with section 29(3) of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 with effect from 16 December 2017. 

The suspension was to enable my ministry and the other stakeholders to review and harmonise the licensing, harvesting, movement and trade in these products. All local governments, National Forestry Authority (NFA) and relevant authorities were requested to enforce the suspension and observe total adherence to the directive, and ensure that no clearance of any sort is granted for trade in these products. The directive further required that all logs of these trees and their products be impounded if found during harvesting, transportation, processing and sale. 

Harvesting Afzelia Africana and Shea Nut Trees

National Forestry Authority have been doing their best to control the illegal cutting and transportation of these protected species through forest patrols and tracking of illegal transportation of mainly the logs. This has been concentrated mainly in Mount Kei Central Forest Reserve and in the districts of Yumbe, Koboko, Moyo and Adjumani, where a substantial number of the afzelia africana and shea nut trees grow on public and private land. 

Leaders in Adjumani District have been exceptionally active in the fight against illegal trade in these protected trees. They have been working with NFA and other stakeholders such as Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) and the Uganda Police Force to ensure that the vice is wiped out. Illegal cuttings have been observed mainly in Yumbe District and parts of Kei.

A summary of the output from the numerous patrols and tracking conducted in the last five months is stated below here. We arrested 41 suspects and they were charged in court. A total of 21 cases of illegal cutting and transportation were reported to various police stations. A total of 20 trucks were impounded for illegal transportation of afzelia Africana. Seven chainsaws were impounded from illegal loggers in Kei Central Forest Reserve and 45 logs of afzelia were impounded from the forest reserve and transported to NFA headquarters. All these illegal loggers have been have been so far fined a total of Shs 16 million. We have also given the number plates of the vehicles which were impounded.

Other interventions by the Ministry of Water and Environment

Mr Speaker, we have undertaken some interventions. We have, for instance, engaged with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Inspector General of Police to increase the number in the Environment Protection Police Unit which currently only has 150 personnel. 

The ministry has also begun opening boundaries of all central forest reserves in the country. Work has already commenced at Mabira Central Forest Reserve and it will be rolled out to other forest reserves in order to control the encroachment. I would like to add that the problem with Kei is that there is a big dispute over the boundaries. There is also a problem with the boundary between Uganda and South Sudan, which requires attention. 

The ministry is also carrying out continuous mobilisation and sensitisation of key stakeholders to appreciate the need for concerted efforts to curb this vice. My peers held a meeting with all the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) sometime this year in Gulu; they briefed them on the need to ensure that these tree species are protected. In our mobilisation and sensitisation, we are targeting the Judiciary, the police and Uganda Revenue Authority, especially at the border points. Local government leaders and the communities are also being sensitised. Mr Speaker, we are also encouraging district local governments to pass ordinances and bylaws outlawing this vice.

In conclusion, we need to get to the root of this matter. This requires continuous surveillance, strengthening the enforcement agencies and ensuring that enforcement is done without fear or favour. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any supplementary question from the honourable member? He is not here.

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED ON PAYMENT OF GRATUITY/PENSION TO VETERANS OF WORLD WAR II

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, this is a statement about the payment of pension and gratuity to World War II veterans by Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs.

The issue of payment of pension and gratuity to World War veterans is not new and ought to be seen in a wider context of the unpaid cases backlog of pension and gratuity to military veterans. This has manifested itself in various forms, including heightening political outcries from families of retired and fallen soldiers, disbanded elements and volunteers of various rebellion groups. 

To illustrate the above point, there have been instances were veterans have threatened to demonstrate on this matter and in other cases, Government taken to court like in the case of VA/14292 Warrant Officer I Senkali and 45,006 others v. Attorney-General, Civil Appeal No.55 of 2005. In this case, soldiers who served in the defunct Uganda Army (UA) sued the Attorney-General claiming that they were still members of the army because they were neither formally discharged nor issued certificates of discharge. They, therefore, claimed that they were entitled to formal discharge from the army with discharge certificates, arrears of salary, allowances and other terminal benefits amounting to Shs 1.7 trillion. 

Mr Speaker, the High Court dismissed the suit and the plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeal which ruled in their favour. In a subsequent appeal to the Supreme Court, however, - Attorney-General v Senkali & 45,006 others, Civil Appeal No.2 of 2006 - the Supreme Court upheld the judgment of the High Court and ruled that the ex-servicemen were not entitled to any of the payments claimed. They abandoned their stations and never reported to the incoming government until the National Resistance Movement (NRM) administration came in place.

It should be noted that although UA ex-servicemen lost the appeal in the Supreme Court, His Excellency the President, the Fountain of Honour, directed that the Government pays them ex gratia. As part of the process of fulfilling the presidential directive to make ex gratia payments to UA ex-servicemen, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs went into the field to carry out their verification. World War ex-servicemen and those who claimed that they were kin and kith of the deceased World War veterans also responded. They were accordingly verified and this was an opportunity for Government to update its database of ex-service men in the country since that time.

When the report of the field exercise was presented to the leadership of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs then, it was decided that the ex gratia payment be extended to cover only living World War veterans to address their social and economic plight. The rest of the claimants of the World War II ex-servicemen who died were excluded because all of them who served in the King’s African Rifles (KAR) in Uganda were duly paid their dues before independence. Only those who were transferred from KAR to the Uganda Army had served the required 13 years and were eligible for pension as 	attested to by a copy 
Of a letter dated 24 September 2000 from the British High Commissioner, which is attached here to this statement as annex A.

In another case, some elements of the claimants of deceased World War veterans petitioned court in High Court Suit No.527 of 2004, Eliab Kavuma and other ex-servicemen v. Attorney-General for payment. In his ruling, Justice Remmy Kasule, among other declarations, noted thus: “Government of Uganda is, in law, bound to pay gratuities to those plaintiffs who produce satisfactory records that they served in the Kings African Rifles and that at the time of their discharge therefore, they were entitled to be paid benefits by way of gratuities, and that such benefits had not been paid to them as of 9 August 1957 when the East African territories’ respective governments, Uganda inclusive, became responsible to pay the said benefits to date.”

In conclusion, I wish to note that -
a) 	The grant of ex gratia payment to ex-servicemen was by way of gratuitous payment initiated by the Fountain of Honour who, in the exercise of his constitutional mandate, deemed it fit to grant the payment to those who had served their country in previous armies and were living a difficult life.

b) 	Ex gratia payment for World War ex-servicemen is in nature of gratuity which, both under UPDF Act No.7 of 2005 and the Pension Act, Cap. 286, is not assignable or transferable to a third party other than the living World War veterans intended to address their socio-economic plight.

c) 	The declaration of Justice Remmy Kasule to pay gratuity to all World War veterans rests the burden of proof of non-payment and eligibility for payment on the shoulders of those claiming. Government is therefore ready to comply with any court decree once the set parameters are adhered to.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable member, are you the one who raised this question? (Interjection) - No, it does not entitle you. Honourable members, we failed to identify the Member who raised this issue. 

However, honourable minister, when you say that the burden of proof rests with those who are making the claim, is that something that is sustainable? All I have to say is that I have not been paid. What proof do you need from me to show that I have not been paid? The burden should be on you to prove that I have been paid. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, those World War veterans were actually paid before they left.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it should be you to prove that they have been paid.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: We have proved. What we are trying to prove is that they are the ones still living.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the important thing with these kinds of statements is for the committees to pick them up and see if aspects of these can be followed up properly and then we can see how to proceed.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION NO. 14/01/10 TO THE MINISTRER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is hon. Lubogo here? He has a representative. Please proceed, honourable minister. 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Janet Museveni):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a response to the issue raised by hon. Kenneth Lubogo, Member of Parliament, Bulamogi County, Kaliro District. The question reads, “During February 2017, Makerere University graduated a lot of students who had completed their studies in June 2016. The succeeding lot completed their studies in June 2017. However, up to now, most faculties have not issued documents like transcripts, certificates or testimonials to students who completed more than a year ago.”

This is our response: The printing of transcripts for the 67th graduation is more than 90 per cent complete. The delay in completing the printing of all transcripts is due to the rigorous verification of the results by colleges after a number of students were found to have graduated fraudulently, and due to delays by students to clear their dues as well as non-submission of clearance forms. 

For the 68th graduation, more than 95 per cent transcripts are complete. The unprinted transcripts are due to failure by students to submit clearance forms or incomplete tuition fee payments. Sixty per cent of certificates for 2017 have been printed and issued. 

In order to improve service delivery, all transcripts are issued at colleges now. This has eliminated the inconvenience of students queuing for long periods of time at the academic registrar’s office in Senate Building. 

Moving forward, transcripts are to be issued as soon colleges submit results and certificates, upon graduation. This will further improve service delivery to students and alumni. The management of transcripts and certificates has tremendously improved over the last year and the university is committed to further improve its service.

Mr Speaker, if you allow me, I will respond to some other questions that had been asked by other Members of Parliament. One of the questions was from the Member of Parliament for Kibaale, hon. Kisembo Basemera. His question was about when the ministry will resume grant-aiding of private and community providers of primary education in line with the Government policy of having a Universal Primary Education (UPE) school per parish.
		
Our response is that 27 private schools built by Building Tomorrow in 20 parishes in 14 districts were coded. Eight more community schools in Buvuma District were also coded in financial year 2017/2018. The coding of community schools is currently at a halt due to lack of funds. I have provided the list of coded schools built by Building Tomorrow and the list of coded schools in Buvuma in the tables below, which I pray Members of Parliament can peruse through at their own leisure. 

There was another question regarding when the ministry will ensure that school-going children stay in school and will not be lured into providing cheap labour in sugarcane and rice plantations in places like Luuka and other parts of the country. This question was asked by hon. Rwabushaija, Workers Representative in Parliament. Mr Speaker, the following are some of the measures put in place to enable children stay in schools: 

There are national strategies planned for local governments to use in order to curb school dropouts, and these include:  

1. 	The National Strategic Plan on Elimination of Violence against Children in School, 2015/2020. The ministry has and is still engaging parents on elimination of violence against children, including challenging them against child labour. The ministry has, for example, held community dialogues in Kaliro, Karamoja, among others, to encourage parents to support the education of their children so that they can stay in school.

2.	 We have the National Strategy to End Child Marriage and Teenage Pregnancy, 2014/2015-2019/2020. This will help children, especially the girls, stay and complete school. 

3. 	Circulars have been sent to schools and local governments to ban corporal punishment right from 2001. There was another circular issued in 2006 and recently in 2015.

4.	 School feeding and nutrition intervention programme, which was carried out mid-year, was one of the ministry’s efforts to curb school dropouts.

5. 	Implementation of water, sanitation and hygiene programmes in schools particularly for menstrual hygiene and creating a conducive learning environment for all children is also another effort to keep the girls in schools.

6.	 Reporting, tracking, referral and response guidelines on violence against children in schools. Some offences are reported to the head teachers and disciplinary committees, while capital offences must be reported to the police. In terms of tracking, the police must work with the health facilities and courts of law.

7. 	Implementation of conflict and disaster risk management in schools is ongoing. 

8. 	Guidelines on alternatives to corporal punishment and giving positive discipline. 

9. 	Guidelines developed on the formation of clubs in schools to strengthen participation and leadership by the students at school so that children can be interested in being at school.

10. 	The Ministry of Education and Sports has joined the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in disseminating the guidelines on responsible parenting. 

11. 	The Ministry of Education and Sports is also challenging teachers to follow up learners who absent themselves from school by doing home visits and recordkeeping of those who stay out of school.

Mr Speaker, there is another question that was asked about Government’s intervention in mitigating job insecurity affecting teachers employed by some private schools. This question was raised by hon. Kajungu Rosette, Woman Representative, Mbarara District and this is the response:

While the non-state providers of education are playing a significant role in increasing access to education at all levels, the need for compliance to laws, policies and standards must be upheld. Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, developed guidelines for staff employment in private schools and institutions, basing on the Education (Pre-Primary, Primary and Post-Primary) Act, 2008. Section 3 of the Act empowers the minister responsible for education to make such regulations so as to promote effective management of schools and institutions for quality education provision. 

The guidelines were launched in December 2017 and one of the major objectives of the guidelines is to address the challenge of job insecurity by spelling out the terms and conditions of employment for teachers and non-teaching staff. It is anticipated that implementing these guidelines will foster improved teacher quality and professionalism, high morale and a conducive learning environment that discourages high attrition rates of staff and other disruptive occurrences that may arise in the management of staff in private schools and institutions.

The guidelines are in tandem with the following laws and policies: the Employment Act, 2006; the National Social Security Fund Act, 1958, among others. You can read them for yourselves.

Mr Speaker, below are some of the specific sections that deal with job insecurity in private schools and institutions. Section 5 (8) of the staff employment guidelines stipulates that the recruited staff should be given appointment letters, duly signed by the chairperson of the board of governors, and ensure that the recruited staff sign contracts in accordance with section 59 of the Employment Act, 2006. The contracts should clearly indicate the following:

    a) Duration of the contract with specific dates;
    b) Type of employment/job;
    c) Salary and the related benefits to the member of staff and   the means by which they are calculated – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her submission. Actually, the responses of all the ministers who came before her were uploaded on the iPads. She has a number of answers to questions that were raised but nothing is on the iPads and yet they are pertinent. Therefore, are we proceeding well? I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports and we take much interest in what she is submitting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you had said it at the beginning. The honourable minister is almost finishing what she was saying. (Laughter) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I see she has more than two pages to read. She can even direct somebody to give us hard copies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two pages out of 12 is now almost done. I think let us receive the statement, since we are not going to discuss it now. Let us receive all of them.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, will you also allow me to ask her some questions in relation to her ministry since I have seen her today?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, these questions are under rule 42.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged.

MRS MUSEVENI: I beg your pardon because I was supposed to respond to one but when I requested whether I could respond to all that I had with me, the Speaker allowed, so I used the opportunity.

MR SSEWUNGU: Honourable minister, my prayer was that your submission is good but could we get what you are submitting on the iPad or you give us hard copies. 

MRS MUSEVENI: We will send them.

MR SSEWUNGU: You have answered very well. (Laughter) However, I saw some Members panicking, thinking that we cannot raise a procedural point from your submission. (Laughter) I can because I am a Member of Parliament from Kalungu West, Mr Speaker, who will one day be a President in this country. 

MRS MUSEVENI: Thank you. If you will allow me, Mr Speaker, I will conclude and we will send you these copies. I promise.

I will conclude on this particular one. I was on section 5(14) of the staff employment guidelines, which provide that employees should be paid their salaries, wages and allowances as agreed in the contract. 

In addition to the above, the ministry ensures that during monitoring and support supervision, a lot of emphasis has been directed towards the staff recruitment and management to ensure job security of staff.

Before registering any school, it is required for the school to produce signed contracts with the staff it is intending to have in the school. 

I could also inform you about the netball championships at Makerere, if you allow. Uganda successfully hosted the third edition of the World Universities Netball Championships from the 17 to 21 September 2018. In 2016, the Association of Uganda University Sports, won the bid to host the third World Universities Netball Championships from the 17 to 21 September 2018, beating Namibia, England and Jamaica. Makerere University was selected to host the games on behalf of the Association of Uganda University Sports.

The national university team has always put up a good show. In the first edition held in 2012 in Cape Town, South Africa, they finished fifth while in the Second World University Netball Championships in Miami, Florida, in the United States of America, they finished fourth. 

The games were organised by a local organising committee, chaired by the Vice-Chancellor of Makerere University and supported by the International University Sports Federation. As Minister of Education and Sports, I happen to be the patron of the games. 

Government provided Shs 5.57 billion for the construction of the new sports arena at Makerere University to host the games. Makerere University Council allocated Shs 600 million to facilitate organisation of the games. Due to the limited time available for construction of the arena, a UPDF engineering brigade was commissioned to undertake the task and they successfully delivered the facility just in time for the games.

Seventeen countries participated in the games, including Kenya, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, United States of America, Zimbabwe and the host, Uganda. The Uganda team comprised students from Nkumba University, Ndejje University, Kampala International University, Kampala University and Makerere University. 

The opening ceremony was presided over by the Minister of State for Sports, hon. Bakkabulindi, while the closing ceremony was presided over by the Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, the Prime Minister of Uganda. Uganda are the new champions now, having defeated South Africa, the defending champions, in the final games played on 21 September 2018 and witnessed by the Prime Minister and the Minister of State for Sports.

The Fourth World Universities Netball Championships will be held in Liverpool, UK, due in 2020. As a Ministry of Education and Sports, we extend our sincere gratitude to Government for all the support, especially for funding the construction of the new sports arena - the best in the region – at Makerere University main campus. The facility is multipurpose and has a capacity of 3,500 spectators and can also accommodate 5000 people if used as a conference hall. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. As you said, we would like to have copies of those statements so that they can be sent to the Members who raised the questions and the records can capture them, and so that we see how to handle those responses in future because they were responses to questions.

Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Bright Horizon Primary School in Arua Municipality, represented by hon. Kassiano Wadri and hon. Osoru Mourine. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Trust Education Services in Ayivu County, Arua District. They are represented in Parliament by hon. Atiku Bernard and hon. Osoru Mourine. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, I have already informed you that on Monday, we will have the National Prayer Breakfast. However, as one of the activities leading to the National Prayer Breakfast, there will be Women’s Forum, championed by the women Members of Parliament on Sunday 7 October, beginning at 8.30 a.m. at Hotel Africana. The chief guest will be the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports. Discussion topics cover the areas of -

1. 	Access to justice, which will be presented by the honourable Lady Justice Catherine Bamugemereire.
2.	Leadership; the presenter will be hon. Veronica Bichetero.
3.	Entrepreneurship, which will be presented by Mrs Mable Kiggundu.
4. 	Family, presented by Mrs Dorothy Kisaka.

All the women Members of Parliament of this august House are urged to attend and interact with the women of Uganda in various positions of leadership. Please, attend. By virtue of inviting the women, the men are accordingly invited. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I made a serious omission at the beginning of these proceedings. One of the people who had requested to raise an urgent matter was the Woman Representative for Omoro District. You know the kind of trouble I would be in if I made that omission.

3.30
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Mr Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance in relation to food security. 

From 11 to 15 September this year, Omoro District was hit very badly by hailstorms that led to massive destruction of crops and death of animals. According to the statistics that have finally been arrived at, at the moment there are 165 households that were affected very seriously. 

As you are aware, Mr Speaker, the county that was hit most was Omoro County, where you come from, and particularly Odek and Lalogi subcounties. A total of 891 acres of a variety of crops were destroyed, whose value has been estimated at Shs 749 million. The crops that were destroyed are quite many and they include simsim, cassava, soya beans, rice, maize, beans, cotton, peas, sunflower and others. 

It is my prayer that Government, particularly the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, takes note of this and urgently responds and relieves these households which have remained without food. Vegetables were also among the crops that got destroyed. Quite a number of animals, including cows and goats, died. 

Indeed, it is my prayer that the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees organises something urgent to respond to the plight of these people, especially relief food items and also seeds of early maturing crops, to rescue the situation in Omoro District. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, in responding to my sister, the Woman Representative for Omoro District, I would like to start by giving an observation that borders on bad news. Climate change is with us and indeed, the consequences are going to be dire to the country and the entire planet. When we used to receive dry spells, we knew what they meant to us but they now come in form of drought. When we used to receive rain, we knew what type of rain we used to get. However now, it comes in form of storms, landslides and floods. In this particular case, Omoro District, among many other districts, has been visited by this kind of tragedy. 

Mr Speaker, your office drew my attention and that of the Prime Minister to this tragedy. I am happy to report to you that in our possession is the report prepared by the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Omoro District and the District Agricultural Officer, forwarded by the chairperson of the district. 

While we are responding to many other parts of the country systematically, we are also going to respond to Omoro District in particular. Having received this report, we analysed it with our technical people and I think the response will start tomorrow. 

I would like to request my colleague, the Woman Representative of the district, to be in touch with the Office of the Prime Minister so that they can help her track the support that will be sent to the district, so that it can go to the people in need. However, our response will start tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, clarification is supposed to be taken by the minister, not the Speaker. 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You will appreciate that the National Meteorological Authority has issued a very serious warning of a looming El Nino. As the minister is assuring the House of response in terms of recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction, isn’t it procedurally right for him to come up with mitigation measures and preparedness? 

As you know, prevention is better than cure. This ministry is always demonstrating by word and deed that they are long at response but very short at mitigation measures. Therefore, isn’t it procedurally right for the minister to give us a plan of the mitigation measures, preparedness and prevention?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this is going to be an annual event, honourable minister, because last year, you did exactly that. It actually came down to the point of saying, “Where are the resources to be put aside to deal with these issues?” That is what it came down to last year and that is going to be the same this year. 

Honourable minister, it would be good if this came at the beginning because we now have two problems - floods and landslides at one point and then drought at the other point – and they come every year. Like day follows night, they happen in this country. So, what preparations should we have to deal with this situation, since we know they will come anyway? 

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, honourable members know very well that last year, working with the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we compiled a report. Arising from the clarification that a colleague has requested here, I want to commit that we will again consult these two sectors so that together, we can come up with a report that will be able to explain to the country what is likely to happen and how we intend to mitigate the consequences. 

However, I am aware that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which supports my ministry when emergencies arise, particularly with planting materials, is also in the know about what is happening. However, I will draw their attention to it again so that in this report, we will be able to adequately capture how we intend to respond. I will bring that report to the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I thank you and I thank the minister for trying his best. The minister mentioned the issue of climate change. In 2015, we were in this Parliament when a spell of lightning started hitting most of the schools. As we speak now, a school in Yumbe District has lost close to 60 pupils that were hit by lightning. At that time, we said it would be proper for Government to come up with a plan in which these schools would at least be given lightning arrestors.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, would it not be procedurally right for the honourable minister, when he is bringing a report to address the action plans for other areas of calamity, to also include among them the issue of lightning? We cannot continue losing students like this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue of lightning was dealt with by the Minister of State for Higher Education last week. The honourable minister is there. He responded to the issue of lightning and he told us how far they have gone with the procurement and installation. The Minister of State for Higher Education, hon. Muyingo, dealt with that last week.

MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we raise issues like the one hon. Christine Lamwaka has raised, the minister shows concern and say that he is going to handle them, and when you go there, he actually writes. However, when you go the ministry, there is a commissioner called Mr Owor; you can go there several times but you will never get him in his office. I even tried to call him but he was not picking my calls.

Here, the minister has shown the entire country that he is ready to help. However, the commissioner in the ministry is never in office. I called him but he did not pick. I sent him a message and he said Mayuge was not affected. I am the Member of Parliament for Mayuge and I told him the truth, but he insisted that Mayuge was not affected. That is the time when there was a lot of famine and they were giving food to Wakiso. How could you fail to give food to Mayuge and you give to Wakiso?

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is: Are we proceeding rightly when the minister of disaster always appears here as if he is helping the nation yet the ministry is not helping the nation because the commissioners are not towing the line with the minister? Is it procedurally right? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are also doing ourselves a disservice by calling the ministry, “ministry of disaster” because the minister is going to begin thinking that he is in charge of disasters -(Laughter)- It is the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. You now make the minister wait for disasters. However, these matters should be handled properly, honourable minister. When Members raise these concerns, they have been affected.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Musa Ecweru, the minister in charge of disaster preparedness, for accepting my humble clarification. 

Hon. Christine Lamwaka clearly seeks redress from your ministry. At the moment, we are talking about an area where people may go without food, and some may not take their children to school the following day because they cannot process food and any other things. The clarification I would like to seek from you is: What, in specific terms, should the people of Omoro expect from you tomorrow - is it beans, flour, milk, sugar - to at least jumpstart their lives? 

Those specifics are what this House looks for from you, because you have done it before and we have confidence that you have performed in this docket very well, with due respect. However, the country needs to hear from you, in particular as a minister in charge of that docket. What should the people of Omoro watching this august House today expect from you tomorrow, like you have said? Is it flour, sugar, salt, oil? Please, name it and they will be happy and glad to hear from you. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Members are seeking clarification from you. Are you taking the clarification? It is not for the Speaker to manage that.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, it is not always okay for us to come and break down the details of our response. However, now that a colleague has requested, I would like to say that the intervention for Omoro tomorrow will include food. In this report, we have homes that were de-roofed. We may not be able to provide iron sheets but we have what we call plastic sheeting in the form of tents. We will deploy those. We have also been told that there are elderly people who are now exposed and are at a risk of getting pneumonia as a consequence of the storms. We shall organise some blankets and mosquito nets for them. 

Basically, that is tomorrow’s response. If we find that it is not adequate, we will again revisit it, but we will do that tomorrow. Mr Speaker.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Three weeks ago, a hailstorm hit Kanungu seriously. We wrote to the office of the minister through the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and we patiently waited. I am surprised to hear that now he is responding to a question here and saying that they are going to take food to Omoro yet Kanungu, which wrote earlier and went through all those offices and the right channels, has received nothing up to now. I expected him maybe to say that even Kanungu will receive food or seedlings.  

Therefore, are we proceeding well, Mr Speaker? Don’t we need to go through the right channels to get the right things at the right time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is more of a clarification than a procedural matter. 

The Prime Minister’s question time comes up at the top of the hour. We have ten minutes and we have one question to be responded to. I see the hon. Ogwal; she had requested for some short intervention on some issue here. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising this as a procedural matter - how we conduct business on the Floor of Parliament and the response of the ministers to some of the serous matters of concern to the people of Uganda.

Recently, I shared with Parliament the risk that the cooperative unions are facing. Many of them are losing property because the Government is not supporting cooperative unions. The Committee on Budget, having received a special request from Lango Cooperative Union and Busoga Cooperative Union, were able to put aside Shs 1.9 billion to revive Lango Cooperative Union in particular, to save a huge piece of land which was already advertised for sale. 

It was the view of Parliament that Lango Cooperative Union could not lose that prime land, which was their only property left. Therefore, Parliament put aside Shs 1.9 billion, which was approved and appropriated. However, as I talk now, the property was advertised and has been disposed of. I can share with you correspondences between the lawyers of Lango Cooperative Union and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. They confirm that the ministry has done nothing despite the fact that the minister stood on the Floor of Parliament and vowed that that property would not be sold. As I speak now, Lango Cooperative Union has lost that prime property, the only property that was left in the hands of Lango Cooperative Union. 

Mr Speaker, I stand here with a lot of pain. The people of Lango sent us here with their votes; we cannot allow the only piece of land, which is a huge acreage, to be lost just carelessly like that. Besides that, Parliament had put aside money which was going to cover the debt which Lango Cooperative Union owed to the Microfinance Support Centre. 

Mr Speaker, we give instructions and pass resolutions here but they are not implemented. In this particular case, prime property has been lost to the hands of a Government agency. What is the use of us labouring to pass resolutions here if they are not implemented? The shame goes to us because there are people outside there looking at us as the only people who can speak for them. Indeed, we have been speaking for our people and Parliament has been taking very tough decisions sometimes in order to save our people, but the Government has been letting us down.

I do not want the people of Lango to celebrate Independence Day with pain. They should be assured that their property will be rescued.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister was this matter approved? If it was, what happened to the money? I see the ministers in charge of cooperatives and finance; who will speak first?

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, it is sad to hear from hon. Cecilia Ogwal that the property of Lango Cooperative Union has been sold. It is true that supplementary funding was passed. However, at the time when the ministry was ready to pass on the funds, we were told that the money was not available, notwithstanding what Parliament did. Maybe my colleague from the Ministry of Finance can explain further because we were ready to pay but the money was not available.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is true that Parliament, through a supplementary budget, appropriated Shs 1.9 billion to the Lango Cooperative Union and at the time of implementation it was not released. We have taken action by informing the Microfinance Support Centre not to sell that property because we are going to release the Shs 1.9 billion.

I am very surprised that this has happened. However, I am not sure about the truth in what Mama is saying. I know that there was a legal case but we advised the Microfinance Support Centre not to sell the property of Lango Cooperative Union. We would like to release the money to the union by the end of this month.

I request to get out for two minutes to inquire from the Managing Director of the Microfinance Support Centre and then come back to the House. I am not sure that the property has been sold.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Shield of Faith Nursery and Primary School in Kabwohe, Sheema District. They are represented by hon. Tumwesigye Elioda and hon. Atuhaire Jacklet. We also have pupils and teachers from Amuria Primary School in Amuria District, represented in this Parliament by hon. Musa Ecweru and hon. Suzan Amero. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

It is now time for Prime Minister’s Question Time - in two minutes - but I want responses from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the question from Bunya East. Is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, as I explained earlier, all of them are not around.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Bunya East, let us pause this. We will deal with it when the ministers are ready with the responses. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.57
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has a rural electrification policy. However, statistics available in Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) indicate that 77 per cent of the rural areas in Uganda do not have access to electricity. 

Through the Prime Minister, may we know what Government has is place to ensure that most of the rural areas in Uganda are connected to the national grid. Thank you.

3.58
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, it is true that a big chunk of Ugandans - about 77 per cent - are not yet connected to the national grid. This is mainly because of two reasons: issues of inadequate generation of power and resources. 

Fortunately, both issues have been sorted by, one, Government borrowing a substantial amount of money to ensure that the whole country, at the subcounty level, is connected to power. Two, on the issue of generation, all of us are privy to information that Karuma and Isimba dams, and many other smaller power generating stations, will be coming on line soon. Ugandans should be ready to enjoy the electricity that is going to be in plenty. 

3.59
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the Government of Uganda is looking to tourism as a major source of income. The Prime Minister one time stood here and said that they are going to look at how to connect tourism circuits. However, we have seen all over the media that tourists were stuck for over one week in Bwindi trying to connect to Bunyonyi. 

What are you doing as a Government to make sure we revamp this economy? Other than borrowing money for gender-based violence, we can put it in something that is lucrative to the Government. When are you getting a loan to construct tourism roads that can help revamp this economy? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, gender-based violence is a big enemy and the country should be united to defeat it. 

On tourism roads, Government is mobilising money to ensure that the key tourism roads are constructed as quickly as possible, because we know that this will be a big source of income from tourists. They will come, find good roads and that will attract more tourists and more revenue to the country. 

4.01
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the National Development Plan I achieved barely 20 per cent of its targets. We are left with one financial year for the National Development Plan II and it has also not been evaluated. May I know the efforts you have put in place to restructure so that we achieve the intended targets and achieve Vision 2040? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the key point in implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is improving service delivery to the wananchi and that is what Government is doing. You may be aware that Government is now even looking at consolidating and merging agencies of Government and parastatals, with the view of saving money, improving service delivery and meeting the SDGs and, therefore, meeting Vision 2040 and of course, the second National Development Plan.
 
4.02
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Leader of Government Business a question. We know that Yumbe District is the largest city that hosts refugees in Uganda. However, the road from Koboko to Yumbe up to Adjumani is not worked on. Several car accidents occur on that road and even now the cars that carry food for refugees to Yumbe District get accidents and some spend five to seven days on the road. 

What is Government’s plan to construct that road? This road has stayed for a very long time in that state, yet the people of Yumbe District keep waiting to see what the Government is going to do. In our culture, when somebody gives you something, you cannot return the bowl empty; you put in at least one thing and say “thank you”. May I know what plan the Government has concerning that road? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, let me thank the people of Yumbe District - Yumbe being one of the 12 districts in Uganda hosting refugees - for the hospitality and generosity that has been extended to the refugees. 

We are fully aware that the roads and the bridges have been damaged by the heavy trucks. This is a key point known to Government. Government is mobilising resources and it has also asked the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other Governments involved in the care of refuges to support Uganda improve the roads in the area, including strengthening and building bridges.  

4.05
MR PAUL MUSOKE (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a challenge in the aviation industry. Recently, the Government recruited civil servants in Soroti Flying School - the so called East African Civil Aviation Academy. The President is also facilitating students in terms of scholarships. Big sums of money have also been earmarked for the institution. Unfortunately, qualifications attained from that institution are not recognised by the National Council for Higher Education. Apparently, this is going to cripple the revival of the national carrier. 

People who have attained qualifications from that institution are categorised as senior six leavers, just in case their licence is withdrawn. Can you kindly help the institution so that we are also categorised as degree or diploma holders, other than the Government injecting money and yet we do not have qualifications that are recognised by the Government? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you training unqualified people? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda should be proud because it hosted the East African Flying School in Soroti, which trained very many pilots. However, the school also suffered, like many other institutions over the years. Fortunately, Government now has a programme to revamp the school. As the honourable member rightly said, pilots have been recruited and their remuneration has been significantly enhanced. Our qualifications will have to be comparable to the global qualifications in the aviation industry. 

I do not have the details now. However, the problems were related to inadequate supplies and staff in the school. Now that we have staff in school, we will ensure that the qualifications from Soroti are universally acceptable and recognised in the global world of aviation. 

4.07
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Early this year, 10 villages in my constituency, Kashari North, were affected by a hailstorm. We took pictures of the “snow” and wrote letters. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I brought those pictures to you and you directed the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, in writing, that officials from the ministry should visit those areas and afford us some relief items. To date, nothing has happened. 

My question is: Should I take it that you withdrew your directive or the minister defied your directive? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the ministry responsible for disaster preparedness is actually overwhelmed by requests of the nature that the honourable member has described. However, they are also very limited with capacity in terms of resources and personnel to effectively respond to all these issues, so they do prioritisation. Therefore, there is no defiance at all, as being suggested, but I know that the ministry will respond. They are just delayed. 

4.09
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the first time in my life, I was relieved when I got information that the contract for Bukakata Road, the long awaited project, was signed. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have not got any information as to when the actual work on Bukakata Road is beginning. My people and I are anxiously waiting to hear and see the actual works beginning. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as I was coming up to answer the question, I was reminded by hon. Chris Baryomunsi that even at long last, the Kanungu Road contract has been signed and we are also still waiting.

The explanation is simple: After signing an agreement, it takes about three months to do the mobilisation and start the work on the ground. Please, reassure the wananchi that the road is going to be done. The contract has been signed and within the next few months, they will see the tractors on the road doing the work.

4.11
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I wish to know the right posture when we are singing the Uganda National Anthem? Some people put their hands on the side while others begin to put them “here”. Which is the right posture? (Laughter)

I crossed from Lwakhakha to Kenya one evening at about 6.00 p.m. Their flag comes down at about six o’clock. The Kenya National Anthem was sung and everybody who was sitting down got up, villagers inclusive. However, in Uganda, even when we are at an official function, you see people walking around and nobody enforcing this. Even us here, when we are singing the Uganda National Anthem we do not know the right posture. Mr Prime Minister, can you help us? Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)  

DR RUGUNDA: I am very happy you have raised this point because the national anthem is a major asset for the country, which calls on everybody to realise that there is a great country called Uganda. Therefore, one should be in respectful attention or more less pay attention. 

The question of the hand being somewhere is not the practice in Uganda. The key point is, be respectful, at attention and sing the national anthem. I would like to also say that when the national anthem is being sung, people should not play about or jump up and down or start walking. They should be at standstill singing. 

4.13
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it was common knowledge that the services of Local Councils I (LCIs) were highly commercialised. Now that the new chairpersons have been elected and handed over their stuff, what are you doing to regularise and stop our people from complaining and commercialising these services? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, LCI chairpersons are representatives of the people, elected not for a monthly or regular salary but to provide essentially pro bono services to the wananchi. It is true that Government has sometimes considered giving them moral support here and there, for example bicycles. However, paying money for services rendered by LCI chairpersons, in my view and according to practice, should not be done. They should work knowing that they have the mandate of the people and they are serving their community.

4.15
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, some months back, this House appropriated the national budget and this included funds for institutions like the National Medical Stores (NMS) to procure HIV/AIDS medicines or commodities like Antiretrovirals (ARVs) and Septrin. 

While bonding with my voters in Katakwi District this week, I realised that we did not have Septrin in Katakwi Hospital. For a while, HIV/AIDS patients have been referred to clinics to buy Septrin. My question to you is: Why is this the case when we appropriated a budget to NMS to procure HIV/AIDS commodities, Septrin and ARVs inclusive? Patients are asked to buy Septrin from the clinics yet these are supposed to be supplied by the Government free of charge. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, ARVs are available in hospitals and approved health centres. Septrin is also supposed to be enough. The honourable Minister of State for Health has also said that there is enough, but there may be misallocation which needs to be streamlined. 

There have been questions asked about the efficacy of Septrin in patients that are HIV/AIDS positive, but that is detail. The Ministry of Health will ensure that the drugs that are supposed to be available for the wananchi are indeed available in hospitals and also health centres.

4.17
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring it to the attention of the Prime Minister that last year, my teachers requested me to buy for them Sipro textbooks and I bought the books from a bookshop in Mbale District. However, to my surprise, these books were only meant to work for one term. After that term, they expired, like course units at the university. 

I bought textbooks for all the subjects for my primary schools, from P.1 to P.7. I would like to know from the Prime Minister whether the Government is aware about this practice or whether it is in line with the national curriculum. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my answer may be old fashioned. When I was in school, we would normally have a textbook for a year. However, if they are now for each term, that brings about complications. 

I think the honourable minister responsible for education may have to give the appropriate explanation to this very question. The matter should not just be about commercialising text books but we must take into account the inconvenience and costs of purchase of textbooks. 

4.19
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is: Under what circumstances have officers of the Uganda Police Force started wearing un-gazetted uniforms and become mobile adverts for private companies, especially SGS and China Railway? I see traffic officers putting these on? Under what circumstances have they become advertising boards for private companies? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Uganda Police Force, or for that matter the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF), are supposed to be loyal to the people of Uganda and not become advertising posts for private companies or agencies. If, however, the information you have given is factual, this is a matter we will actively investigate and ensure that it is corrected.

4.20
MS BETTY MUZANIRA (FDC, District Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister tell this House and the whole nation about the progress on the Supreme Court recommendations in respect to the electoral reforms? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Hon. Muzanira, the answer is that Government has already taken specific steps. The Attorney-General has already communicated to the Chief Justice on steps being taken by Government on the issue of electoral reforms. This august House will be informed in due course of the steps being taken.

4.21
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question is going to be very specific and it relates to our good record of service delivery. I think it has been a while. We have seen work on the Northern By-pass. The people of this country, particularly those in Kampala, are tired of traffic jams. Can you tell us when exactly we shall cut the red tape to launch this road because work seems to have stalled? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I thought the honourable member was first of all going to give a lot of thanks to Government for taking radical steps to improve traffic jams in the Kampala and Entebbe areas. As you know, 75 per cent of the expressway is already under use but it will formally be fully open for use in a fairly short time. November is supposed to be the month actually. 

With regard to traffic problems, colleagues should know that fly-overs are now going to be a feature in Kampala. This is being done in order to ensure that wananchi have no problems of traffic jam. 

4.23
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is about the failure by Government to open the boundaries for forest reserves. In my area, many people neighbouring forest reserves have been chased away. Today, the plantation of the LC I Chairman, Bavunikire, was cut down and yet he is not within the forest reserve. However, they claim that he is part of that area. When I tried to intervene, they said that the Government has failed to give them money. It happened today. A banana plantation covering almost 10 acres, outside the forest, was cut down completely and the owner is a leader in our Government. 

When are we going to get money so that the boundaries can be clearly demarcated? We shall then be able to know those who are within the road reserves, instead of people claiming all areas as forest reserves when they are not.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point raised by hon. Muyanja is a serious one. It is true there are lots of boundary disputes among individuals and between individuals and Government. It is true that opening of boundaries is very important. Nevertheless, this particular case is going to be investigated so that appropriate action can be taken. 

Let me also request colleagues to encourage individuals and Government departments in your constituencies to ensure that boundaries for game reserves and forests are properly marked so that the confusion between the wananchi and Government agencies can come to an end.

4.25
MS MARIA GORRETI AJILO (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about indoor spraying of mosquitoes. 

In Kaberamaido, because of the rampant theft of food stuffs in the traditional granaries, people have resorted to designating huts in their homesteads for food storage. What perturbs me is that when the sprayers come, they forcefully and ruthlessly spray every house. No amount of explanation gets to their ears. Those who try to resist the spraying of their food stores are arrested and taken to police. The cash crops which people grow and harvest such as soya, chia seed and red pepper are being rejected by buyers because of the chemical content. 

My question to the Prime Minister is: What are the guidelines regarding spraying of houses in relation to food stores? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, whether there are food stores in the house or not, the spraying of houses is basically and primarily for the benefit of the inhabitants of those houses. There should be proper communication between the Government agent who is carrying out the spraying and the owner of the house. There should be a common understanding and the person should understand that it is for his or her benefit.

Therefore, the question of arresting people, having confrontations, spraying by force - that type of situation should not arise. If there is a problem, then the LCs should come in to explain the rationale and importance of spraying so that those petty quarrels can be resolved or better still, can be prevented. 

4.28
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2015, this Parliament amended the Local Governments Act and made provision for workers to be represented in the district councils. Indeed, recently, the Electoral Commission (EC) was able to conduct these elections. However, the district administrative officers have now stopped the swearing-in of workers’ representatives who work in Government. The idea is that they should first resign if they are to represent workers.

I wonder, if you have already resigned as a Government worker, how then do you continue to represent the workers? I think the law is not clear on this matter. If that was so, how then was it possible that the EC provided guidelines and nominated these persons to represent workers in the district councils? Their situation now is a dilemma and they do not know what to do. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, fortunately, the Deputy Attorney-General is in the vicinity and he has informed me that there is a lacuna in the law and that the Attorney-General is looking at it. (Applause)

4.30
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is from the cattle corridor. The cattle keepers in the cattle corridor are perturbed about the lack of concern by the Government as their cows are being devastated by tick-borne diseases and tsetse flies.
		
This morning, I received people from the east and West Nile, particularly Arua, who sent a message to the President that their cattle are suffering because of tsetse flies. Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Prime Minister to assure the cattle keepers that Government is paying attention to their plight. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is very true that the matter being raised is serious and is affecting not only the cattle corridor but even other areas that have cows. We have discussed this matter in this august House before. 

There have been problems of controlling and organising the use of acaricides. Government is now importing some acaricides to ensure that we exterminate these terrible ticks that are causing a lot of mobility and mortality in cows. In addition, new guidelines are coming up and the ministry responsible for animal industry will be announcing them in due course.

4.32
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you know, Uganda depends on agriculture. However, lately, there has been a sharp increase in the prices of agricultural inputs, especially fertilizers, NPK in particular.

My farmers in Bugisu subregion are buying a kilogramme of NPK fertilizer at Shs 5,000. What measures is Government putting in place to curtail these ever increasing prices of agricultural inputs?	

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable member that agriculture is the mainstay of our economy. It is true that we are aware of the cost of fertilizers being high. The solution is that we have new factory in Tororo that produces fertilizers. I therefore, think that with local production of fertilizers, the cost is going to come down and they will be more affordable. I also expect productivity in the country to improve as a result of that.

4.34
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two months ago, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was here and he asked us to go and tell our farmers that they should not be exploited by middlemen that buy maize at Shs 200, since Government had listened to their cry and resolved that they were going to buy their maize at Shs 500 a kilogramme. We went and assured the farmers about this. Again, two weeks ago, when we asked the same minister, he told us that we should tell our people that in less than a week’s time, money would be available and the farmers will be accessing the money.

Mr Speaker, senior four students are beginning exams at the end of next week. Parents are crying because their children are at home. Parents are asking us to give them money so that they can send their children to school and yet we do not even have that money and the Prime Minister knows this. Therefore, can we know from the Prime Minister whether we should tell the parents to sell something different other than maize, like their land, so that they can take their children back to school since the Government has not answered their plea?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the concern raised by hon. Kibalya is well taken. Actually, money was released by Government and sent to different banks but the banks wanted to be sure that the money would be used by people who have the storage capacity and other related items. 

We also know that it has not moved as swiftly as we wanted. However, we are managing it very closely. Money was released and we expect that the small logistical hiccups will be solved in due course so that the wananchi can be able to get prices that are meaningful and close to the labour they put in.

4.36
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Uganda National Meteorological Authority is supposed to supply efficient and timely information concerning weather. In the recent information that they gave to this country, there were indications that for the months of September, October, November and December, we would have plenty of rains. However, to date, many districts, including Amolatar District that I represent, have not received any meaningful rain for agricultural production.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what policy shifts is Government going to undertake to ensure that the weather forecasts can be credible, reliable and specific to our areas of jurisdiction? Thank you very much.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my comrade for giving way. With due respect to my honourable colleague, when we come to this august House, we should pose questions that are answerable. Asking the Rt Hon. Prime Minister when the rains will come – (Laughter) – I am not saying that he cannot answer it, but as to whether they can assure us if the rains will come or not is stretching the Government a little far.
	
Mr Speaker, I am not saying this because I speak for the Government. The procedural point I would like to raise is whether we are proceeding right by asking questions that are assumptive rather than practical. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we were listening to the same speech. What I heard from the Member for Kioga County is that the meteorological authority has given a forecast saying that it would rain this month and next month. He then asked if the Prime Minister can assure this country that we can rely on the information and projections -

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Nsereko should be saluted for the procedural inquiry. I have also been expecting some rain. (Laughter) 

Forecasts, by the way, may be accurate but they could also be off point. Therefore, it appears we may need more sophisticated equipment so that our experts at the meteorology centre can be assisted to be able to give more reliable forecasts, so that we can rely on them to plan accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the meantime? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: In the meantime, we may have to resort to the traditional people. (Laughter) When I say “traditional”, I am not saying that we should go and look for rainmakers, but “traditional” meaning we know the way the weather has been behaving over the years and from that pattern, one can really interpret. It is true that sometimes rains delay, but I expect that the rains will be here soon. I hope that my forecast will be right.

4.41
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, Uganda is an independent nation. When we attained independence on 9 October 1962, this country committed herself to be a member of the United Nations (UN) Assembly. This country also committed herself to be a member of the African Union (AU). Those two bodies all have standards.

Mr Speaker, you must have listened to the reaction that came from the European Parliament regarding the trend of events in Uganda. Recently, our dear Rt Hon. Prime Minister represented the President in the UN Assembly, where the country was supposed to exhibit true adherence to the UN and African Union standards. That is what the Prime Minister stood for in the UN.

Given what has been going on in the country, I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether this country, the Republic of Uganda, still stands as per the UN and African Union standards, along the democratic position. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I share the view that Uganda is a member of the United Nations and the African Union. I would to add that it is not a mere member but an exemplary member of those organisations. (Applause) That is why Uganda has scored very highly, both at the United Nations and the AU, in terms of implementing the resolutions of those bodies. (Applause) That is why Uganda today has troops in Somalia - in order to defend AU’s commitment to liberation and stabilisation of African countries. Therefore, Uganda is a country to be emulated by many others. (Applause)

4.44
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government that you serve prides itself in infrastructure development, particularly roads. You may not be aware that the Kampala-Gulu and even Kampala-Arua highways do not have a single climbing lane, which is one of the reasons why we are losing lives. For those who do not know a climbing lane, it is an additional lane that slow vehicles retreat to so that they give way to fast moving vehicles. 

This is what happens in middle income countries and countries that are developing steadily, but we do not have this kind of road design. I am told in some parts of the country, it is there. I am told these climbing lanes are on the Mbarara-Kampala highway. Can you tell us why the Government you serve as Prime Minister is designing roads in a very segregated manner? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I think we are going through a process. We started with no roads, then we went to murram roads, which are gradually being upgraded to tarmac roads, and we are now identifying weaknesses on some of our tarmac roads. Therefore, we will have climbing lanes; it is a process. 

The loss of life is, of course, very much regretted. However, I think one of the areas where the country has done well is in upgrading and paving roads in many different corners of Uganda. Nevertheless, the point is well taken. The ministry responsible for roads will pursue it. 

4.47
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Mine is not a question but just a request to the Prime Minister. The request is in relation to the people who have not been paid for tea seedlings for almost three years.

Kanungu District is so grateful that the Government supplied us with tea seedlings, which our people planted. They are trying to improve economically. However, there are many suppliers who planted these seedlings but were never paid. The only challenge we are facing with those people today is that many of them had got loans from banks like Post Bank and Centenary Bank. In the last one and half weeks, about six people were arrested and taken to prison because of those loans. Even some who got little money from the LCI SACCOs, which we call bataka in Kanungu, are also facing a great challenge.

Mr Speaker, I have raised this issue many times but I do not know why the response is not coming or why these people are not receiving their money. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as I speak now, the people of Kanungu know that today is Prime Minister’s Question Time and everybody is watching their screens. I assured them that I will raise this issue today and you will tell them when they are going to be paid. 

This issue has been raised several times. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had told us that the money was there but we are not seeing the money. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we want you to help and tell us today when these people are going to get their money? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there was a question posed. If you have some money in your pocket, just declare it there. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Karungi has a good point. It is true that there was a problem with tea seedlings in the Kigezi and Ankole regions. The main problem was that there was “air supply” of some seedlings. People would supply, for example, 100 seedlings and say they have supplied 150. 

Therefore, the responsible Government departments said that there would be no payment, although money is available, until verification has taken place. Verification was initially resisted but I am happy to say that it has now taken off and some districts have already been verified. Kanungu will soon be verified and as soon as verification is done, then payments will be made for actual seedlings instead of paying for air. 

4.50
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you. It is Government policy to promote fish farming and I would like to thank the Government for the western region fish multiplication centre in Bushenyi. The issue is that this big fish multiplication centre, supposedly built to support fish farming in the region, was completed two years ago. However, until now not a single activity is happening in that place. A lot of money was sunk in that project and it is simply waiting for operationalisation.

Mr Prime Minister, the people of the south-western region need an answer from you regarding the operationalisation of that centre. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you started eating fish now, Mr Prime Minister? I thought people in that region do not eat fish. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it seems some people have started eating fish. I am very happy the Member of Parliament has raised it. It is true that those facilities were put in place but there has been a problem of power connections. I think as soon as the power is connected, the fish fingerling multiplication centre should be able to function fully. Indeed, the country is looking forward to it so that fish production in the country can increase both for the wananchi and for export.

4.52
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would just like to know if the Prime Minister is aware of the looming problem with foundation bodies in primary and secondary schools. This is because about 11 primary schools in Lira District are under threat. Recently, a catechist’s house was pulled down by people from another religion. Also, a signpost of a school affiliated to that religion was pulled down. 

As I talk, learning has been affected in those schools. Boke Primary School, Ongica Primary School are some of the schools affected and other schools in Lira District. Also, security is being threatened because they are almost taking up pangas, bows and arrows to hit one another. What is the position of the Ministry of Education and Sports on the issue of foundation bodies? 

I know this does not only affect the schools in Lira or Lango subregion; it is a countrywide problem - Church of Uganda versus the Catholic Church and others. What has the ministry put in place to curb this situation so that learning is not affected? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Schools in Uganda are for everybody. Everybody qualifies to enter a school irrespective of their faith or religious affiliation. Whether it is a struggle for land or other things, the key point is that no Ugandan child at any level should be stopped from going to a particular school because it is for foundation body x, y or z. The critical point, therefore, is access to education irrespective of the foundation body. Of course, if a foundation body became obstructive, then the law would take its course.

4.55
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you. Koboko Health Centre IV was upgraded to a general hospital four years ago due to a large volume of patients. However, up to now, it is still receiving funds as a health centre IV. Why is that happening? The drugs, nurses and doctors are not enough. Why aren’t you giving the right amount of money to Koboko General Hospital? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: The Minister of Health could have factual information. However, it is possible that that health centre IV was upgraded as a general policy but in terms of the budget, the money that was sent was not for a hospital; the money which is still flowing for the purchase of drugs and other things remains the budget of a health centre IV instead of a hospital. 

I see hon. Sarah Opendi is here in the House. She has said the information is accurate, that there are several health centres IV that were upgraded to district hospitals but they are still getting the budget of health centres IV because of lack of resources. As soon as resources are available, they will get their proper budget as district hospitals.

4.57
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that Government and this Parliament have had keen interest in decongesting our prisons. For more than one and a half years, the Rwenzururu King and other people have been kept in prison. The case was committed to the High Court. Government is duty-bound to schedule and facilitate the process of hearing cases in this country. However, the latest development is that Government has defaulted on some of the bail conditions that they gave the king including withdrawing the security of the Her Highness the Queen. 

I would like to know what plan Government has to ensure that these people get a speedy and fair trial. I am aware that there are cases like the one of constitutional amendment, which came recently but was fully facilitated. Therefore, may I know when the king and his subjects are going to get justice that is fair and speedy? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, you may have seen that I was getting wise counsel from the Deputy Attorney-General. He has told me, as all of us know, that when cases are in court, constitutional matters take precedence. Therefore, the constitutional cases he referred to were given priority, naturally. 

Secondly, the case involving the Omusinga has criminal aspects that require to be thoroughly investigated and investigations take quite a bit of time. Therefore, I call on my brother to give both the Judiciary and the investigative bodies of Government a reasonable amount of time to do a thorough job so that justice can indeed be administered.
5.00
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, almost three years ago, Parliament was requested to pass a tax measure on Kerosene. The justification was that a fund would be created and a department established, at the relevant ministry, to supply solar power to rural areas that cannot be accessed by the national grid.

To date, we have not seen this fund and the department has not been created. Would you let this House or the country know what is happening because this was an assurance given to this Parliament and the country at large?

DR RUGUNDA:  Mr Speaker, the honourable energy minister would give more details about the fund. However, suffice to say, there has been prolific investments in solar energy sector and the country is heavily benefiting from these private investments.

However, the point of the fund is still a good one; I will ask the energy minister to come and brief this august House on the progress with regard to that fund.

5.01
MR MBABALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto South County, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, recently I presided over a fundraising function at Ssese Island. I was made to understand that Ssese Island, which comprises 58 small islands, has no ambulance boat to deliver people from all those 58 islands to their main hospital at Kalangala.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you have any plans as Government to provide an ambulance boat so that these islanders could reduce their mortality rate, which is rising day by day?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that is a very valid point. The Ministry of Health is working on the arrangement of having a boat ambulance available to the people of Ssese Island.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have exceeded one hour. It would have been my wish to accommodate all Members but one hour is over and we have already exceeded it. I would like to ask the Leader of the Opposition to make a short response before the Prime Minister comes in to close it up. All the members whose names are pending will be dealt with at the right time.

5.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to start with a question on why resolutions of Parliament are not implemented. For example, when we talked about Sustainable Development Goals; in September 2016, you agreed that you will bring into this House, annual reports on Sustainable Development Goals. However, to date nothing has happened.

I would like to give a second example. In the Ninth Parliament, resolutions were passed here on, can I now say, people affected by war because they are no longer children, girls or boys, that they would be supported. They came and sat here, a lot of them mainly ladies. But to date those resolutions are not implemented.

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we take great concern that when this Parliament passes resolutions, they are not implement, why?

Right Hon. Prime Minister –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you are rising on a point of order, the rule says that you actually rise.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, the tradition, as I know of this House, is that when we are addressing, the person on the Floor addresses the Speaker. I see the Leader of the Opposition addressing the Rt Hon. Prime Minister directly. Is she in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The kind of engagement that the Leader of Opposition is having with the Prime Minister is permitted.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that good guidance. One, we have in this Constitution the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. They are up to 29 and No.I (ii) says, “The President shall report to Parliament and the nation at least once a year, all steps taken to ensure the realisation of these policy objectives and principles.” We have a lot of them but I can say, democratic principles, national unity and stability, all those.

I have been in Parliament for more than 10 years but I have not seen the President reporting to this Parliament - apart from delivering the State of Nation Address –(Interjection)– no, that State of Nation Address is catered for under Article 101; this one is quite different. I have not seen Mr President address this Parliament on these principles.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you tell us why this is not happening and when the President is going to address us on these provisions of the Constitution? Therefore –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry that I have to move this to my neighbour in office down there. However, honestly, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to mislead the House by insinuating that the President has for the last 10 years not fulfilled the constitutional mandate by addressing the nation on issues like unity, and development? 

Is she in Order when we all know that principally those are the general principles of law; when we all know that at the beginning of every financial year, the President makes a proper detailed presentation to the Parliament and the nation? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the directive principles on state policy were made part of the Constitution by an amendment we made in 2005 under Article 8A, which activated those provisions to be provisions of the Constitution. However, the original intention was that the directive principles would be guidance on the general operation of policies.

However, the active provision on how the President does this is in Article 101 of our Constitution. He has been doing that at the beginning of every session of Parliament. If you are talking about the content not addressing those issues probably, you would have some point but that duty has been executed every year. (Applause)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance but I still would like to say that about all the 28 principles, step by step, at least once a year –(Interjections)– yes, I am reading from here and I expect the Prime Minister to give an answer. 

There was another issue on the boundaries of forests but I would like to include boundaries of public facilities such as health units and schools; there are a lot of land conflicts regarding those facilities. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you as the Leader of Government Business cannot take it as a very big issue of concern, how are you going to protect these public facilities, which are under attack by sometimes individuals who would like to take them on?

On roads, yes we build our roads in the name of upgrading. A road is built this year but in two years’ time you find them deconstructing it in the name of upgrading. These are public resources; can you give an explanation to the tax payers of Uganda why planning is not properly done to avoid deconstructing roads after two or three years?

Lastly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have big schools, for example, Sir Samuel Baker S.S, Kitgum High School, which were known for academic excellence. I do not know whether it is because of poverty, sometimes the facilities are there but they are underutilised.

Let me give an example of Sir Samuel Baker, which I keep visiting. That school has a capacity of about 2,000 students but now has about 300 students. However, the level maintenance of the facility still remains the same yet they collect little.

How does your Government plan to address these issues regarding education, which are making the standards of education not fairly the same in all the sub regions?

In the poor sub regions, the standards are continuously going down because the managers are failing to manage the institution. What are you planning to do about those institutions? Thank you.

5.15
DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that hon. Nsereko should be orderly and he is not part of the Opposition as far as I know. 

Anyhow, to respond to some of the points raised by my sister, the Leader of the Opposition - first of all, I was surprised because she said, “Your Government.” We have one Government of Uganda, which is our Government; you are part and parcel. So, the language should be straight and none confusing. 

There are three arms of Government - the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary. We in Parliament - Opposition and Government side - are all part of this Government. 

On the question of SDGs that my sister raised, I would like to say that it is true we have been performing well on SDGs and there is a lot to report. When ministries report on the progress they are making on roads, water and schools in regard to the performance of the vision fulfilment and performance of the development plan, it also covers the SDGs. However, we can also bring a specific report on 17 SDGs.

You raised the question of the President addressing Parliament I have nothing useful to add to what Mr Speaker has said. I am in total agreement with his explanation. The President speaks every year to this country as provided for in our Constitution. 

You also raised the issue of boundaries. You and I are in complete agreement. Government will have to spend more money to ensure that boundaries of public institutions are properly demarcated and maintained. The political leadership in the country side should also sensitise the population about this very point.

On the question of reconstruction of roads - when roads are poorly made, they should be reconstructed. However, in a number of agreements, if there is damage done before the expiry of a particular period, the contractor pays for the job. As we gather more experience, we will ensure that this country gets the best value for what it pays for the roads.

On schools, I would like to say that in the past there used to be a few secondary schools. People would drive miles to go and study in different areas. Fortunately now Government, under the policy of liberalisation of the education sector has enabled many private schools to be started. These are competing very favourably with Government schools and some are even much better.

So, it is true that some schools or even Government ones find themselves with inadequate number of pupils either because of management- the buildings may be very good but if the leadership is poor, people will look for different schools.

The policy however, should be for all of us to work together to support our educational institutions whether they belong to Government or the private sector so that the quality of education remains very high. After all Uganda today is the centre of education in the region. Many people are coming from different countries to Uganda. So, we all have a duty to support high quality in Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, there are prayers that will start at 6.30 p.m. in the Members’ Lounge. Please prepare to attend. 

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kiruka Primary school in Kiryadongo District, represented by hon. Jack Odur and hon. Helen Kahunde. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

From the Parliamentary Cooperative Savings and Credit Society Limited, I have an announcement to make, that the 15th annual general meeting for the parliamentary SACCO will be held on 12 October, 2018 in the Parliamentary Conference Hall, beginning at 10.00 a.m. Thereafter, you will have a reception in the Parliamentary Parking, South Wing at 7.00 p.m. All members of the SACCO are invited to attend. Signed Chairperson, hon. Jalia Bintu. Thank you.

Honourable members, I have matters from private members and I know today is private members’ time but there is an item that I thought we should reflect on, since it has become an eyesore on the business on our Order Paper; that is item 10. I thought we could have a touch on it and see how far we can go with it. 

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE NATIONAL BIO-SAFETY BILL, 2012 AS RETURNED BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason I say it is a problem is because we received notification from the President on 2nd January. The President wrote on 21st December returning this Bill to Parliament and it was received by the Speaker on 2nd January. 

The rules say by that day, we needed only 14 days to handle this matter, finish it and return the Bill to the President, if we agreed with it. If he agrees with it, he signs and if he does not agree with it, we send it back and make it law without assent. However, it has taken all this time and that is why I am saying it is an “eyesore.” It is one of those things that should be handled, if possible. 

5.22
THE MINISTER FOR SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Bio-safety Bill, 2012,” as returned by the President, be reconsidered. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, seconded by the Member for Ntenjeru, Member for Rwampara and Member for Lugazi Municipality. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

DR TUMWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, in October last year, this Parliament passed a Bill for an Act entitled, “The Bio-Safety Act, 2017.” However, when it was sent to H.E the President for assent, he returned it to Parliament. I laid it on the Table, as prescribed in Rule 142 of our Rules of Procedure, and the committee was able to handle the Bill and reported to this House. 

The issues that were raised by the President include: the title of the Act, the rights of indigenous owners to genetic resources, testing of genetically modified materials in the irrigated areas of Mubuku, the isolation and confinement of genetically engineered materials, the need to clearly indicate that there should be no mixing of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) with the organic materials and also to never allow for use of poisons and dangerous bacteria as inputs in genetic engineering. 

The President also wanted the labeling of the GMO products to be very clear. Further, he questioned the use of the word, “modern biotechnology” and insisted that we should indicate that there should never be human cloning. 

Additionally, the President talked about the home of genetic engineering and that he had heard information that National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) could have released some of the genetic engineering organisms and wanted the Ministry of Agriculture to respond together with the liability and protection of consumers, environment, people and animals.  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the President talked about the need for the Noah’s Ark for the preservation of indigenous material. As a ministry, we also presented this to Cabinet and an inter-ministerial committee chaired by the Prime Minister was put in place consisting of the ministers of agriculture, health, defence, security and the Attorney-General. 

This committee also interacted with the people, the activists and the scientists that were opposed to the Bill. A consensus was reached on the major issues that the President raised and this consensus report was submitted to the committee. Thereafter, the committee incorporated what we suggested in a report that was laid before Parliament. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion before the House. I would like to propose this question for your debate and thereafter, ask the chairperson to report. Then, we see how to proceed with this matter. The chairperson has not yet reported on this Bill so there will be no report. 

The motion that I propose for your debate is that Parliament reconsiders the Bill entitled, “The National Bio-safety Bill, 2017,” as returned by H.E the President in accordance with Rule 142 of our Rules of Procedure. What was returned by the President was the National Bio-safety Bill, as passed by Parliament in 2017. That is what was returned; not the original Bill. To kick off this, I would like the chairperson to report based on this matter. 

Honourable members, we should recast that the clauses that the President referred to for reconsideration include, the Title of the Bill and Sections 3, 15, 16, 25, 26, 35 and 36. Those are the sections we should be focusing on and, not any others. The rules prohibit us from reopening the whole Bill but restrict us to deal with issues raised by the President, unless what has been raised by the President touches on some other clauses by implication. 

5.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Fred Bwino): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 3rd April, the committee presented its report to this august House and what is pending now is the debate. If I may run through very quickly - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since it was already presented, we could just refresh our memories on the recommendations that you made relating to what was passed. 

MR BWINO: Thank you. The recommendations that we made were basically to amend those clauses that are mentioned in the letter from the President and a few others that by implication, are affected by the amendments on those clauses. 

Mr Speaker, we also made a recommendation that in response to the recommendation by the President the Ministry for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should establish a national indigenous green bank where indigenous materials would be kept uncontaminated with any genetically engineered organisms for our future, if there is any crisis within the modernisation effort.

I have the details of the proposed amendments clause by clause.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that would now be considered at another stage. Honourable members, what this House needs to know is where we stand on this matter. Now, it has been properly articulated by the chair that the report was presented and all that was left, was for us to carry out the debate. Are we prepared to debate this matter now?
 
LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the Bill that attracted a lot of debate and consultations. The procedure I am inquiring is that we should consider the amendments. We should go to the committee stage and consider the amendments and pass them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I do not want to take that line because I am looking at the way we are currently in the House. Therefore, I do not want to go along those lines for now. 

If we are ready to debate then we could debate. However, since we already know where we are with this matter, maybe we could also consider dealing with it when we are properly constituted to take a decision. Is that okay? 

I think we will not be able to make major strides on this issue properly arising from the controversies that have accompanied it. I think we should pose because we now know that the motion has been substantially moved and the report has been presented. Therefore, what is left is to debate the motion and then we go to committee stage and deal with the amendments as recommended by the President. Let us pose it there for now. Thank you.

Honourable members, there was the issue of designation which is a short one which we could finish. Clerk, I amended the Order Paper to accommodate the designation. Where is the Government Chief Whip? 

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL AND STANDING COMMITTEES

5.33
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to use rule 184(1), 157(2) to designate the following Members of Parliament who joined us later after I had designated the rest:

    a) Hon. Abrahams Lokii from Kotido Municipality will be on the sectoral committee of defence and internal affairs and serve on the standing committee of rules and privileges.
    b) Hon. Suleiman Hashim, Nebbi Municipality will serve on sectoral committee on foreign affairs and standing committee on rules, privilege and discipline.
    c) Hon. Bishanga Rwaburindora Tarsis, Ibanda Municipality will serve on the Committee on Agriculture and Animal Husbandry and government assurance as standing committee.
    d) Hon. Alex Byarugaba, who requested to be designated from the Committee on Science and Technology to Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I noted that the Government Chief Whip decided to do both standing and sectoral committees. I will put the question to the first category of sectoral committee to the names that have been designated to sectoral committee. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the Members that have been designated to standing committees of this House. I put the question to the approval.    

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had gone to the Committee of Supply’s page of this particular matter, it is a matter of 2017 and its way overdue. Can we close this chapter by dealing with this matter now? We can deal with it? Okay, thank you. 

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 stand part of this Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I am proposing an amendment to column 2 throughout the Bill by deleting Shs “000” throughout the Bill. The justification is to depict the right amount of money supplied by Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it because the figures are complete?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, can I put the question to that amendment? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the Chair.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the only amendment, Chair? Honourable members, I now put the question that the Schedule to the Bill as amended, stands as Schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the title to the Bill remain and stands as the Title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to help the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion.

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the committee of supply. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017” be read a third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister. Thank you, Mr Chairperson for that and thank you, honourable members!  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL (NO.2), 2017

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No.2), 2017” be read the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the members for Mawokota, West Budama North, Kaberamaido and Usuk. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR DAVID BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I said yesterday, during the Financial Year 2016/2017, we did receive extra requirements on top of what Parliament had appropriated. Part of this was within the three per cent which is within the law that requires the minister to approve and then report to Parliament within four months. We did that. 

The other requirements required prior parliamentary approval and we conformed to the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). We brought these requests to Parliament and the committee considered them. This was to support the programme of Government and requires that this House approves the Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No.2), 2017. It is the reason why we are here. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No.2), 2017” be read for the second time. That is the motion for debate. To kick off the debate, I ask the chair of the committee to report. 

5.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the budget committee on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No.2), 2017. 

On 3O January 2018, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before the House, the Supplementary Appropriation Bi11, (No. 2), 2Ol7. The Bill was subsequently referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration and report thereafter.

The object of the Bill was to provide for supplementary appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund as provided in Article 156 (3) of the Constitution and Section 25 of the PFMA an amount of Shs 960,733,828,180.

The supplementary requests which are the basis of this Bill were processed by Parliament based on the budget committee reports on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedules No.1 and No.2 for the Financial Year 2016/17 and approved figures were accordingly supplied.

The Committee on Budget was required to verify and confirm that the figures in the Bill match those that were supplied by Parliament.

Methodology

The committee examined the Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No. 2), 20l7 and reviewed the parliamentary Hansard.

The committee also interacted with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Observation and Recommendation

The committee observed that –

    i. the total Supplementary Appropriation Bill amounts to Shs 960,733,828,180 of which Shs 345,320,262,223 is recurrent expenditure and Shs 615,413,565,955 is development expenditure;
    ii. Parliament approved supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2016/17 amounting to Shs 960,779,006,917 under two separate schedules; schedule No. 1 and No.2. Schedule No.1 amounted to Shs 185,365,041,608 and schedule No.2 amounted to Shs 775,4I3,965,309;
    iii. the Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No.2), 2017 is less than what Parliament approved by Shs 45,178,737;
    iv. Parliament supplied Shs 3,662,977,072 for projected salary shortfalls to cover districts which had not been included in the schedule pending verification. 

The committee has noted that Government only utilised Shs 831,713,857 which was allocated as follows:
Vote 571 – Budaka District – Wage allocation of Shs 182,417,538
Vote 560 – Isingiro District – Shs 74,648,175
Vote 601 – Mitooma District – Shs 574,648,144
Total – Shs 831,717,857.

This allocation has left a balance of Shs 2,786,084,420 to be offset from what was originally supplied in paragraph 3 (II) above leaving a total appropriation of Shs 957,992,922,497 of which Shs 342,579,356,542 is recurrent expenditure and Shs 615,413,565,955 is development expenditure.

Mr Speaker, based on the above, we have proposed amendments in the Bill as follows:

    i. Amend by substituting the words “Shs 000” in column 2 and row three of the Schedule with the words "Shs” on all pages of the Bill.

The justification is that the inclusion of “000” gives different amounts from the ones being supplied.

    ii. Amend the amounts in the following votes with amounts approved by Parliament as reflected in the table below.

The figures are there for everybody to see. I will read these figures at an appropriate time when we go to the committee stage. The justification for this amendment has also been reflected.

    iii. Substitute the word “Bugiri” appearing at the end of the sentence in column two, on page 8, under vote 505 to read “Bundibugyo”

The justification is to correct an error.

    iv. Delete Vote 113 appearing in column one, on page 5, of the Bill pertaining to recurrent expenditure on salaries and other expenses for Uganda National Road Authority for the financial year 2016/2017 to a tune of Shs 466,115,000.

The justification is that these amounts were not supplied in the original report.

    v. Substitute the word “Iganga” appearing at the end of the sentence in column 1, on page 19, under vote 776 to read “Busia”

The justification is to correct an error.

    vi. Amend the long title to read “A sum of nine hundred fifty seven billion, nine hundred ninety two million, nine hundred twenty two thousand, four hundred ninety seven shillings” in substitution of “a sum of nine hundred and sixty billion, seven hundred and thirty three million, eight hundred and twenty eight thousand, one hundred eighty shillings.”
    vii. Amend the total in column two, on page 21, to read “957, 992,922,497” instead of “960,733,828,180”

The justification is to reflect the right amount to be supplied.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I move that the report of the Committee on the Supplementary Appropriation Bi1l, (No. 2) 2017 be adopted by the House and that the Bill passes into law with amendments as proposed. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question that I will put will make us to move to debate the principles of this Bill. I think the principles of this Bill are here; it is a Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which means the money was spent and now we are confirming by an Act of Parliament that what we approved and supplied at the time when that matter came should be concluded by the passage of this Supplementary Appropriation Bill, (No. 2) 2017. Can I put the question to this?

Honourable members, the question that I put is that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill (No.2), 2017” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL (NO.2), 2017

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

The schedule

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend by substituting the words “Shs 000” in column two and row three of the Schedule with the words “Shs” on all pages of the Bill.

The justification is that inclusion of “000” gives different amounts from the ones being supplied.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment.  

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairperson, I am proposing amendments in the following votes reflected on page 4 of the report:
 
Vote 544 - Nakasongola District.
I am amending the figure from Shs 907,426,839 to Shs 883,942,332

Vote 775 - Ntungamo Municipal Council.
I am proposing an amendment of the figures from Shs 213,521,914 to Shs 163,505,140

Vote 592 - Kiryandongo District. 
I am proposing an amendment from Shs 111,020,814 to Shs 58,464,730. 

Vote 585 - Lamwo District. 
I propose an amendment from Shs 175,092,933 to Shs 109,847,393 

Vote 560 - Isingiro District. 
I am proposing an amendment of a figure from Shs 74,648,175 to Shs 74,648,175. 

Vote 791 - Ibanda Municipal Council. 
I am amending from Shs 993,508,882 to 63,206,897. 

Vote 612 - Kween District. 
I am proposing an amendment from Shs 383,709,522 to Shs 246,106,034. 

Vote 571 - Budaka District. 
I am proposing an amendment on this vote from Shs 182,407,538 to Shs 182,417,538 

Vote 784 - Kitgum Municipal Council. 
I am proposing an amendment from Shs 2,012,692,788 to Shs 1,751,741,762.

Vote 615 - Omoro District
I propose to amend the figures from Shs 520,834,169 to Shs 202,239,993. 

Vote 783 - Mityana Municipal Council. 
I propose an amendment from Shs 720,080,865 to Shs 364,299,105.

Vote 570 - Amuru District
From Shs 870,190,672 to Shs 440,651,157

Vote 559 - Kaabong District
From Shs 1,109,685,314 to Shs 654,605,883

Vote 596 - Serere District
From Shs 1,105,261,372 to Shs 598,251,239

Vote 601 - Mitooma District
From Shs 574,648,144 to Shs 574,648,144

The justification for these amendments is to reflect what was supplied by Parliament during the consideration of Budget Committee reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the amendments. The purpose for which he is proposing these amendments is to make those figures correspond to what we supplied previously. That some of the things proposed in the Bill were beyond what was proposed but I notice that some of them are actually the same. However, we will deal with them as such.

Therefore, can I put the question to this amendment that has been proposed? Are there more amendments of the figures? Can you present the total then? So, you will deal with the total first?

MR LUGOLOOBI: The third proposed amendment is to substitute the word “Bugiri”, appearing at the end of the sentence in column 1 on page 8 under Vote 505, to read “Bundibugyo”. The justification is to correct an error. 

The fourth proposed amendment is to delete Vote 113 appearing in column 1 on page 5 of the Bill, pertaining to recurrent expenditure on salaries and other expenses for Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) for the Financial Year 2016/2017 to a tune of Shs 466,115,000. The justification is that these amounts were not supplied in the original report.

On the fifth proposed amendment, we are proposing to substitute the word “Iganga” appearing at the end of the sentence in column 1 on page 19 under Vote 776 to read “Busia”. The justification is to correct an error.

The proposed amendment in (vi) is to amend the long title to read "a sum of nine hundred fifty seven billion, nine hundred ninety two million, nine hundred twenty two thousand, four hundred ninety seven shillings" in substitution of what is appearing there as "a sum of nine hundred and sixty billion, seven hundred and thirty three million, eight hundred and twenty eight thousand, one hundred eighty shillings".
The seventh amendment is to amend the total in column 2 on page 21 to read "Shs 957,992,922,497" instead of what is appearing there as "Shs 960,733,828,180”. The justification is to reflect the right amount to be supplied.

Mr Chairman, those are all the amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have listened to the amendments. Can I put the question to the amendments, as proposed by the Chair? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The schedule as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the schedule, as amended, stands as schedule to this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

The schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the title to the Bill stands as title to this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation (NO.2) Bill, 2017” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS
 THIRD READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL (NO.2), 2017

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation (NO.2) Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Supplementary Appropriation (NO.2) Bill, 2017 be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT (NO.2) OF 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Congratulations, honourable minister. (Applause) 

Honourable members, I had altered the Order Paper to accommodate the Leader of the Opposition to make a statement. Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you cannot read this statement. It is too long. I think just speak to it. [Mr Mwiru rose] Can I deal with this amendment? Please, let me deal with this matter with the Leader of the Opposition.

6.08
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable, do not read the statement. Simply summarise.

MS AOL: I am not going to read it. I am now going to speak to it because even the Rt Hon. Prime Minister responded a bit to it. However, for emphasis, this statement is really about the oneness; that we are one Uganda and one people and also that we have our motto, “For God and my Country”.

It is about electoral reforms. We talk about constitutional review. I remember in the Ninth Parliament – it even started from the Eighth Parliament – we talked a lot about electoral reforms and they kept on talking about time. When it came to the Ninth Parliament, the Prime Minister promised that they were going to work on them but later on, he said that they were caught up by time so they would see.

In the first two years of the Tenth Parliament, they promised to constitute a Constitutional Review Commission and we have been waiting. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs last year said they were ready but they did not come. When hon. Magyezi came up with the Constitutional amendment to remove the age limit, his argument was that time was running out. However, we are not considering the electoral reform which is more important than the amendment which was brought alone. 

We need to go step by step on what I have brought up here. We have always said we would like fairness and credibility in Uganda. Even election observers have emphasised this. Even court- you see if we contest election results in court, it means something is wrong. This problem has been coming up. In the Tenth Parliament, I think we had over 100 court cases of elections. This means we need to go back and review our Constitution. Why are we really dragging our feet on this?

So, what I am emphasising here is that electoral reforms are a must if we want peace and harmony in this country. We also want justice and truth. These are really lacking. They are not for me only but for all of us. We want peace and harmony for our people. Even in the party, we also need some laws so that they follow what is in the law. This is what I was trying to emphasise. 

Although the Prime Minister said the Attorney General is ready, I would like to say we are giving one month. After one month and nothing comes up, I am coming again on the Floor of this Parliament to question the Prime Minister on when we are going to have this Constitutional Review Commission. We really need to know the roadmap. It is going to take a little bit of time for us to consult and educate the people, and probably even translate some of these documents into the local languages. 

So, we need time for this. We are in our third year of the Tenth Parliament and yet it was promised that within the first two years of this Parliament, it would be done. Why are we reluctant to do this and yet we see glaring problems? These problems can only be solved by a review commission. Electoral Commission is not serving the people equitably. Therefore, we need a review. How to put Electoral Commission in place should be very participatory and not the way it is being done now. There is a lot in this statement. I would like to lay it on the Table since I have not read it, because of time; I have only talked about it. 

Members of Parliament, we are here to serve our people. If we are here to serve Ugandans first before we think about ourselves, then we need to do a little better. We can only do a little better if this Constitutional Review Commission is taken up seriously and Electoral Commission- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, do not access the microphone before you have been allowed.

MS BETTY AOL: What I am trying to emphasise is that we need –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to a very passionate appeal made by the Leader of the Opposition on the need for constitutional reforms. I am seeking clarification; as the Leader of the Opposition, what aspect of the constitutional reform are you looking at because the whole thing is so big? We need to be specific. 

If it is for us to change the law for the elections so that by 2020, Government does not come running with pieces of law or tell us that there is no time for the law, we need to be specific. We can give the timeframe to the Government and say “by this time, all the pieces of legislation that are required to be in place prior to 2021 should be there”. Please, guide us appropriately. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you. If I were allowed to read this statement, the details are here. Although written by hand, the last point I am giving is that we need this in one month’s time. Within one month, we need the Prime Minister to come with all roadmaps for Constitutional Review Commission and electoral reforms. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this on the Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. Since you were not able to present the whole details, the record has captured it. Clerk, please upload that statement so that Members can share its content.

6.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for her presentation. Electoral reforms are key to everybody who is interested in elections and the stability of a country. Secondly, we have to respond to what the court directed us to do as Government. So, we cannot run away from it. 

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs did his part. I would like to pledge that we will remind the head of state to establish the Constitutional Review Commission to cause the other amendments to the Constitution which we would like to consider, which is coming from the community.

We are also mindful of the fact that if we do not do that, we will push Members of Parliament to come up with Private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution. So, I would like to promise that we will do this. I cannot stand here and say within one month – I know you are sending us to recess for one month. Therefore, I cannot give a timeframe but what I am stating is that we are taking this matter seriously.

Lastly, I would like to mention that Ugandans are now aware of the election calendar. We have achieved greatly towards organisation of elections. The amendment to the electoral laws cannot make us undo the achievement that we have achieved. At least we know the next elections will definitely be there in 2021, 2027 etc. Members keep on mentioning it.

Therefore, we cannot be the ones to have lit the fire and bring a basket and cover the very fire we have set up. I would like to take this commitment and thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I just would like to request you to update the House that the last sitting you requested me to go and make a call to the Managing Director of Microfinance Support Centre. We have done that, the property of Lango Cooperative Union is not yet sold. They halted the process of sale and they are waiting for us to send the money and we are doing that. 

Therefore, I would like to update the House and also to request the hon. Cecilia Ogwal that every time she is away, she comes with new fire to steer the House without sympathy. I hope that next time she will do better. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members for sitting up to this moment and for the sittings we have conducted in this meeting of Parliament. 

On Tuesday, Uganda will be celebrating its independence and that will be 56th Independence celebration. However, as we do the celebrations, we should ask ourselves some questions. If Uganda was a human being, it would be 56 years old and typical 56 year old person would have some issues; like the honourable member who has volunteered to say his age, that he is 56.

Usually, by that age, human beings begin to grey, some of them begin to get slow, some of them have complications. However, by that time, many of them have grandchildren and many of them have very established systems for their existence. Many of them are preparing to begin living a quiet life in a few years.

However, in the case of countries, life is just beginning. The systems should function better, faster and deliver on this purpose better. The institutions should function better and deliver on these purposes. One such institution is this House of Parliament and its Members.

Honourable members, as we go for these 56 years of independence, let us take it as a moment of reflection. What has been our contribution in strengthening the institution of the country? What has been our contribution in reinforcing the service delivery mechanisms that are in place to deliver services to our people? 

What has been our role in delivering services to the people or ensuring that Government and its institutions do exactly that? How have we used this House to put food on peoples’ tables, to create systems that enable children to walk with the support of laws, policies and the budget whether they are with disability or without any disability?

What systems have we created in place to enable female children to start walking that journey as young mothers into adulthood and your mothers bearing children? What systems have we put in place to support and walk with these people? What systems are we putting in place to make sure that we resolve our ways of dealing with things? Crises when they come, we come together and deal with them without causing unnecessary stress on our resources, patients and our people.

What are we doing as Parliamentarians? Some questions have come to this House and they have been very tricky. Some issues have come to this House and instead of solving them, we have escalated them.

May we take this moment for reflection as we celebrate 56 years of independence that the things we do here should bring peace. After all that, what are we set up to do; to pass laws for the better, peace and development of the country! After all that is our purpose and the only thing we can do. That is what this Constitution allows us to do; to pass laws for peace, progress and development of this country.

Let us reflect on these matters so that when we come back in November, we put those issues first and we deal with them with finality as we prepare to go and deal with other matters. From the time we come back we will start counting down.

We don’t want what happened in 2016 to happen in 2021. That might be a reflection of what we do now. What will happen in 2021; we still have the opportunity to fix it, so that we avoid what happened in 2016.

In 2016, when we came here, about 80 per cent of the Members did not come back. We want all of us to come back and our coming back will depend on what we do in the remaining period. How relevant we become.

Therefore, honourable members, let us go and reflect on these issues because they are serious. May God bless you as we go to pray on Monday morning; as women Members of Parliament go to reflect on some of these issues on Sunday, as we leave now and go up in the Members’ Lounge to pray for this period of independence; may we have moments to reflect on these issues?

Best wishes for independence; those of you, who are traveling, travel well. However, also remember that the spiritual dimension will be celebrating in Paimol on the 20th of this month. Join the people of Paimol and of Uganda and the rest of the world in celebrating the martyrdom of Daudi Okello and Jildo Irwa who were martyred 100 years ago. This celebration will be in Paimol on the 20th of this month. Please come and join us. May God bless you.

This House adjourned to Tuesday, 6 November 2018 at 2 o’clock. House adjourned.

(House rose at 6.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 6, November 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

