Monday, 10 October 2005

(Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS
 
(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back very warmly from the recess. I hope you had opportunity to present your views to the Committees on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Public Service and Local Government and Defence and Internal Affairs that deal with the proposed bills on the transition. This is because when we begin, we intend to handle them in an express manner; so I hope you have done that.

Secondly, I regret to inform you that the former Member of Parliament for Burahya in Kabarole, Mr George William Kisembo, died last week and was buried in Mugoma in Burahya. He was in Parliament as an NRC Member, Member for the Constituent Assembly and I think also a Member of the 6th Parliament. I would like us to observe a minute of silence in memory of hon. Kisembo. 

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

MR AWORI: Guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, did the recess put a lot of questions into your head? Okay, proceed.

2.59
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance and probably also that of the Attorney General and Minister of Constitutional Affairs on a matter pertaining to constitutional interpretation, and specifically the implementation of Article 78(b) that is in regard to the representation of special interest groups in the august House.

Madam Speaker, if I read correctly, the Constitution says that this matter shall be reviewed after ten years, which ten years ran out on Saturday. I am just wondering when Government will come out with a bill to review this matter. Should I assume that those Members of Parliament who were elected under this Article are no longer Members of Parliament? Are we not going to comply with the conditions of the Constitution and allow these Members to remain Members of Parliament?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, permit me to seek guidance this time from the front bench and specifically from the Leader of Government Business, on a remark made by His Excellency yesterday at the independence celebrations in Kololo about us opposition political leaders. I am just wondering whether Government will come out with a more elaborate statement. Otherwise, I find the accusation made, that we are agents of foreign governments, very inappropriate especially since it lacks evidence.

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, permit me to congratulate my colleagues of NRM who are Members of this august House and who were successful in their bid to be elected at parish level. I would also like to offer my commiserations and condolences to some of my honourable colleagues who lost especially the leader of the NRM caucus, hon. Kizige. I am told he was not successful in his bid and I would like to assure him that next time he will succeed. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, about this matter that hon. Awori has raised, first of all, I would like to say to hon. Awori that you should internalise fully the contents of Article 78 which says, “Parliament shall consist of …” and goes on to state various categories. Therefore, taking into account the time frame, I do not expect the Parliament to be dismantled before the next general elections. That is not possible.

Secondly, the provision says that, “…upon the expiration of a period of ten years...” It did not say within ten years. If it had specified within ten years, this Parliament would have had to consider this long before now. However as it is, this time has just expired and Parliament will in due course handle this matter. Therefore, you do not have to worry and I want to assure Members of this House and especially those belonging to special interest groups that they are full Members of this House and should not be threatened under any circumstance by anyone.  

However, I still ask the Attorney General to respond as our advisor although that is my interpretation. The other matters mentioned I think belong to the Government and specifically the Leader of Government Business.

3.02
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera: Madam Speaker, thank you very much indeed. I also want to thank hon. Awori for raising some of these issues although I think that he needn’t have gone so far especially concerning certain issues. However, I am here on behalf of the Prime Minister and I would like to say that I have not got the text that contains what His Excellency, the President said regarding parties. 

Suffice it to say that he simply requested them to have a similar vision about our country. I do not remember in his brief statement that I heard on radio that he categorically accused anybody of actually being an agent. He just raised this concern and requested political parties to work together for the good of our country. However, as soon as we establish that anything like that was said, we will obviously come back to Parliament and explain the matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague agrees that he was not there and that he does not have the text. However, I remember this correctly and I heard it very clearly and even have it on tape that the President said, “I will fight them, those political leaders who are agents of a foreign-” -(Interruption)

MR SEBALU: Madam Speaker, I was in Kololo and I agree with the statement made by hon. Kagonyera. The President did raise a caution that, as we move towards a transition, people should be cautious and mindful of the sovereignty of their country. His statement was mainly in relation to independence and he said that if we are to keep Uganda independent, whoever we are and whatever parties we belong to, we must act in the interests of our country. 

He emphasised that no party should be used as a conduit for foreign interests and I think that was only a caution and unless one is guilty, they should have no reason to push it beyond. (Applause)
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not speculate. If you are asking for the text of what the President said, then since these statements were made yesterday which was a Sunday and not a working day and today is Monday, perhaps we could ask the Government to produce the text before we discuss it. But as of now, I think we are just speculating.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I am only seeking your guidance on the way this Order Paper is arranged. I can see the reports of Parliament that are going to be discussed despite the fact that there are many reports that were presented on this Floor of Parliament. Some of these were discussed half way yet now I see other reports coming in to be discussed. I am just seeking your guidance. Wouldn’t it be better, for example, if we finished the debate on the election violence report first?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you looked at the back of that Order Paper?

MR SABIITI: I can see that some reports have appeared before –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you looked at the back of that paper? I called that report before we went on recess last week and there was nobody here. Yes, I did! I had put it on the Order Paper, called it but none of you was here.  

MR SABIITI: Okay, thank you.  

3.07
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have just come back from recess and I want to join you in welcoming back colleagues from the short recess we have just had. However, during recess, we had opportunity to interact with our constituents and also get updates on the on-going voter registration exercise. We were able to gather that this process is having a lot of hiccups. 

In many polling stations, Electoral Commission agents are handicapped. They do not have cameras to photograph those whose pictures are missing and even those polling stations that have cameras do not have batteries. I learnt later that in fact in certain districts like Nakapiripirit, they did not have a single camera. They had to run to Kumi to borrow some cameras that were magnanimously given but without batteries. 

The exercise is having a lot of hiccups and most voters are wondering if they will not be locked out since the deadline for voter registration is due 28th of this month. I think it would be prudent for government to issue a statement concerning what will happen to those voters whose registration will not have been accomplished according to the specifications. Moreover this is as a result of weakness on the part of the Electoral Commission. If there is a lack of batteries or cameras, it is not the problem of the voter. Therefore what is going to happen to those voters whose cards will not have been processed by the 28th of October? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.09
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I also had interactions especially with some educational institutions and particularly boarding secondary schools. I happen to have very many of them in Busiro East and currently students are at school and by 28th October schools will not have closed. These students need to be registered since they have reached voter age and they are wondering whether there will be any special arrangement so that they are catered for during holidays. 

This is a very genuine issue because they are very many of them and especially S.4s and those above. We are talking about big numbers who need not be disenfranchised. As nationals they have a duty and responsibility to take part in decision making through elections. Therefore, I thought that that should be also looked into when government is responding. [Mr Wagonda Muguli rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the issue you want to raise about elections or something different?

3.11
MR JOHN WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is quite different although it is related to the registration of voters. In my area in Njeru there are Dinkas who have been brought there in large numbers. These Dinkas are very tall people from Sudan. Ordinarily one would think they are refugees and we know that there are certain laws that govern the settlement of refugees. 

However, these Dinkas are also turning up for registration and my people are worried that this could be one way of trying to rig elections in favour of those who may have brought them there. Could the responsible person in government clarify this and put the concerns and fears of my electorate to rest?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Obviously we cannot claim to be 100 percent perfect although we do our level best under the availing circumstances. Therefore, I do not dispute that there could be instances where people have gone for registration and found certain materials missing on a particular day. However, there are also very many instances where registration officers have sat for days and not had anybody to register. So we have those two extremes. 

I thank honourable members but I would have preferred hon. Epetait to be more specific since the issue of generalisations do not help. If he had said that on such and such a day, I was in such and such a station and there was no registration then that would be better. For example, I went to one of the registration centres in my own constituency and the lady was there with her camera and everything but there was no body coming to register. That is specific and that is for sure. So honourable members will be more helpful if they can specify those areas so that when we charge the Election Commission with doing their work, let us be as specific as we possibly can.  

I think the question regarding educational institutions is a valid one and we are definitely going to make sure that the Election Commission gets involved. If I may guess, these people will be allowed to register in their institutions and then arrangements will be made to transfer this information to where they will vote. However, this is a guess and I am going to make sure that they take into account the fact that these special educated voters who are very many have an opportunity to register and to vote. We will take that one up.

Hon. Wagonda Muguli, you know that Uganda has the record for being one of the most hospitable countries in the world with regard to people who come to seek refuge in our country. Therefore, as a matter of principle, we accept people who come to Uganda seeking safety for their lives and property and we will continue to do that, elections or no elections.  

Secondly, the honourable member has alleged that Dinkas were brought and the only biological qualification he has presented as evidence for that is the height of these people. Now, I am a student of biology and I cannot imagine anybody telling a person’s tribe by his or her height. I am a biologist and I have a PhD in Comparative Pathology. Therefore, the honourable member needs to help us understand how he established that these people are Dinkas.

Thirdly, I think it is important that my colleague if he thinks there are any known non-Ugandans who are registering to vote that case should be reported to the appropriate authority; and actually immediately in front of him is the Minister of Internal Affairs who is in charge of people who misbehave. Therefore, I am sure if he is sufficiently briefed, he will be able to make sure that non-Ugandans whether they are Dinkas or not are not allowed to register because only Ugandan citizens are allowed to register and participate in our elections.  

We have no intentions whatsoever as a government to allow anyone else except bona fide Ugandans to participate in the electoral process that is going on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I could not go into details of which polling station I went to, on which date and found such a hiccup because this was a general problem.  

In fact, on the 6th of this month is when Kobwiny sub-county in my constituency received a battery for a camera; you can imagine several polling stations in a sub-county having to share that battery. When the voters report to any one polling station they would get fatigued; you have to keep checking everyday to see whether there is a chance of a battery having passed through that polling station in order to get your voters register updated.  

So, there is no way I could have gone to specifics when it is actually a general problem. So, I wanted to know what steps are going to be taken to remedy that hiccup before the deadline of 28th of this month is reached. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.18
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The last two days of September the LRA invaded Teso again and Obalanga sub-county in Katakwi District was attacked.  What happened was that a camp was burnt and when that camp was burnt we got very many contradicting utterances.  

We heard from the Army spokesman that there was no problem in Teso; there was no LRA invasion in Teso.  But we were also in Teso at the same time and we saw the Arrow boys bringing in the body of a dead LRA commander to Soroti town. We kind of got so disappointed, so distressed, that the government can fail to know what exactly is happening in the country.

But that aside, Madam Speaker, given that incident the Arrow boys have to remobilise again to go back and protect the people. This House for a long time has been urging government to pay these Arrow boys.  Unfortunately, they have not been paid and they have to go back to the battlefield to try to protect the people of Teso.  

I want to know from the Leader of Government Business what is really happening? Are you finally paying the Arrow boys? Do you still expect them to work? Do you have any mechanism of making them work without pay or without any form of motivation?  

Two, what has the Office of the Prime Minister done to support the people who have been displaced again whose camp was burnt and bearing in mind, Madam Speaker, that most of the IDPs in Katakwi were regarded to have gone back home when they were actually not at home.  

These people initially had been displaced by the Karimojong cattle rustlers then to the camps where the LRA displaced them, to other camps in Soroti and other places and when they left those camps they were deemed to have gone back home. So, they were not receiving any support from World Food Programme or anybody; there was no food going to them. Now that this camp has been attacked what has the Office of the Prime Minister done to alleviate their suffering?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether I am mistaken, but I seem to recollect that when we were dealing with the supplementary there was provision for these people, the Arrow boys and the Amuka, and that is several months ago.  I do not know whether anyone can explain why they have not been paid.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question of auxiliary forces and their payment has been with us for quite some time.  We did agree in this House to pass some supplementary funding for the auxiliary forces. You are right, Madam Speaker, that money was passed but it was not adequate to clear the arrears that were due to these auxiliary forces.  

Government has instituted a committee under the chairmanship of Rt hon. Moses Ali to go to different areas of Northern and eastern Uganda to verify the numbers of these people to make sure that when government releases money the question of paying “ghost” auxiliary members does not arise.  

So, the committee is doing its work. Some of you may have seen reports in the media about the work of this committee. This committee includes a number of ministers like hon. Okot Ogong, hon. Mukula Mike and Brig. Kale Kaihura. So, we expect that when the report is ready government will, with the support of Parliament, clear these payments.

The question of contradictory statements that hon. Alaso is talking about. It is true that when there is an attack not all the information is readily available to everybody concerned. So, if there was a statement from one of the officials that may have missed a point or two at the very preliminary stage of getting reports about this attack, it will not surprise me at all.  

The fact of the matter however is that, that group of Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) came, attacked, but was decisively defeated and neutralized by the gallant forces of UPDF.  

So the answer, Madam Speaker, is that we should remain vigilant and the people of Teso will go in the history of this country in terms of giving a bloody nose to the rebel forces of Lord’s Resistance Army and defeating them. They should continue being vigilant and an incursion that may be attempted should be defeated. UPDF is always there and the Government is always there and people of Uganda are always there. So, mobilize the population, hon. Alaso, to remain vigilant and wipe out this rebellion. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for that response. However, the story of verification has been in this House for the last six months. I am beginning to think that the verification exercise has become a mission impossible even for the committee that was set up. Because if they are going to take six months to verify when they were facilitated - you remember it came to this House that they were given Ugshs 60 million to do the verification. I think there is something that is not being taken seriously.  

Then on the question of the money not being adequate. Why would the Government consider giving these auxiliary forces part of their pay? You could pay them three/four months but they are going into the eighth month without any pay and you are saying the money is not there for verification. I think that is not goodwill on the part of the Government and, therefore, to ask me to go back and mobilize the people of Teso is actually to send me to a slaughterhouse, honourable minister. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add to what my colleague the honourable Minister of Internal Affair has said. Now, if the honourable member thinks that the scope of work this committee is supposed to do should have taken x months but instead of that it has taken Y months is something that can be looked into.  

I would like to agree with the minister that the defeat of Kony and his fellow terrorists is a cooperate effort of every Ugandan. There is no question in my mind that every Ugandan must participate maximally in defeating these guys. I do not think it is a very good thing to always condemn and condemn when you ought to say, “For me I did the following but so and so did not do this.”  

We know very well hon. Alaso, through you, Madam Speaker, that really the defeat of Kony in Teso was a cooperate effort of all the people including the political leaders and we appreciate that.  Therefore, we will do everything possible within the means your country has to meet our obligations. 

On the issue of helping the people who were displaced by the attack, actually last week- I cannot remember the day of the week- I was with the honourable Minister of State in Charge of Disaster Preparedness and she was getting into her car to travel to the affected region. Unfortunately she is not in town today because she is still engaged with work in Northern Uganda. Otherwise, we would have asked her to tell this House exactly what happened. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.28
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to present to this House a very important matter touching on the persistent violation for the rights of employees in Mayuge District. Particularly the district administration has made it a practice to underpay employees and to make unlawful deductions from their salaries, and the most affected category are the local administration police, prisons and teachers. 

We have taken up this matter with the Ministry of Public Service and the IGG has been involved, but money that is outstanding arising out of unlawful deductions and underpayment remains unpaid. There is an impending crisis that should collectively be averted.  

I, therefore, request through you, Madam Speaker, that the Minister of Public Service intervenes by making another investigation in this matter and reports to this House. Otherwise, indication on the ground is that some of these workers may go on a slow - something that will not be good for this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fortunately, the minister is here, but I am sure she will need time to establish the circumstances surrounding that matter. The under-payment of civil servants in Mayuge, unlawful deductions –(Interruption)

3.30
The MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have suggested, I need time and I will brief the House later. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

Question No. 37/05 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Mwandha. Was anyone delegated to ask this question? 

3.31
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): “According to the Uganda food security update for August 2005, ‘banana prices are up to 212% higher that the five-year average in production areas as demand outpaces supply of the staple crop threatened by Banana Bacterial Wilt (BBW)’.

What measures is the minister taking or intends to take to eradicate Banana Bacteria Wilt (BBW).”

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker, we want to sincerely thank the House for this question. Before I embark on it, may I request all of you honourable members to join us at a place called Namayemba Primary School in Kapyaka sub-county Bugiri District on the 16th of October where we shall be holding the World Food Day. 

Number two, I am personally associated with this problem of banana bacterial wilt. As and when I have a bit of time to spare during the day and particularly at night I interact very closely with scientists in Namulonge and Kawanda to articulate the way forward for this devastating disease.  

May I inform this House, but I think many people know we got the water hyacinth from Rwanda, we got the cassava milberg from Kenya, a weed called auxilios from Australia, a banana disease called black sciatica from Rwanda, cassava mite from Kenya, banana weevil from Rwanda and Kenya, the banana normative from Kenya, the coffee berry disease which attacks Arabica coffee from Kenya, coffee rust from India, and lantana camara, a weed particularly in the eastern region, where the tsetse fly breeds, which we got from Australia.

I am struggling to explain that we have always got these attacks and fought them off. All the above are no longer a problem. They come, we fight them, and finish them and life goes on.  When the banana bacteria wilt got here, it was only in Ethiopia.  There it used to attack a type of banana called Esette, which is called Ebitembe in Luganda. We first located the disease in Ntunda, Mukono District and in Kayunga District. It is surprising us how the disease moved from Ethiopia to Uganda and of all places in Ntunda and Kayunga, which are very remote areas. This was in 2002 and since then, we have waged a battle on this disease.

Madam Speaker, the disease we are talking about is very serious. It attacks all bananas; Kayinja, Matooke, Kivuvu - I have the Latin names here but they are very long. We used to have another disease, Kuduula, which is a phyllium. It used to attack Kayinja and Ndiizi unlike banana bacteria wilt, which attacks all bananas. This is why we really appreciate this question. We shall use this opportunity to further harness your efforts in helping us in tackling this problem.

For the record, the disease is now in Mukono, Kayunga, Kampala –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, use the microphone.

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: I do not normally speak on these things. It is also in Wakiso and Mpigi. I was shocked when I went to Luweero the other day. The disease has spread to Mubende, Nakasongola, Masindi, Kibale, Kiboga, Hoima, Kabarole and Apac.  When I went to Barlonyo, I was devastated to find the disease along all the roads as I went along Apac, Lira, Gulu, Koikigoma, Nebbi, Kaberamaido, Soroti, Kumi - it is terrible around Ngora and Kaberamaido, as you branch off at Lwela towards Kaberamaido town - Pallisa, Iganga, Kamuli, Bugiri, Mayuge - towards the lake - Bunya, Jinja –where it is terrible, Tororo and Mbale. If I have not mentioned your district, don’t you think you are safe, for you are sure to get it tomorrow.

Madam Speaker, the places above are where the disease is now. I have already indicated that it spread all the way from Kayunga and Mukono districts to very many other parts of Uganda. My particular worry is if it spreads at the same rate in Mbarara, Bushenyi, Rukungiri, Ntungamo, Kabale and Kabarole, which are our feeding baskets for bananas, we shall then be in more trouble.

I should inform you that approximately 24.5 percent of income in Ugandan households is contributed by bananas from which also contribute about 45 per cent of the GDP.  We may miss the bananas as food, as fruits and miss our very favourite drink. This drink generates a lot of income from Kasese, Mukono and Kibale.
 
How did the disease move from Ntunda and Kayunga to these other places? The disease is mainly air borne. You may step on it and carry it, you may drive on the soil and carry it on the tyres, you may cut a banana sucker from Ntunda or Kayunga and take it to Kamuli. You may also carry banana leaves, particularly the fresh ones -(Laughter)-Madam Speaker, we are doing some work to find out whether the dry ones also carry spores that may be transported in this manner. Travellers, farmers and traders are the people that normally carry the disease. What I am talking about is well explained in this brochure. 

This picture is a banana. I will deposit copies in the Members’ pigeonholes. This banana has ripened prematurely. It has a male part, which is always dangling. The female part normally stays stationary around the fingers. The commonest way this disease moves is by a bee, which comes, picks male pollen from the female part and transports it to another male to female banana. What then happens is that the male and the female parts get in contact with each other. They do not normally touch each other but bees and insects make the contact. 

Secondly, if you cut a banana with a knife and then cut another, you automatically transfer the disease from one plant to another. It is dangerous particularly where they trade in bananas. A farmer cuts this banana and that banana until he raises a lorry full. What he is doing is simply spreading the disease in the whole garden.  

The other way it spreads is again through insects and birds. If a bird comes to eat a sick fruit and then eats another, that way the disease will spread. Therefore, bees, contaminated tools like pangas, knives, all spread the disease. Every time I drive in the countryside, I look out for this. When I drive to Mbale, Kamuli and all other places, I look out for this. Unfortunately, when some people travel, they just sit in the vehicle and look ahead. May I appeal to everybody to begin to look out for this and kindly tell us wherever they see it. It is in Busia, of course, but can you please tell us and give us some idea about the intensity. 

It is very important that somebody recognises the disease and understands the way it is spread in order to apply the best control methods. The control methods are obvious. You simply avoid what I have just described. Do not go cutting bananas. When you cut bananas, make sure after every cutting, you warm the tool or apply a chemical before you cut another, particularly when you are in an area where the disease is rampant.

Let me to say that I have one of the best plantations in this country. It is even better than these Bushenyi bananas. My boys are instructed that whenever they see a male bud, they must remove it as soon as it starts to dangle off the fruit. In other words, the only way is to castrate the plant, for it is the entry point for this disease. Alternatively, observe the things I have mentioned. Do not drive in these infested places, do not walk - I cannot allow anybody to walk into my garden.  There are many things we have done to fight the disease but I will not enumerate them here. 

Madam Speaker, I circulated a paper on this matter last week. I want to thank all those Members of Parliament that read it and understood it. I will not enumerate all things that would have been achievements and control, where we have been, for instance in hon. Nansubuga’s place in Kayunga. She has been supportive, for whenever we are there, she is with us. If you go with a Member of Parliament from the area, people tend to listen more. Madam Speaker, when I prepare to go to your area next time, I will make sure I come with you so that we talk about this matter. I am sure I will get more influence if I go along with you, particularly since you are an honourable Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be assured of my support.

DR KIBIRIGE: My last statement is to do with research. I mentioned all other diseases that have come to us from neighbours, as far away as Australia. I am sure Dr Esele is conversant with what I am saying. We have tenaciously worked either in the field or in the laboratories to control this disease and pests.  

May I announce on behalf of my ministry and NARO that the coffee wilt, which has been causing a lot of hullabaloo, is almost over. We are about to release varieties that are resistant to the coffee wilt. The water hyacinth has gone, just as many other challenges we have dealt with. Similarly, we are in the laboratories and in the field.  This one is going to be a little bit more difficult because we normally look for another crop, which is resistant and mate them. We move pollen from the male, put it in the female, look for progenies and find out whether there are any. 

I have said that all the bananas are attacked but we have seen some resistant genes in other plants, like sugarcane. It may be necessary to use what some people normally do not want us to talk about, especially hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. We may need to use abnormal means to move genes say from sugarcane and put them in the banana. You either allow us to do that or there shall be no bananas anymore. Fortunately, we have got one of the best labs for this in Africa in Kawanda. We spent a lot of money building it. It is one of the best labs, which even the South Africans do not have. 

May I invite everybody after this politics of ours to find time to visit that lab? The other day the President went there but he did not want to leave. So, I kept on saying “Sir, your time has run out”. He was thoroughly impressed and he wondered why there was such hullabaloo about chromosome engineering. But we have got the capacity to attack this disease through biotechnology, genetic engineering and creating artificially a new plant but not using the usual sexual means. I am a chromosome engineer myself and I am involved in the back tour. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The honourable minister has said that when one cuts a banana and uses the same knife to cut another, the disease spreads. I want to know whether this bunch, which is transferred from Mbale to Kamuli, spreads the disease there. What shall we do about all these places where they sell the matooke? Should we fumigate them because people collect there everyday to buy matooke?

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I was actually surprised when I went to a place just above Kalerwe and found that almost every plant on that hill is sick. My interpretation was that these people buy matooke from Kayunga and bring it to that market. Then people buy the matooke, which they peel and throw the peels around their gardens. I could not see how else this disease could have got there. Some go and trade in cows from Kayunga, Mbale and other affected places and bring the cows to that market. The hooves end up in people’s gardens and you only need to infect one plant and the rest of them over time will be sick.

That is one way that spreads the disease. You transport matooke from affected areas and by the way a lot of people from the Western region bring cows in that market and then drive back to Mbarara and Nakasongola or even drive out of that market to go and buy cattle in Ankole. You sure may be taking the disease. 

Then some people are in the habit of wanting everything they think is beautiful. Whenever they see something beautiful in Bugerere they want to carry a sucker. May I advise that if you want to plant a banana plantation, you go to Kawanda first and seek their advice? They have got materials, which are produced by tissue culture in their laboratories. They are very small plants like onions but they are clean and that is what I plant myself. I do not go into people’s gardens to cut off suckers because that way I am carrying all sorts of things. Apart from this disease, I am also carrying nematodes and weevils.  

It is extremely dangerous to simply go hunting around for suckers. In fact this is part of the serious probleMs People go within their gardens and begin to transplant. All that they are doing is transplanting disease and pests and at the end of the day they look very frustrated that theirs does not grow properly while Kibirige Sebunya’s, who is a rich man, grow properly. Sometimes they say I bewitch their crops.  In essence they do not know what they are doing. That is why we are telling NAADS to concentrate on this matter otherwise we shall starve. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.58
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you Madam Speaker. I wish to first of all thank the Ministry of Agriculture for the success it has registered in containing the various crop diseases and pests. I have no doubt that the scientists out there will champion the fight against banana bacterial wilt.  From the minister’s report, over half of the country is already infested with this disease. I vividly remember that early last year we had a one-day conference in Hotel Equatoria, which was focused on banana bacterial wilt. Among other things that we agreed on was to have the information regarding the epidemiology or the behaviour of this disease translated into various local languages.  

I am glad that the ministry has gone ahead to print out information in these languages but one area that we had also agreed upon was to have programmes on radio in local languages to advise the people. This is because it might be very difficult for us to stop wherever we see an infested banana to educate the people of that area. We had agreed that radio programmes in local languages be funded and I think that is an area the ministry has not yet considered seriously.  

Madam Speaker, arising from interaction with various agricultural scientists, we discussed issues to do with the manner of the spread of the banana bacterial wilt. The banana bacterial wilt was locally named mukono disease because it was first discovered in Mukono District. I think it was not very fair for Mukono as a district to have a disease named after it. 

Among other things that this disease causes is the drying of banana leaves and the scientists were saying, “We are aware but somehow we also fear to mention certain things because of the likely political consequences”. In fact in that meeting I even suggested that we just name the disease ekisanja disease because the scientists said they cannot come out openly to start discouraging people from carrying dry banana leaves because they have to protect their positions in their offices. 

I would have loved the minister to take courage and advise the people. It will not harm because we are trying to save millions of Ugandans who are dependent on bananas as a staple food. I am happy that you have advised on how to handle banana bunches, how to handle the implements for cutting the male buds but also take courage and advise people not to carry banana materials, be it fresh or dry, from one area to another because we are mindful about our –(Prof. Kagonyera rose_) No, I will take the information when I complete this particular point. I think it would be wise for all of us not to take it as something haunting but to get ourselves armed with every nitty-gritty of a mechanism for avoidance of the spread of this disease, lest we run into the danger of getting the whole country infested with banana bacterial wilt.

Mr Minister, with the bio-technology that the scientists are developing, I am happy to learn that resistant genes have been detected in the sugarcane. I really want to encourage such innovations because what we are looking at is to safeguard our food basket. However, allow me to observe that the agricultural research is under-funded. Possibly this is one area, which has led to slow progress in getting the technology to control these diseases. I would be very happy if government put more focus and special attention on agricultural research in order to control not only banana bacterial wilt but other diseases as well. Agricultural research needs focused funding if we have to achieve results.  

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Epetait. Following the insinuation about dry banana leaves, if there is any scientist that thinks that when they give this government scientific information, they are risking their jobs, they do not deserve these jobs. 

The House must know that this government also has people who are scientists. It also has the leadership in His Excellency the President who respects the knowledge of experts. If the insinuation is that the wearing of banana leaves is what is spreading the disease and stopping them would stop the spread of the disease, we have no problem absolutely with saying that from such and such a time, no more wearing of dry leaves.

There are people who tend to believe in things beyond science that when someone puts on banana leaves, the disease spreads. But if there is scientific evidence for this, we want it and I would like to challenge my colleague to quietly give me the names of such scientists. I will go and talk to them and if we establish that these banana leaves are a major cause for the spread of this disease, I will take the responsibility to inform the Head of State that we banish the wearing of banana leaves to protect the matooke industry of this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.05
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The question put to the minister was about the measures he is taking or intends to take to eradicate the banana bacterial wilt. One measure that I heard about was research, but he went on to tell us the many good practices that he is doing or carrying out on his own farm. I waited to hear from him what he is doing to make sure that the peasant farmer in Bugiri, in Mayuge, in Kamuli does exactly what he is doing, and I did not hear it. That is what I would like the minister to tell me. 

In terms of policy measures, what is on the ground to make sure that our people in Masaka and Mbarara adapt these good practices? (Interjection) I can hear my colleague saying they are pamphlets but not every one can read. I think this is a very serious matter we are not raising for any other reason, but the need to help our people. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.08
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the good comment he made about the support I have given the ministry. I would also wish to thank him because at one time I travelled with him to Kayunga, an area thought to be the origin of this disease, and he has done so much. Most importantly the minister in his history has been key in fighting the banana bacterial wilt. I would like to thank members for applauding him.  

I have been following the argument that the wilt has hit my constituency badly. Hon. Epetait said they have not translated in other languages. I have been privileged to have seen at least a translation in Luganda regarding that banana bacterial wilt.

DR EPETAIT: I commended the ministry for proceeding to translate that information in leaflets, but what I was talking about is radio messages in local languages. It has not been taken care of. Otherwise for the translation in the leaflets, they have done it. Thank you.

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you very much. Still on radio, I have heard at least adverts in Luganda. That is the language I follow. So, I feel much has been done.

Regarding dry leaves – with these banana leaves as he put it, when you cut the fresh ones, it is that juice, the sap, which goes on oozing that transmits the disease but the dry leaves have nothing in them. (Interjections) I will not take any more information. I just wanted that.  

I want to know from the minister: honourable minister are you aware that despite all the efforts you have done, the information is not going to - trickling down to the lowest people? I tried to move with the pamphlets you gave to almost all LCs but you find that they do not even know the signs - what to look out for. 

So, honourable minister, our extension workers need to be more vigilant and get down to really educate our people on how to get out the banana bacteria wilt. I would like to inform you that in Kayunga it is improving but it is now spreading to other areas where it was not before. Where you started - where we went, it is under control but then other new areas have been found to really get this disease. Thank you very much.

4.10
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether I got the minister correctly. When he was reading the list of districts, which are affected by this disease, he gave the impression that maybe the areas of Ankole, particularly Mbarara and Bushenyi, are free. Is the honourable minister aware that this disease has already affected bananas in Mbarara and to be specific, some areas of Rwampara and Kashari? I do not know whether he is aware.

Then two, this is specific to the measures they have taken, Madam Speaker. Since this disease broke out in areas of Mukono and other districts, the ministry has taken very serious measures; they have been carrying out a number of activities. Can he confidently tell us the impact of these measures, which they have been employing in combating this disease so that we can say we are moving on the right track? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the explanation that he has given and the efforts that have so far been undertaken by their ministry in combating this problem. 

My concern is that this is a very serious problem because amongst other problems that we have, like the AIDS scourge, when you add on a problem like this in terms of food security, if not seriously handled, it can lead to a catastrophe. So it is something that we really must take seriously. So my concern to the minister is in terms of how they have applied the knowledge that he has given us here. He has stated that they are emphasising NAADS should handle matters related to the disease and help create outreach in order to be able to reach out to the peasants in our countryside but NAADS is not operational in all the districts. Even in some of the districts where it is, it is only operational in some sub-counties.  

My question is, are they now spreading NAADS activities to all areas specifically are all the areas that he has mentioned that are suffering from this problem covered by NAADS? If so, what has so far been the impact of NAADS where it is operational? Do we see the problem going down with scientific evidence that it is going down? Because this problem affects the peasants and the peasants, the majority of them do not seem to have any knowledge of how to intervene in this matter.  

Are we also using the LC structures so that during their LC I meetings, the chairman or the mobilisers can bring out some of this basic information to help out on the peasants to be able to appreciate? Just like we have done in the AIDS scourge, whereby almost every family has an idea on how to fight the problem because it is taking a national character and it needs a national approach to eradicate it? Thank you very much, Madam speaker.

4.15
DR JOHN ESELE (Bukedea County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like also to thank the minister for the very eloquent answer to this question.  

The most effective way of spreading a disease caused by a bacterium is through living materials, because the bacterium is effectively spread. It is a living thing so it is most effectively spread in living material. So the movement of banana leaves, the wet ones is the most effective way of spreading banana bacterial wilt. A bacterium can be transported as a dead material only if it can live as a cyst; it has to reach the end stage of its life cycle. So scientists are studying that now to see whether the bacterium that causes bacteria wilt in banana does insist and can live as a dead material and be able to regenerate itself.  

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. I think he is talking about a bacterium, which can withstand adverse environmental conditions even in dead materials. Really you are talking about bacterial spots. In any case when a bacterium forms a spore, it is not that it has reached the dead end of its life cycle. May I inform you, for example, a bacterium like anthrax can form spores and it stays in the environment for a long time? It is not that it has reached the end of its life cycle. It is still very infective once taken.

Two, the issue of the dry bananas, the lamina of the blade may dry and sometimes those who try to harvest dry banana leaves for whatever reason or use may harvest them when the mid-rib is still fresh. Usually it is the blade, which dries first and the midrib remains fresh, and if that leaf was harvested from infected material certainly you have an infected midrib there. So I thought I should bring it out to you that that is not really the end of the life cycle for the bacterium to form a spore.

DR ESELE: Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Dr Esele. The clarification I want is, you are actually building a very wonderful argument, which I think is helping me. Don’t you think that as the scientists go on with this study it would be wise for this country to take precautionary measures just in case they turn up one day and tell us that the dry banana leaves actually transmit this disease? Would it not be good for us to take precautionary measures now?

DR ESELE: Madam Speaker, scientists do not speculate.  Can I also inform Dr Epetait that the bacteria that are pathogenic in livestock are different from the bacteria that are pathogenic to plants? So the spread of bacterial wilt on dry leaves is insignificant.

The minister made an important statement in his answer. He said that the genes for resistance – and by the way resistance is the most effective way of getting rid of this problem – the gene for resistance to bacterial wilt of banana is in a different specie. He mentioned sugarcane; to bring that gene for resistance from sugarcane and put it on banana cannot be done using the traditional breeding methods. The traditional breeding methods can only be utilised on plants that are of the same family and of the same specie. The only way we can now bring that resistance gene from sugarcane to banana is through genetic engineering, the science of biotechnology.  

He said we have a facility in Kawanda, we also have the technical capacity; we have the scientists to do this, but the problem is that we do not have a policy in place. The biotechnology and bio-safety policy is still somewhere I think in the Ministry of Finance. Surely, it has been there since 2002. We as a country signed the Cartegena Protocol on Bio-safety; we also signed the Convention on Biological Diversity but we cannot benefit from these because we do not have the policy on biotechnology and bio-safety. It is there as a draft. 

I would like to request government to release this policy. A lot of stakeholder meetings have been held and we have taken care of everything internationally and nationally. I am convinced that if this policy were out, our scientists would be able to use this technology and improve on our productivity. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Esele, just for my education, what does the policy have to do with the Ministry of Finance if it is not a Bill? Is it a Bill or a policy? Why should the Ministry of Finance withhold consent on just a policy?

DR ESELE: The Uganda National Council of Science and Technology drafted the policy, and this Council is housed under Planning.

4.22
MR HENRY KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To emphasise what Dr Esele has just given, I am a member of the National Bio-safety Committee. The Bill was drafted some three years ago on bio-safety in Uganda through which scientists in Uganda can use biotechnology, but this Bill has been sitting in the ministry for too long. 

What the minister is saying that we can have a good gene from sugarcane implanted into banana trees to stop bacterial wilt cannot be practiced because there is no Parliamentary Act and there are no guidelines.  So what the Minister of Agriculture has to do is to talk to his colleague in the Ministry of Finance and bring this Bill to Parliament. As you see, if the parliamentary calendar does not come soon, it may not be in place maybe until July or August next year. So it is very important if we are to stop this banana wilt, we need this Bill in Parliament.

I want to inform this House that BT maize in America has completely been able to control all the corn borers, including the European corn borer, which had almost wiped out maize in America. So, it is a good exercise; it is very good science. 

To my brother, Dr Epetait, if the dry banana leaves are a problem to banana wilt, we who support the kisanja as we call it shall wear tree branches because this is a popular demand. It is a popular demand to show that we want President Museveni. Even if the bisanja are done away with, we shall still put on tree branches and the effect will be the same. Thank you.

4.25
CAPT. FRANCIS BABU (Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, my question really is very simple in this contribution. It is our neighboring countries and the movement of plant materials from those countries; in most countries especially earlier on hon. Kityo was talking about the international means of protecting biodiversity, they do not allow other plants to come from other countries until they have made sure those plants are disease-free.  

My question at this particular moment is whether the present legal framework would allow us to stop plants from our neighboring countries from coming into this country? There are countries, which surround us, which have got the same sort of plants. Are these plants crossing the border and if so, what measures do we have to stop them from coming into this country?

The other problem that I foresee here –(Interruption)

MR SEBALU: Just to support hon. Babu’s idea of ensuring that plants that are likely to be diseased are not allowed into certain countries, for instance in South Africa you do not take there any plant in any form. In fact they have got very strict regulations at all their airports not to allow in any foodstuff, and specifically the idea is to ensure that they limit entry of diseases via plants or foodstuff.

DR EPETAIT: I think it was early this year, I do not remember the date, and this Parliament actually passed the Seeds and Plant Bill, which takes care of the fears of hon. Capt. Babu.

CAPT. BABU: The reason I brought this one up, Madam Speaker, there are neighboring countries – and I do not want to mention names – that actually have got the same sort of plants like our country and I have seen plants move up and down between these countries. My worry is that we should actually plot the movement of this wilt and see if it has no connection with our neighbouring countries.  

Secondly, there is a problem. It is not only with plants actually but it also goes across all the agricultural products including milk for example. There is now proof that the raw milk that is sold in this town is diseased and a lot of people who drink it get a disease called Brucellosis. What sort of regulations do we have in place to protect the people? I am not against people selling this milk, I am just against people getting the disease and I am told Brucellosis is such a disease that when you get it you get a continuous fever. Eventually you have loss of weight and if you are not careful they might think you are suffering from HIV.  

The question is, what are we doing about this? I know the ministry recently tried to stop this milk from being sold in urban centers and there was a very big thing about it. These are the kind of questions that I think our ministry should try to answer and we do not need to wait for the law, Madam Speaker, because they have got the powers to come out with statutory instrument –(Interruption)

MR KITYO: The honourable minister has made a statement, which can make people in Kampala to stop taking milk. I think the message has to be put clear that pasteurised milk cannot carry any disease but disease can be in milk, which is brought in bidomola and sold all over town. But pasteurised milk, which is sold when packaged, is safe. Also, Brucellosis is so dangerous that it can make men impotent. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Kityo, you are going to stop men from drinking milk.

CAPT. BABU: I would like to thank the honourable member for making this clearer. I was not talking about the processed milk but actually the unprocessed milk, which is being sold in different parts of this town. A lot of our people do not process this milk and some of them drink it straight from those pots I am talking about. I am sorry; I brought in the milk moving from the plant. I think it is the same ministry and what we need is to protect this country from our neighbours. My worry is that at our border points there are no laws; you do not find agricultural officers there, you do not find them at the airport and people can come in and out. 

Recently, Madam Speaker, you heard that there was monkey meat in this town. Now where did it come from? Is it within the country or is it coming from outside the country? This is the kind of thing that we need the ministry and the Government to try and plot and see where these things are coming from so that we can protect the people and even protect ourselves from this kind of thing. I am not saying that it came from the neighbouring country but I am saying during the investigations they could try and find out if there is a connection with our neighbouring countries. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Madam Speaker, may I once again really thank this House sincerely for raising this matter and for asking these very useful questions. 

When I got a telephone call this morning to come and answer this question, in our top management meeting we were discussing what is it that we can do to make sure that the policy, the law and the regulation on bio-technology get to this House. What happened at that time when the Ugandan National Council of Science and Technology was formed, unfortunately there was no Minister for Science and Technology. So, the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology was placed under the Ministry of Planning. 

Subsequently, the Ministry of Planning merged with the Ministry of Finance and you know there they handle privatisation, taxation. These laws may not be a priority to them and yet unless you put these laws and policies in place then we may be in a lot of problems because we may not be able to increase our productivity and this country could be in a lot of probleMs 

The other thing we were discussing this morning is what we call fatal sanitary measures because we are expecting – do not be surprised if the Bird Flu gets here. When you read the international media it says it is spreading from Eastern Asia worldwide. It may kill between 50 million to 150 million people. So, I think Bush the other day called his pharmaceutical companies to order them to ensure there is enough treatment and also enough vaccines, but everybody argues it will not be possible; it may be too late. Should the Bird Flu mutate and become an agent that can get that virus into humans, we may be in a lot of trouble. So this morning those are the two issues we were discussing when we got this call to come here.  

There are things, which you can prevent. We wish we were able to prevent HIV from entering Uganda from Tanzania but because our borders are porous and things are mating freely all over the place, the birds, humans and plants are mating freely across borders and it may not always be possible to prevent these cross-border entries, which is very unfortunate. But on the other hand if you come through Malaba or through Luzira or any of the authorised boarders, you cannot bring in anything strange. I know particularly ministers and politicians always use their offices to smuggle in things but if we catch you –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think that is a very serious allegation.

DR SEBUNYA: I beg your pardon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which VIPs smuggle things using their offices?

DR SEBUNYA: Actually, may I confess at one time I wanted to detect whether this was possible and I smuggled in a bird from Zambia and I arrested the quarantine officer at Entebbe and we took disciplinary measures against the person. I smuggled but I was so sophisticated, I simply wanted to prove that this can be done and I smuggled in a bird - enkwale. 

Yes, I travelled with it all the way from Zambia, through Zimbabwe, then travelled on the aeroplane when it was making noise even on the aeroplane, and I came to the aeroplane when it was making noise. Madam Speaker, I have got proof that it is possible –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister, if you said it is possible for VIPs to misuse their office that is different from saying that ministers use their offices to smuggle. You say it is possible and that is acceptable.

DR EPETAIT: Now that the minister has confessed, can he, therefore, accept that we institute some action on him –(Interjection)- rule 118?

MS ALASO: We would like to know where the bird ended because the minister could be telling us he was just checking those people when he actually meant to have that bird in his home. So, where did the bird go?

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, to make the story short –(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister on this issue, but first and foremost some of us who are ministers and VIPs would like to be cleared of this. I have taken many years to build my reputation and I find it very difficult for somebody to come to this Parliament and wipe it out with one sentence. I have flown airplanes, I have lived in different countries and I cannot break laws of smuggling. I disagree with it, it is against my principle and, therefore, I would like the honourable minister also to be very fair that what he did to his employee was wrong. You are not supposed to tempt employees by actually stage-managing a smuggling exercise just to arrest them; it is not right.  

It is totally unfair and I think the honourable minister also broke an aviation law. You are not supposed to carry a live animal into a passenger plane because you can spread disease. You are supposed to declare it and it is supposed to be caged and carried in a cargo hold. Therefore, right from the word go up to now the minister was wrong through and through and I think he should withdraw his statement and be very careful not to say it in the public because he could be arrested. He broke every rule in the cargo convention of aviation. Thank you, very much.

MR PAJOBO: I thank the minister for being frank that he managed to punish a worker for his own mistake. Where is that worker, was he sacked, and if he is sacked, is there a way for us to see that this worker is reinstated with immediate effect; because it is the minister who tempted him to do that mistake? You cannot withdraw a statement when somebody has lost his job.

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I did indicate at the beginning of this speech that many times when I have got time I join my colleagues in those labs and the field in these kinds of investigations. We had received persistent reports that things are being smuggled in and out of the country without following the necessary procedure. So I said, “Why do I not use my science to find out whether I can actually do it and I escape?” I must confess that I used an elaborate scientific method to prove that hypothesis and eventually arrived in Entebbe. I went through and after I ordered for the Quarantine officer to be arrested because I had the evidence.  

We took disciplinary action against the officer and the bird was incinerated, but I had proved the point that there are some heavy people, I do not know which word to use, whether I should call them VIPs or whatever, but there are some heavy people who can actually use their offices to engage in such unlawful transactions. 

As you know, Madam Speaker, when we get to Entebbe nobody checks my luggage. When you arrive, you go to the VIP lounge, they pick up your luggage, you get your luggage and you drive to Kampala and most of these Members of Parliament do the same. But if what I said has hurt anybody, I withdraw it in that context. Otherwise, that is the experiment I did and I succeeded in proving that it is possible to smuggle in live organisms and therefore diseases even through the authorized entry points. I am very happy that my answer has been that satisfying. (Laughter)

MR KITYO: Madam Speaker, I am a frequent traveller, inside and outside this country and I use the VIP lounge. The statement from the honourable minister is putting guilt on me that I am one of those who smuggle and my luggage may be suspected and subjected to unnecessary search. This House has asked the minister to apologize and withdraw the insinuation that VIPs are smugglers but he has not withdrawn it. So, is he in order to continue addressing this House when he has actually refused to withdraw the statement, which is unpalatable to this august House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know that the statement you made is injurious to very many people in this country. They could be professors at the university, judges, and many others. So if you have no proof that a particular VIP smuggled a bird, a dog or a donkey into this country, please withdraw the statement. I know that you did it for an experiment, but I do not know what you did with the results. So you withdraw that statement, which says that VIPs smuggle things into this country, because you have not given us any proof. Which VIP, apart from you has smuggled?

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I want to apologize for my experiment, which I carried out using my qualifications as a scientist, Member of Parliament and minister. If my approach to that experiment has really hurt anybody, I withdraw the statement. May I thank Dr Esele; I did indicate –(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Madam Speaker, I wanted the honourable minister to tell me what happened to the worker whom he punished? I wanted to know what happened to that worker!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The worker who was arrested after your scientific experiment, the Workers’ Representative wants to know what happened to that worker.

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, disciplinary action as appropriate in my ministry.

MR PAJOBO: I am not satisfied with the minister’s explanation at all, because I want to know what kind of disciplinary action he took. That maybe dismissal, jail or whatever; I want to know. That is my concern.

MRS KULANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to know from the minister, since he carried out his experiment, has it in anyway curbed smuggling or have we had any evidence that there is smuggling through the VIP lounge after your wonderful scientific experiment?

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, we are aware that VIPs are really accorded the respect of a VIP and it is unfortunate that a VIP could engage in such a clandestine experiment. To me that worker accorded the minister the respect that a VIP deserved and at the end of the day he was backstabbed. How sure are we that the minister was not simply witch hunting that particular worker for whatever reasons? We want to get more information about this worker; after all, we now know who the smuggler or experimenter was who was breaching the physio-sanitary rules by doing a clandestine experiment. Now we are also interested in knowing who that worker was.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish the honourable minister withdrew that statement because there is a lot of friction in that story. He has not explained to us how he carried the bird; there are so many checkpoints before you enter the airplane. 

First of all, he told us that he was with it in the cabin and hon. Babu has informed us that there is no way you can violate laws and bring a live animal into the cabin. So how did he come up with that bird through the VIP, if it was not in a cage? Unless he came in a cage himself, for how else did he come with that bird without it was being detected by anyone? I think there is a lot of fiction in this story and I would wish to request the honourable minister to withdraw the whole story so that we can move on more seriously.

MR MIKE SEBALU: I am looking at the dignity of the office of the Minister in the Republic of Uganda, caught with that bird in Zimbabwe; because he said he passed through all those places. Don’t you think that would bring disrepute, diplomatically at that level? Because even when you are doing experiments, you need to look at the repercussions and the status. Supposing you were not successful enough to get to Entebbe with the bird and you are caught in Zimbabwe en route? Would you really tell them that you were trying to make a scientific experiment for Uganda, on how some of these things can be brought in? I think the minister should be cautious in future not to try out some of these things because they can bring disrepute to the image of the country.

DR SEBUNYA: Hon. Kagonyera will agree with me that when we are carrying out experiments we use something called a scientific method. You either read about something or observe it physically and wonder, and then you come up with some guesswork. The guesswork is what we call a hypothesis. 

Next, you design your experiment and then gather your materials, which you are going to use and define the procedures. In my case the material was the staff. The second thing I was going to use was something I was going to import. The third thing was the mode of transport, which I was going to use. The other one was the container and how I would design my container. 

I was very meticulous, Madam Speaker, just to be able to prove that this thing is possible, because we got into a lot of probleMs One of the members of sciences visited South America and collected a cassava cutting and went with it through Entebbe and planted it in Katalemwa. It so happened that one cutting, which he planted in Katalemwa had cassava mite and between 1972 until recently, actually about 1994, we have been fighting the cassava mite. 

So, to us in the research division, it is extremely important that should anybody neglect their work at the entry points, there should be very seriously consequences. So in defence that is why I took this risk in protection of my country. I could not allow this. Now there is Bird Flu coming. Supposing somebody smuggles in a bird from South East Asia? 

Madam Speaker, in science we do not disclose our sources. I will not disclose the server I dealt with. Its bad enough that I disclosed the mode of transport I used, so if I tell even the container and how I designed it, it would be unethical in my profession, but may I nevertheless say that it is a risk that I took in defence of my country and I think it was worth it and if we do not become very vigilant in these coming days of the Bird Flu, then –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable minister, you are taking us for a ride. You said that you did an experiment but I do not know whether you did it five years ago or much longer ago, because you have been in that ministry for sometime. So what did you do with the result of that research? Is our airport still porous or have people stopped smuggling; what have you done with that research? 

DR SEBUNYA: Madam, we eventually apprehended the culprit on duty. We took the necessary disciplinary action in the ministry and incinerated the bird. Having given that very elaborate scientific explanation, if there is anybody else who still feels hurt, I withdraw.

CAPT. BABU: Madam Speaker, we are not hurt; what we are trying to do here is to find a better way of working with each other. First of all, it was the VIPs who were on the table and that is something that makes some of us stand up.

Secondly, the experiment is very good and I would like to thank the honourable minister for doing it, but there were better methods of doing it. There are people who are trained in this work. At the airport, we have what we call AVISEC, which is the Aviation security. In some countries they have agricultural officers at the airport, and vet officers. Therefore, the next question would be, would the presence of these people be felt at Entebbe Airport and probably our entire border posts?

The other question would be, if you want to find out whether these areas are porous like Entebbe Airport, Malaba and all that, what would be the best method to do it, to work with the people who work around there so that they can carry out the experiment or should it be the Minister of Agriculture to do this? I think these are the questions that everybody is asking.  

All we are saying is that what you wanted to do is very noble but I think there are better ways of doing it without putting himself in such a situation. As the honourable member said, being caught in Nairobi Airport with a bird, which is not allowed or in some other airport, can cause a big problem. So what we are saying is that what he did is probably good but it can be done better by experts who are trained in that job, to make sure that there is no smuggling of such things in our country. Thank you very much.

MR PAJOBO: Madam, I am worried. I wanted the minister to tell me what action he took against the worker; is that worker dead or was he just sacked? What happened? What disciplinary action did he take or else I am serious - he is tempting me to move a motion, which may not be good. What happened? Did he kill the worker, what action was taken?

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, we never killed the person. We took the appropriate measures that we have in the ministry. May I apologize also for mixing up my two roles? That day I had travelled as a scientist. It only so happened that I was also a minister and I was doing this experiment in my capacity as a scientist, but may I repeat my apology just in case my elaborate scientific explanation has not been noted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, do not put conditions on the apology. We are not worried about the experiment. We are worried about you saying that the VIPs smuggle through the airport. That is what we are interested in. Get that out of the way and continue with your experiments.

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I withdraw the statement for the record.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also believe that at least in social research, which I have been doing, there are some ethics that must be followed and we would like to encourage all researchers whatever they are researching about to be very ethical and not to use people as guinea pigs unless if you really want to have a guinea pig for trying out your theory. Because the discomfort for my colleague the Workers’ MP is that this worker who was finally disciplined my not have in his own right been this person you could compromise but he could have seen a minister, let alone a Minister of Agriculture, carrying a bird and he thought he was bringing a bird to improve on our bird varieties in the country and then he decided to help the minister. But I think we want to be very ethical and very careful so that we do not use our people as guinea pigs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

DR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, may I think Madam Alaso Alice. Madam Alaso Alice wondered whether we could take a precautionary measure with ekisanja. The information I gave was that we are carrying out experiments in the lab now, we said live plant parts carrying the bacteria such as stems, leaves and fruits. That is what we said and we are saying the measures we are taking are to ensure that those things are not either transported all over the place, or when we discovered the disease in Kayunga we actually quarantined off Kayunga. We put Askaris and one was not allowed to enter in or out of Kayunga District and the rest of Mukono with any –(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: The place, which was quarantined off, is not in Kayunga, it is in Mukono. It is in my constituency Nakifuma and the sub-county is called Ntunda. The access is through Kayunga but it is in Mukono.

DR SEBUNYA: Because of the gravity of the matter I was always on site everyday myself and I know the geography, I should have brought the map, Ntunda, Najembe, Kayunga, I know the map very well, I know exactly what I am talking about and hon. Nansubuga knows what I am talking about. What I am saying is that we quarantined off those affected areas. We placed guards, we placed Askaris, and we paid out a lot of money to ensure nothing gets out but still these things got out unfortunately because our borders, you branch off one path, the guy goes through the other way on to Jinja, and it is so difficult.

One time we contemplated ordering people to stop eating matooke for a while so that the movement of matooke is stopped for a while until we sort out this problem and these ndagalas and all these things but then you think about something and say, “No, let us handle this as we progress with solutions.”

Kisanja; we did indicate hon. Alaso Alice that we are now carrying out experiments in the lab and we shall have the answers very soon because we know the election period is just around the corner and I have seen people keeping a lot of sanja, which they want to deliver to Kampala I think on lorries and lorries so that they can either tie them up around themselves here or upside down, but we shall have the results very soon and we certainly will give you an answer.  

Madam Speaker, I promised that I am going to order my sons to release some temporary results but in the meantime I appreciated the explanation by Dr John Esele about the life cycle of a bacteria, a fungus, a virus, those are the kind of things we are trying to compare but I thank the hon. Alaso Alice, given her fears for pointing that out, and I thank you very much Dr John Esele.

Then No. 5, honourable member we are definitely aware that we keep plotting everyday, in fact there is a very rough map, which I brought here but we keep plotting everyday as and when we receive information village by village. We plot and put that on our computer to see exactly how this disease is crawling around and we have got a very good database on this.  

Hon. Wandera Martin left but he was wondering about how really our interventions get to the peasant. This Parliament sometimes you stay here and somebody says this is so, when I came I thought I would summarize this paper so that we can save time. I saw the thing as a long one and in fact I am surprised I have been given all this time but I have a whole half page of the achievements we have made, I have a whole half page of the strategy for the control of this disease, and achievements. I have got a whole half page on the control methods, I have got half page on the results we are getting, I have got a half page on the challenges, I have got a half page on the way forward.  

I kind of thought if I come to this Parliament and begin to read these things verbatim when I circulated this paper last week I would be unfair to the hon. Members of Parliament really –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think I have been very fair to you I did not allow anybody to attack you for not submitting the answer in advance. Usually you are supposed to hand it over to the person asking so that they do not ask you unnecessary questions but maybe you will reproduce it and the members benefit from your knowledge.

DR SEBUNYA: I will reproduce another set –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the House?

DR SEBUNYA: I will do that; I thank you and make sure everybody gets it in the pigeonhole.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker will ensure that everybody gets it.

DR SEBUNYA: Hon. Mike Sebalu, Kony has been here for 20 years, I was listening to the President the other day talking about revolutionaries who do not panic otherwise you may lose direction. May I inform you that this coffee wilt material that we are going to release - and we shall have a big party – was made in two countries? I made some crosses in Uganda crossing Robusta and Arabic coffee were crossed in Uganda and in Papua, New Guinea. This is a very complicated thing because naturally getting progenies works better than crossing. We then exchanged information. In 1972 we combined our material with what we got from Papua, New Guinea. 

Our thing has been on schedule for the last 20 years. Thank God we now have use for it for we are discussing it with biotechnology. I should have told you this because we can go ahead with our research in the laboratory. However, we cannot release the material to be used in the field for commercial purposes until enabling laws are in place. There are only five laws including the NARO Law and the Uganda National Council Law, which allow us to continue with our work in the laboratory. 

Should we succeed even in 20 years’ time, when the Minister of Finance brings these laws here we will have our thing on the shelves. That is exactly what happens with all scientific discoveries. You discover it and wait for the laws, no matter how long it takes. My only prayer is that in the next reshuffle the President remembers to appoint a Minister of Science and Technology so that we can sort out this problem.

MR MUGAMBE: The minister should clarify which particular law is keeping the work away from us. Is it bio-safety, bio-technology or the patent law? We should urge government to bring those laws, if they will help us get the research results.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he told us which laws are missing. Dr Esele also supplemented where the problems are, before you arrived.

DR SEBUNYA: As I was saying, there is a draft policy, there is a draft law and some draft regulations. However, all these go through a procedure before they can get here. I do not want to blame my colleagues on the other side, but they have not got here. If we had been the ones handling the instrument, we would have brought them here a long time ago. As you may know, Uganda National Council of Science and Technology caters for health, environment, industry and agriculture. However, the most aggrieved party in this matter is agriculture. The truth is that we have the laboratory infrastructure and the brains. We have also trained many who can get on with the work. 

We have decided to utilise the support of the committee of Parliament. We will declare that we are starting and present the safeguards to be taken in our own laboratories. We shall use all sorts of bio-technological techniques including tissue culture, chromosome transfer and transgenic transfer.

Madam Speaker, may I say that in this document we have elaborately illustrated what we have done on radio, TV and barazas - they call them barazas. We have used all methods and there is data on this paper. I thank you very much because one of the most important things in this matter is awareness.

Hon. Sebalu, you know we had a problem. We used to have a general extension staff at districts. Government made a policy to ensure that the staff is very far from the people at the districts. We then came here and requested that we post graduates at sub-counties. We gave them motorcycles, fuel and allowances. However, even now, none of us sees them. Therefore, we came here again and argued a case for NAADS. We asked, “NAADS, why don’t you organise these farmers at various levels, so that you empower them to hire service providers, hire and fire?” We think they are doing very well because the farmers’ groups can now hire extension workers, NGOs or anybody competent with our approval. I am sure if such individuals do not perform, they are fired.  

We have covered about 29 districts now. I think we are soon making 39. I thank Parliament, particularly our committee, which insisted that we needed more money in NAADS. Our research budget is slightly better this year and we are very happy. Madam Speaker, may I apologise for my rough face. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Minister, for responding to our questions. Honourable members, thank you for the work you have done today. I do not think we should start new business at this time of the day. Therefore, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11 October 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

  

