
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 20 October 2021

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, the week is running quickly. So, today, we will go straight into business. We will start with Item No.3. The Minister of Works and Transport who is here requested to deal with some points of clarification and issues that arose from the discussion on that motion. We will then proceed with the rest of the discussion. 

We may not be able to handle some of the items on the Order Paper today because we have three debates, which might take us quite some time. 

Honourable members, there are Members who came to me with urgent matters to raise. This would be a proper time for them to do that. I have the Member for Buhweju West County, Member for Butemba County and Member for Ora County. Can we start with the Member for Buhweju County West? If he is not here, can we go to the Member for Butemba County? 

2.18
MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter regarding the people of Kigando Subcounty, in Mbogobiri Parish in my constituency who suffered destructive hailstorm on 5 October 2021. 

Four villages were affected and they are: Mbogobiri, Kamate, Galilaya and Kasambya. Hectares of crops were ravaged and structures put down. Among the structures that were put down include six houses, two churches and a school. This was an insult added to an injury because this particular area has been grappling with land grabbing, characterised by a slow economic activity. The little they had is also gone now. 

I pray that the Ministry for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees intervenes to assess the situation and accordingly, come to the rescue of my constituency with food, seeds and any other remedies that they may deem necessary from their assessment. Otherwise, the magnitude of destruction experienced is worrying and it is likely to trigger food shortage and affect livelihood. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. This is something for the Prime Minister. 

2.20
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, we sympathise with the families that were involved in those problems. We know it is not easy to be facing such problems; one after another. This afternoon, however, Brig. Oluka has just left for that place to assess the situation. He will come back and we will see how to handle the matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Ora County -

2.21 
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national concern in relation to the list of roads that were on the headline of the New Vision on Monday, 18 October 2021, where a very important road covering the districts of Pakwach, Nebbi, Zombo and Arua was left out after we had struggled to get it on the list of roads to be tarmacked since 1996. 

It was pledged to be tarmacked in 1996, 2001, 2006, 2011, 2016 and 2021. Our only hope is that – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we deal with the urgent aspect? 

MR BIYIKA: The urgent aspect is that the road was left out of the list of the roads to be tarmacked. My prayer is that – 

THE SPEAKER: What is the condition of the road? 

MR BIYIKA: The road is in bad shape and yet, it passes through the food basket of West Nile and northern Uganda. During the rainy season, it is impassable. In fact, in the recent attack, which took place in Zombo, it was even difficult for the UPDF to send reinforcements to contain the attackers. 

Mr Speaker, this road is in bad shape. Yet, the road sector affects all sectors of the economy. My prayer, therefore, is that the road from Nebbi-Paidha-Zombo-Zeu-Vurra, which is 120 kilometres, be included on the list of the roads to be tarmacked in line with the pledge, which was made since 1996. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before the honourable minister responds, I have travelled on this road and it is very bad. I think the honourable member has been very polite in presenting it. A woman got stuck on foot. The Boda Boda that was sent to rescue her also got stuck. This is how bad that road is. Yet, it is one of the major roads that is the business traction line from the DRC and everywhere. So, when it rains, there is no movement for three days. Honourable minister, that is how bad that road is. Hon. Biyika, you might want to talk to it a little more.

MR BIYIKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. This road is at the border with DRC. It is both a security and economic road. Of course, there are other roads like the one from Panyimur- Parombo-Erusi-Goli. Those are very important security and economic roads. 

GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: For now, my prayer is that the road from Nebbi-Goli-Paida-Zombo-Zeu-Vurra be included on the list of roads for tarmacking because it was pledged and we have talked and written about it since 1996. Mr Speaker, Yesterday, you guided that we do not give Generals points of orders and I also benefit from that –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, please, you do not give point of orders to a General –(Laughter)- because it is not in the rules; it is part of those rules that the Speaker has allowed to extend.

2.25
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concern of the honourable Member of Parliament from Arua. The roads, which appeared in the New Vision and which also appear in our paper are those which are under the NDP III for which we are getting funds directly from the Ministry of Finance.

We have some other programmes, and this particular road was identified among the roads, which the World Bank is going to finance under a programme called IDA. Among those roads is the Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road that is going to be financed under IDA; it also does not appear here.

Therefore, because this road also connects with the refugees who have been coming in from Congo, we identified it under the IDA 19. Therefore, it is in programme for it to be addressed under that funding. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.27
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Yesterday afternoon, the 19th of October, there were heavy rains with hailstorms in Buhweju West, especially in the subcounties of Burere and Rubengye.

Unfortunately a woman called Molly Mwolozi was killed by the landslides. Her body disappeared and it was recovered today at 10 o’clock. The landslide swept her with their family tea garden and a number of goats and pigs were also killed.

Mr Speaker, on the same day and time, in Rubengye Subcounty, Kyamatoojo Primary School had its two classroom blocks blown down; they are all damaged. 

Over the past two weeks, the subcounties of Rubengye, Burere, Kyahenda and Engaaju have had all their roads washed down.

My prayers are that the Government quickly goes to Buhweju to assess the extent of damage that occurred to the people.

Secondly, I request Government, after assessing the extent of damage, to provide commiserate relief in terms of condolences, building materials and road repairs.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I ask the Government to enlist Buhweju District among the disaster-prone districts so that it remains on the red flag of the Government of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.29
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We understand what is happening in Buhwezu. As I said before, there is a team that has gone to Buhweju to assess the extent of the damage that has been caused. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we go to the Order Paper now?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF ROADS IN THE COUNTRY

(Debate continues_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under our rules, this debate will take exactly one hour. The Cabinet minister and the State Minister who presented the statement are both here. Therefore, debate starts now. Can we agree on the time so we can share it well, because I see many people would like to contribute? What time do we agree on? Two minutes each? Okay, two minutes each.

2.31
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start with the road in Zombo District, which the minister has talked about. He clearly stated that that road is together with the Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road.

However, I would like him to know that the Koboko-Yumbe-Moyo Road is on that list. And that tells me that there is something else about the Zombo Road. Therefore, he may need to clarify later.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we know as a country that at some point, we emphasized that all roads that lead to international borders should be tarmacked. We know for sure that again the road from Nebbi to Goli, which is a very heavy road, in terms of usage and very important because of the trade with Congo from West Nile, is one of the most important roads.

That road has also been talked about for many years and nobody has bothered. We thought that on this list for NDP III, that road would feature but it is now clear that it is not there, and we are not happy about it.

We know for sure that from Panyimuru via Pakwach, Obongi up to Moyo, there is a border point also there. We know that that road is classified as a tourism road and it is very important. It also goes to the border with Sudan yet we also do not see it here.

Mr Speaker, you know what also bothers us most is that our own son is the Board Chairperson for UNRA. We think that when such roads in our region are missed out, is a sign that he is being disrespected yet this is somebody who has provided distinguished services to this country including in this House. Therefore, there should be something not fine. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, in the Nebbi subregion, which comprises Pakwach, Nebbi and Zombo –(Member timed out.)

2.34
MR FRANCIS TWINOMUJUNI (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the minister for yesterday’s presentation. However, I am a bit worried. There is a road in my constituency called Kabwoya-Kituti Road. People were compensated two years ago but up to now, we haven’t seen any sign of any contractor reporting on the site.

May I, therefore, get clarification from you on whether my road was scrapped off from the list or should I continue hoping that the road will be worked on?

Secondly, I am happy that you promised the country that the new districts will get road equipment - and I come from a new district called Kikuube. You have been promising us for a very long time. Can you assure me and the House today that in such and such a period, this equipment will be reaching the country and be given to certain districts? This is because we have waited for long. Roads in these new districts are not good. For your information, a district like Kikuube is an oil district.

May I, therefore, get your answer, honourable minister? Thank you. 

2.36
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the presentation he made yesterday regarding the status of roads in Uganda. The people of Otuke voted overwhelmingly for the President in the last elections. And that was done on the premise that for the first time since creation, they would have a tarmac road that passes through their district and enable them to promote economic development.

Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister of Works and Transport about the status of Lira-Aloi-Otuke-Abim-Kotido Road - the 187 kilometres, which was in the manifesto of the President. When will it be done?

Secondly, about the Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Acholibur Road, I am happy that the construction work has started. As Lango Parliamentary Group, we have engaged the Uganda National Roads Authority team and the Ministry of Works and Transport as well. Unfortunately, it has now taken a year. The road between Rwekunye and Apac is 91 kilometres. It is a year now but they have done only seven kilometres; just cleaning the road. The contract has been signed for three years and we wonder when –(Member timed out.)

2.38
MS AGNES ACIBU (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add to what hon. Ongiertho has said. When we rise and air our concerns about the roads, I think most of the areas are affected in the country. 
We are aware that some of the roads are worked on by UNRA and others by the district and subcounties. Aware of the fact that COVID-19 has done a lot of harm on our economy, we are facing a lot of challenges.

As members of the roads committee at the districts, we find that some of the districts are crying out that UNRA takes over part of the roads. I have two roads in my district; Nebbi to Nyaravur and Kucwiny to Wadarai, connecting the district of Nebbi to Pakwach District. Right now, the condition of the road is pathetic. 

We are all aware that as we were campaigning, the promises were about roads. For all these years, the people of my district have been waiting to see that the promises that have been made are worked upon.

It is my prayer that this time the ministry is going to act on that. I submit.

2.40
MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people of Bulamogi in Kaliro are not happy with the disservice that Government is giving them.

There is a very important bridge called Saka, which has so far claimed lives of over 50 people. Just on Monday, three people drowned in the river where the bridge was washed away. This is a strategic bridge that links Kaliro to Pallisa and goes up to Teso.

When we looked at the list that came out, this bridge was not there, yet recently, Government had pledged to work on it under emergency plans. Therefore, I ask the minister to clarify when work is to begin on that bridge. 

Lastly, the President has since 1996 been pledging for the road from Buwenge-Kaliro-Pallisa to be tarmacked. When we looked at the list, it is also not indicated. Honourable minister, when are we getting our tarmac after Kaliro voted - among the best three districts in Busoga - for the National Resistance Movement? I beg to submit.

2.42
MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA-SSOLO (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard the minister’s report but we have a golden road in Greater Masaka, which unites Masaka City, Lwengo, Bukomansimbi via Misanvu, Buyoga, Kyabiri to Ssembabule up to Lyantonde. 

Last year, the Minister of Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba Wamala, wrote a letter to the LCV chairmen of the subregion, assuring us that this financial year the road would be there - Kyabakuza-Matete Road. Up to now, we have not seen anything like that.

Therefore, we are requesting the Minister of Works and Transport to tell us; what did that road or the people of Bukomansimbi do to you? That is the only thing we have, brothers and sisters. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

2.43
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I was here yesterday and listened very attentively to my good friend, the honourable minister. He classified roads when he was giving the status in his report; class “A” roads, class “B” roads, in that order.

I represent a district whose roads are classified as “A”. The Jinja-Bugiri road connects to Malaba and Busia borders. You said that those roads have been paved. I would like to state that the statement you made yesterday is factually incorrect. I would like you to take a tour of that road and you will be able to ascertain that whoever is giving you information that the Jinja-Bugiri-Busia-Tororo Highway is completely paved is not correct. 

Since you stated that the roads that connect the country to the borders are very critical, find time and work on them. We are disadvantaged in the sense that cargo coming in from Kenya – the heavy trucks use those roads. Therefore, when you are working on them, I think they require more attention than other roads you classify as grade B or grade C. I would like to invite you to take another tour of Bugiri – Busia – Malaba Road and ascertain the situation. 

Yesterday, in your report, you complained of the flooding and how it has affected the roads. This is a problem of –(Member timed out.) 

2.46
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. Honourable minister, in the report, you mentioned that due to limited resources, the Government cannot take on every road that you have identified under NDP III. 

You also mentioned that the ministry did an assessment and discovered that over 8,000 district roads needed to be upgraded but you have picked only 3,000 roads. You have also identified the roads that spur development and classified them as “oil roads.” 

There are some roads that traditionally started when Uganda begun. For example, we have the Gulu – Moroto Road, which is an old road. We would have expected it to appear amongst those roads to be upgraded to paved roads.

You also stated that the road that links Malaba to Elegu – in between there, we have the road from Aboke – Ngai – Otuboi, which is the linkage to the Northern Crate Corridor Road. 

While we pay attention to some of the critical roads, we should also know that the reason affirmative action was put was to balance development across the country. There are certain areas that may not be for tourism and oil but people stay there and equally require the –(Member timed out.) 

2.48
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. 

Honourable minister, there is a road from Zirobwe to Kikyusa Town Council up to Bamugoloode - Kazwama up to Nakasongola Town Council. It is 120 kilometres. I am happy that we moved on that road together with hon. Musa Ecweru, the Minister of State for Works and Transport. He saw the state of that road, which has been a Presidential pledge since 2011. When a delegation from Nakasongola visited His Excellency the President, in April 2011, he pledged to tarmac it. 

When we held Heroes’ Day Celebrations in Zirobwe in 2017, the President again made a pledge. When we went to Kawumu, the President still made a pledge towards that same road in 2020. My humble prayer is that you, please, consider that road for tarmac, because it is an inter-district connectivity road.

The second issue is on the Gulu Highway Road, which you use, Mr Speaker. There is a place called Kyankonwa, which is a terrible area. Two accidents happened there recently and I shared that with you, Mr Speaker; three people died in that place. I always call it a black spot. The two were Indians and one is a resident of Katugo. 

A similar accident also happened and claimed the lives of the wife of the former Nakasongola District Chairman, Mrs Rose Bagonza and another lady called Mrs Margaret Odong. 

My humble prayers are: 

    1. Let the Gulu Highway Road be widened. 
    2. Some humps should also be put in those other areas.

I beg to submit. Thank you. 

2.50 
MS TEDDY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the deteriorating state of rural community access roads under the local government due to increasing rainfall. 

The report tried to highlight efforts of routine maintenance but the budget on which they operate is shrinking due to the coiled local revenue base. The roads are crucial and they connect a farmer to a buyer. If we continue ignoring them, even the highways we are investing in will remain less important to the common man. 
I pray that the ministry conducts a national wide re-assessment of all community roads and their funding to ascertain the bottlenecks hindering the local government from maintaining them. 

The minister also talked about road units in each district but I do not know whether the other components like excavators and low beds were forgotten or the funds were not enough. 

Mr Speaker, many roads under the local government are surrounded by swamps and are currently impassable. In Mpigi, we have Bunjanko - Golo Road, which connects to highways. The technical persons here will concur with me; almost all works on roads with such challenges require excavators. (Member timed out.) 

2.52
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister and his ministry for the work they are doing for this country in as far as the road sector is concerned, especially in this rainy season. 

I have a road in Kagadi called Muhoro - Ndaiga Road, which is 42 kilometres and it was supposed to be worked on in 2010. It has always been a promise; a pledge from the President in every State-of-the-Nation-Address. 

This road is in a deplorable state. There are no means of transport that can be used on that road. I almost got an accident – it was breaking news at the time. Mr Speaker, your office also called me to find out if I was alive. 

It is very unfortunate to see that this road is not included in the priority roads of this country. What did the people of Kagadi do to this nation? I do not understand why we keep getting raw deals in as far as the pledges are concerned. 

Muhoro – Ndaiga Road is not only strategically located but it also connects to districts through Lake Albert via Ntoroko and DRC, where we have committed to invest a lot of billions of Uganda shillings in infrastructure. 

My prayer is for –(Member timed out.) 

2.54
MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogoola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the yesterday’s presentation, the minister talked about the high maintenance costs on equipment and only said that they are yet to buy equipment for the 10 new districts.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform you that even the equipment that were bought for the old districts have already broken down because they bought light machines; Chinese graders. Therefore, the ministry should take note of this as it makes a comprehensive assessment of all the districts. 

Secondly, you talked about maintenance expenditure being low. We have realised that most of the newly constructed roads have potholes. If you pass Lwera on Masaka Road, you cannot tell that it is just a two-year-old road. We implore the Ministry of Works and Transport to have a proper maintenance plan as we build new roads. 

Mr Speaker, Ssembabule as a district has been left out regarding roads. As far as connectivity is concerned, Ssembabule does not have access to Masaka or Lwengo; it is totally cut off. The minister wrote to us two years back and promised to have the Ssembabule-Mbirizi Road and Kyabakuza-Matete Road done as well as tarmacking Matete as a town council but up to now, nothing has been done.

Honourable minister, I request that you visit Ssembabule again and see where you left us. We are badly off and everything is down especially agriculture because of poor connectivity and lack of roads in that district. Thank you.

2.56
MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a couple of issues to raise. Honourable minister, regarding the roads that we are making, I wonder whether we still have laws regarding axle limits. As we speak, the destruction on our roads has continued and increased. It is even worse for the local roads. In Sheema and Rwampara, bridges are almost falling in because of heavy trucks that carry sand. We have reported this matter but nothing has been done. We need bylaws that can protect local roads where UNRA is not present.

The second issue is about local content. You mentioned that 38 per cent of the contracts were awarded to local contractors. This is not satisfactory. We are looking for revenue and the more money that stays in this economy, the better for us.

Honourable minister 38 per cent needs to improve up to at least 50 per cent. The contracts that go to foreign companies need to reduce and we need to see that we abide by the Local Content Bill; the Buy Uganda Build Uganda to make sure that our economy remains robust.

On the issue of road equipment, I represent a municipality where we are struggling. I know that some of the districts are smaller than municipalities; Sheema is one of the biggest municipalities. I would like the ministry to consider the big municipalities when you are looking at road equipment.

Finally, Mr Speaker, Entebbe Expressway was put up and we have a road toll bridge. How many years has it been there and it is not operational? (Member timed out.)
 
2.58
MR NULU BYAMUKAMA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a road that was surveyed in 2015 and people’s houses were marked X but up to now, the road is nowhere. This is Kabwohe-Nsika road in Buhweju. It has a spur to Bwizibwera, to Ruhoko in Ibanda, Kabujogera in Kitagwenda to Rwenzaza then it goes to Mahero up to Kyambura. This is a 208 kilometre road. 

In 2016, it was in the manifesto of the President but in 2021, it disappeared. Up to now, the road is nowhere to be traced. Can I ask the minister to tell this august House where the road went? (Laughter)

Secondly, people’s houses were marked and they cannot even go to the banks to get loans. This road covers six districts and it is a tourist road. Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter; can the honourable minister clearly tell this House what the six districts have done to this country?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is very serious because even the road has disappeared completely. You might have to track the road and find out where it is. (Laughter)

Honourable members, as you can see, this is now not a debate in the sense of a debate but it is just information to enrich the honourable minister’s statement because a debate would have dealt with policy and other related matters; why things are happening this way. 

However, now I see that each Member that rises is stating circumstances obtaining to a particular area of representation. I do not know how to handle it. I am going to be very unfair to Members; some raised issues while others have not and yet they all have to raise them. How do we deal with it? 

If you are all to raise - No, we have only 30 minutes to accommodate - Yes, it is one hour, honourable member. That has to accommodate the shadow minister and the response from the minister. 

Is it possible - I am just asking. If we are talking about specific roads, can we write them down because it is not going to be possible? Can we write them down and transmit to the minister? However, if it is a policy challenge, for example, an issue of supply of road equipment to districts or related matters of policy, we could actually have a debate. If you are talking about jam in Kampala or boda bodas then that would be a debate because this catalogue of issues from the Speaker’s side - I could have also raised my own because I also have similar situations.

However, can we have debate now? On the issues of the catalogue of challenges that we have, let us just put them in writing. Is that okay? Let us have a debate now on the key principles or what needs to be done.

3.03
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Kamwenge District, I am the Chairperson of the District Roads’ Committee. While I thank the minister for his presentation, I note with concern that he recognises that we have continuously received less money for maintaining the equipment that we received.

As an engineer, if you cannot maintain a machine then you forget about it. Right now, some of the machines have started failing because we are not able to maintain them. 

I would like to call upon the ministry to consider funding maintenance of this equipment. With our able engineers in the districts, if we are well-facilitated to maintain the equipment, we shall have them for many more years and this will reduce on the stress on the ministry.

Lastly, I want to remind the minister that there is an outstanding pledge to tarmac four kilometres of roads within Kamwenge Town Council. This is a presidential pledge; it was supposed to be done when they were working on Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road but because of limited funding that time, we were not be able to do that. 

Mr Speaker, the minister is here and can feel free to comment on the four-kilometre road in Kamwenge Town Council. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.05
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to state that the Government of Uganda is trying its best to tarmac roads. However, these roads are shortly damaged due to overload from trucks. The Government tarmacked Moroto, Napak and Nakapiripirit roads but they have been shortly damaged by the marble and limestone trucks in Moroto District.

I request the Government of Uganda to construct a weighbridge that would regulate the load on these trucks such that these roads are saved from damages. In addition, it would minimise the road accidents that are caused by overloads. It would further reduce the cost of repairing these roads more often. 

This is something that we have presented to the Ministry of Works and Transport, for a long time. It is high time the ministry took this into consideration and gave us a weighbridge. 

Concerning equipment, Mr Speaker, I think there are places that have been gazetted for certain districts to be taking their road equipment for repair. For example, for Moroto District, they take their equipment to Gulu, yet Gulu is very far. My view is that the ministry decentralises, maybe, to the subregional level and they get service providers that can do those repairs such that they can be done shortly and the workshops can be accessed easily by the districts. I submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I have hon. Baba?

3.07
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the great work they are doing, constructing roads around the country. However, honourable minister, while you keep adding tarmac mileage throughout the country, a number of issues arise:

    1. The equitable distribution of these roads countrywide

Ugandans have a right to have a stake in the national cake in terms of roads. At the moment, they are lopsided. We, from the northern region, are just beginning to catch up when others started a long time ago. We would like to be part of this national cake, properly.

    2. The companies that construct these roads

Are you taking notice of who is performing well and who is underperforming? Most of the companies, which now construct the roads are Chinese. A Chinese can make paper shoes for you, which will last for two weeks, another one will make for you shoes, which will last for one month and another one will make for you very good leather shoes, which will last for quite some time. Are we assessing some of these companies for their performance? 

I would like to give you one example. The Arua-Nebbi Road was constructed by Solel Bonett International Holdings in the 1980s and that road has never been repaired. However, from Nebbi to Pakwach, there are potholes and you have to go around them. The road has been damaged in less than 10 years. Let us assess the performance of these companies so that we get good and credible –(Member timed out.) 

3.09
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation he made yesterday. However, as you present, honourable minister, I would wish to ask you to look at the issue of equity. For example, Lango subregion has not benefited for a number of reasons that you can best explain to us. Look at the Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga Road. When I look at your presentation, it is still under mobilisation. We have voted, as they have said and I do not know what more we can do.

Secondly, we have Corner Aboke-Iceme-Ngai-Bobi Road. This is part of the Great North Road, which has been pledged by the President three times and I do not see it even coming on the list of the roads under NDP III. When are you going to work on this road?

Finally, in Oyam District, for example, your ministry has never worked on the Central Government roads and they are all impassable. Therefore, as we talk about the issues of roads, I would like to really urge that you give us the district status. 

Regarding the issue of maintenance and road equipment, they were bought long ago and the longer they stay, the more the depreciation level. When are you going to have new equipment, first of all, starting with the districts, which have not got? For those districts which got, the machines are very old and most of them are worn out.

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.11
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I submit on the issue concerning the roads and the state they are in, in Kayunga District – I do not know whether this has already been said – allow me to welcome the rebirth and reappearance of Gen. Katumba Wamala to this House. (Applause) 

The honourable minister, who superintends over the ministry whose mandate we are discussing now, faced his assassins and of course, that incident claimed the lives of his daughter and driver. We are grateful to the Lord that we can see him today, coming back to the House and pledging to serve as a usual humble servant of God. (Applause)

We put you in God’s hands and pray that the emotional healing comes fast because that may not be very easy to come in the shortest period possible. However, we welcome you back and we continue to pray for you.

Mr Speaker, I just want to remind the minister that some time back, Kayunga faced a challenge of floods, which swept a very big chunk of land, including the roads that lead through those areas. Indeed, many areas are impassable because they have been cut off by these floods. The Prime Minister visited the scene recently and pledged that the Government would step in to build the bridges because that is what we now want. Reconstructing roads may not be possible –(Member timed out.)

3.13
MR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to start on a good note. Since 1986, we have some road works in Masaka City and we would like to appreciate the Government, Gen. Katumba and the entire team.

Secondly, I would like to remind him not to forget the three major roads that feed our economy in that city: Kyabakuza-Kiwagala-Kabale Road, which is 65 kilometres and Kyabakuza-Matete-Kaliro Road, which is 72 kilometres. Another very important road is Masaka-Nyendo-Villa, which leads to the Catholic Church, which is a very important part of our culture and tourism.

Secondly, we would like to know about the Mutukula-Masaka road. When are the works going to begin? Our people have seen the markings on the buildings and they think that the buildings are condemned. We want the stakeholders from the Ministry of Works and Transport to go and talk to our people to help them decide whether to go on with the development or not. 

On the road equipment, as Masaka City, we did not inherit any road equipment. Even if you give us the road fund, we cannot utilise it because we do not have any road equipment. 

Lastly, on the Kampala traffic, do we have a comprehensive plan to deal with the traffic in this city? You have to take hours to access the city. We are seeing some few flyovers coming up but we need a comprehensive plan from the Ministry of Works and Transport. How are we going to deal with the traffic jam?

3.15
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (NUP, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the Minister of Works and Transport about the lack of equipment in Mityana District and that it is the equipment for Mityana Municipality that are helping out other areas. When we get those equipment, we shall be able to work on most of the rural roads in Mityana. So, I hope you will be able to get the equipment for us. 

About the main roads, you are doing some work and I really thank you for that. About the equipment, please, provide them. If you do not, I believe my President, Kyagulanyi, when he comes into power, he will do that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we agreed that we can write down the specific concerns about roads. Let us discuss the policy behind this. Is it supportive?

3.17
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are two issues in this whole thing. One is the maintenance of the roads and the other is the construction of the new roads. 
I want to focus on the issue of the maintenance of the roads. The minister, while making the presentation yesterday, indicated that whereas they have road equipment given to a number of districts, the challenge remains with the maintenance of that equipment. He also added that they are constrained financially when it comes to maintaining the roads, especially when we have rains like we recently did and still do. 

We have the Road Fund Act. This Act is very specific. Section 21 of this Act specifically talks about its funding. It is very specific and it says, “All money collected from all the various sources, as mentioned in the Act, shall be remitted to the Road Fund monthly.”   

I want to inform this House that – I know I have said this before – currently, the Road Fund is given money as and when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – it is the finance ministry that decides what percentage to give them. This must end because the law is specific because it makes use of the word; “shall” and the remittance must be monthly. 

So, when you give them 30 per cent - until we deal with that problem, we shall continue lamenting here about –(Member timed out.)

3.19
MS HARRIET BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Turn on the microphone and proceed, honourable member. 

MS HARRIET BUSINGE: I was almost getting a muscle pull because of this down and up movement but I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I am sure you will do many more of those. 

MS HARRIET BUSINGE: I want to re-echo what other Members have said in thanking the minister for the report he gave us. Allow me to also draw the attention of this House and that of the minister to the low budget for the district roads, which I believe is a very big issue. 

The budget for the district roads is a mockery. If we want to improve the road network - because we believe that the district roads are what matter most to our people who vote for us. Take an example, Hoima District got Shs 50 million for the first quarter. On the 50 million, they had to run the office, maintain the equipment and do the actual road works. 

It happened that at that time, the wheel loader lacked four tyres and each tyre costs Shs 7 million. The grader required six tyres and each tyre costs Shs 5 million. The district, however, had got only Shs 50 million.

My prayer is that we increase – our minister should really make sure that the budget for the district road is realistic. Otherwise, there is nothing. We shall keep crying about roads and the districts will not do them because they do not have the money. The budget is insufficient –(Member timed out.)

3.21
MR ANTHONY ESENU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement he presented yesterday. I want to comment on three things. The first is on the quality and standards of the roads that have been constructed. I sometimes get shocked to learn that even before the road is finished; we begin seeing potholes on it, yet, such a road will have been constructed by a contractor for the public.

I wonder whether there is a policy in Government to make sure that whatever road is built in this country is of a certain standard and a particular size that provides for pedestrians, boda boda cyclists and the vehicles. 

Otherwise, we have very many narrow roads, reason there are very many accidents. The quality and types of humps on the roads across the country are as variant as the roads you see. So, I request that we take a position on the standard and the quality of roads.

The second point is on the determination of where to put these roads. The argument is that an economic basis is utilised. If we go by that, some of our districts will never see tarmac roads because they do not have the economic justification to have tarmac roads constructed there. 

I request that the minister also considers putting in place affirmative action for areas where there are no sufficient economic reasons to justify putting tarmac roads there. Otherwise, we will never see tarmac roads in some areas. 

Finally, the Central Government should take over inter-district road construction because the districts do not have the money and the time to build good roads joining districts. I request that it should be part of the policy of Government to help us, going forward. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, it is now an hour since we started. The rule says that the debate on the statement of a minister would take one hour. This is a very important matter and as I said, a lot of the concerns are specific. Can we have those concerns written down and submitted to the minister either today or in the course of the week so that they can be compiled and dealt with comprehensively? 

I am going to ask the Shadow Minister to speak. There is, however, some question that needs to be asked. On page two of your statement, in that table, you will notice that the national roads are 13.2 per cent of the road network in this country. The rest of the roads - the district, urban and community access roads (DUCAR) which are 86.8 percent. You will see that for the 13.2 percent of the road network in this country, we budget Shs 16.8 trillion. The last time I checked, the money that was given to Uganda Road Fund in the last financial year was Shs 168 billion, for 86.8 percent of the road network.

Honourable members, if our discussions are to influence how the Government operates - maybe these are the issues we should be picking out so that they give us direction and guidance, and we see how to advise the Government to rearrange some of the things so that some matters are taken care of.

For 13.2 percent of the road, you give Shs 16.8 trillion, and for 86.8 percent of the roads, you give Shs 168 billion. Yet, 86.8 percent of the roads in the communities are being utilised by the ordinary people. Honourable members, we are talking about socio-economic transformation and these are the people we are talking about. 

Look at the budget for these community roads. Can we have guidance on this so that we see as a Parliament how we can say “No, we might have to restructure this so that we move”? Otherwise, this is the kind of debate I expected. But now, we are doing a catalogue of concerns. I think we better write them down.

3.26
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Yusuf Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Works and Transport for a comprehensive report, though it has a few issues I would like to respond to.

In the first place, I would like to an extent thank the Government for the improvement in the Class A roads. However, for the other two classes that relate to the common man, a lot has to be done.

Mr Speaker, as shadow cabinet, we are writing a comprehensive report regarding this particular issue which we shall seek to discuss with the Government. If they fail to respond to our queries, then we may have to be forced to go through you and present it to this House.

We had a quick look at this report but there are a lot of inaccuracies and misinformation. As the shadow cabinet, we are privy to more information, which is more accurate than the people who are supposed to give accurate reports in this regard.

In the interest of time and as I have promised that we are compiling a comprehensive report, I will just highlight a few areas. 

One, the performance –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed honourable shadow minister.

MR NSIBAMBI: The performance rate of these roads presented in this report is not true. I had the privilege of getting information from UNRA. I will just highlight a few roads. 

When you look at this report, the honourable minister gives the impression that everything is going on well. However, I will look at just about six major roads, which are known. Busega–Mpigi Expressway Highway is 23.7 kilometres but by June 2020, its performance was at 0.4 percent. This is not properly reflected in the report. Muyembe–Nakapiripirit Road is a 92 kilometre stretch road. However, by June 2020, it had not commenced and by June 30 2021, the performance report was below 4 percent. Butiaba-Wanseko Road and all these other roads -

Mr Speaker, we have a report that is giving an impression that things are moving on well yet the performance rate is low. There are roads like Najjanankumbi-Busabala, Munyonyo interchange, and Kira-Kasangati, where construction has not commenced but the money has already been advanced. The same is happening in Apac and everywhere. 

It is not true that all these roads have been worked upon. I would like to agree with hon. Basalirwa who insisted that whatever is given is from the boardroom and that they should go down and inspect.

Mr Speaker, there are a number of roads and bridges that have been washed away. I would like to thank the Parliamentary Commission for the money they give to the shadow cabinet as an additional allowance. I took time to go to Tororo and the wananchi were telling me to become their Member of Parliament. This is because Members of Parliament in Tororo have no access to their constituencies. In fact, they have taken up the task to repair bridges with the wananchi –(Interruption) 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come from Tororo and I have access straight to my own village. I have traversed almost all the subcounties in my district. I know there are challenges with some broken bridges as a result of the recent rains.

About a month ago, we had the Ministry of Works and Transport working together with the district road safety committee - hon. Ecweru was with us and we took him to the spots of the inter-district connectivity bridges between Tororo and Manafwa. Therefore, it is not true that Members of Parliament have no access to their constituencies in Tororo. That is a complete lie.

Therefore, is the Member in order to tell such a lie, when I am here seated and looking at him straight?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like me to rule on this matter? 

MR NSIBAMBI: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to rule on it. You are the accused and so, you cannot give your own ruling. Were you talking about the same Tororo she is referring to –(Laughter)- or is there another Tororo you could have gone to, where Members could not access their constituencies? Were you referring to the same Tororo District?

MR NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I was talking about Tororo South. However, I would like to inform this House that at times, I find hon. Opendi in Kasese.(Laughter) Therefore, I think she is confused. (Laughter) She might be confusing Kasese for Tororo –(Ms Kinyamatama rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Are you rising on a point of order?

MS KINYAMATAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for a Member of Parliament to insinuate that other Members have no right to go to any place in this country? Hon. Sarah Opendi has a right to traverse the country and go to the district of her choice. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Are we still talking about the issue of Kasese and Tororo? (Laughter)

MS KINYAMATAMA: Yes. Doesn’t she have the right?

THE SPEAKER: The Honourable Shadow Minister said that he left his constituency and went to Tororo, to be more specific, Tororo South, which is in Tororo District. I had not yet understood what you were talking about. Is it the same Tororo? Now you are jumping to Kasese –(Laughter)– is there a Tororo in Kasese? I do not think you are in order, honourable member.

MR NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point I wanted to put across is that in most districts in Uganda, the bridges have been washed away because of the rains. We would like to get an explanation from the Ministry of Works and Transport. These matters of the rain are foreseeable. We do not have a sort of plan to work on these specific roads.

I also visited Kasese incidentally and the bridges on Kasese-Kilembe Road, Kasese Bridge, Nyamwamba Bridge, Nkinda-Bugoye-Nyakaringo Road; to mention but a few, have completely been washed away and the wanainchi have no access to their homes, which I believe is also unconstitutional. They have a right to earn a living and even make families but they have no homes –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is happening at the moment? Who raised the point of information? I heard as if it is the Member for Nakawa who raised the point. I just saw you getting up and going – had she raised it earlier when I was not listening? That is very surprising. It is okay if you have allowed it.

MS KAAYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition, the ministry has come up with new technology of the low cost ceiling but they are looking at the low tonnage of the roads. Instead, they should be looking at the weather variability of such areas because at the same time, they have identified climate change as a challenge to road construction. Therefore, they should be looking at the weather of that area retrospectively so that what they establish remains for some time.

MR NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, the problem is that these people are looking at me as a Shadow Minister. I am not just a shadow; I am talking on your behalf. Therefore, that kind of information should have been given to me yesterday as a member of your Cabinet. (Laughter)

I was saying that these areas are prone to disasters and they are known. Instead of talking of River Nyamwamba repeatedly year in year after, we should have a comprehensive plan for such areas. 

We also have an issue of value for money, which will be given in our comprehensive report. Specifically, I have two other items I can talk about in the interest of time.

There is the issue of the district equipment. Most of the areas we sampled, we found that the equipment is still wanting. I do not want to use the word, “fake” but the suppliers did not do a good job. That has to be looked into.

We also have the zonal units, which are supposed to maintain the roads. If you look at the minister’s report, the budget allocation is Shs 3 billion for the zonal units. However, when you look at the people who are maintaining them; Victoria Motors, Spear Motors – they are three. Shs 16 billion is allocated for the zonal units but the only three companies for maintaining have a claim of Shs 1.3 trillion. That is surprising.

If you have just ordinary companies maintaining equipment, which has broken down claiming trillions and yet, zonal maintenance units, which are supposed to maintain all the equipment for the zones at this level, then there is a point of investigation that must be followed. It could be a conspiracy to break down equipment and you deliver them to these companies demanding trillions yet, you cannot fund your own zonal units where you allocate Shs 16 billion. It is something that has to be investigated.

People may break down equipment for them to claim trillions instead of funding a zonal unit under your ministry, which you can control. I think those are areas, which we have to look at.

We also have issues to do with the recent directives by the President that this company is willing to repair and maintain this road. Then, you say that since we are not paying in advance, it should be awarded the contract. First, it breaches the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) rules. Secondly, it is also irregular and illegal. You are now giving out a loan without approval of this House. That is not within the docket and mandate of the President. 

Therefore, most of the local contractors have been pushed out. The people we can talk to; the people who have feelings and duty to build better roads –(Interruptions)

MR SSEBIKAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Member of Parliament in order to tell us that the local contractors can do it when we have buildings, for example, in Mulago, the Cancer Institute building that was given to Roko was abandoned - up to now? Another building, the Heart Institute, was given to - Roko was given another building to construct and it was left undone. Even our Parliament building is not finished because it is under Roko Construction. 

Therefore, our local constructors are not doing what is desired. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: (Interjections) Was that a point of order? (Laughter) I was not able to establish the breach and so, I will let it pass.

MR NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wonderful ruling. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure. 

MR OSHABE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The previous speaker intimated that because of the failure of one local company, ROKO – which we are not sure if it is 100 per cent Ugandan - due to the fact that it failed on its duty, he thinks all local companies in the country should be denied the opportunity to do works. 

We have very many local companies – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, on what matter do you rise? 

MR OSHABE: It is a procedural matter, Mr Speaker. We have very many companies in this country that are losing out on the competition in the PPDA processes but are also losing out with those kinds of awards. 

A Member just came here and uttered words that nail our local companies. He walked away to sit comfortably in his seat very happy that the Chinese are the ones given the work in this country. 

Mr Speaker, are we proceeding right to leave that Member enjoy his seat in this Parliament of Uganda? 

THE SPEAKER: There should be a breach and the sanctions should be commensurate. For a Member to come and mention a company or two and for your assumption to be that the Member should leave the House – I think we would have acted over the offence that could have been committed. 

Honourable members, I think the point is being made. Let us listen to this matter; our local engineers and firms benefitting from the huge monies that Parliament passes for procurement. I think that is the debate we should have. 

Given also that the procurement requirement now that for you to qualify and be able to be prequalified is that you have to show that you have ever had at least Shs 150 million on your account. How many of our young engineers that are starting up are able to do this? These are the questions we should be asking. Each time they are asked, let us take it in the spirit that we have local engineers who we have trained and are able; it is our responsibility to see how to build their capacities. 

Would you like to wind up, honourable member? You know he is doing a lot of stuff because he was my lecturer. (Laughter) You taught me the Law of Evidence but I do not see much of it now coming up. 

MR NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, last but not least, I would like to propose – given that this is my maiden speech – I do not know whether that should be the appropriate word in the circumstance. 

This report, though good, with this bit of misinformation and a few inaccuracies, should be subjected to either an ad hoc committee or the regular Committee on Physical Infrastructure to study the issue of our roads. It cannot be comprehensively handled through submission to the ministry, which over the years, has failed to make a significant difference in this regard. 

I would also like to propose that the honourable minister’s office should be accessible, specifically to Members on committees that deal with roads and the chairmen of districts. They actually know and feel what is on the ground. 

Yesterday, the honourable minister – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you need to close. 

MR NSIBAMBI: Yes, I am closing, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister proposed a visit to whichever district that was raised. That is really a fire brigade approach; we want something comprehensively handled. You are not giving Ugandans gifts; they are entitled to good roads. 
Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is your time to respond. The guidance I gave earlier still stands. 

3.50 
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you guided, I will not waste the Members’ time by going back to respond to every road that was raised. I will respond to some of the general issues. 

I will start from the point raised by the shadow minister on accessibility of our offices. I think many Members of Parliament here will agree that they have been to my office. Even this morning, I just hosted the LCV chairman of Mpigi and the Mayor of Kayabwe - to tell you how open we are. Therefore, our offices are open and you can come anytime. 

I thank the Members for the observations they have made, some of which are very genuine. For example, the imbalance between development and maintenance, which is an issue that the ministry has been raising every year - not only to our infrastructure committee but also to the Presidential Advisory Committee on Budget (PACOB) and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are spending a lot of money on construction of the roads and so, we should up the budget on maintenance. Otherwise, those roads will not be able to last the 15 years we expect them to last. I request and call for your support in that endeavour so that we move up the budget for maintenance.

Secondly, it is true that the most touching connectivity, which pains the public, are the roads in the countryside. They are what you call the “district, urban and community access roads” and yet, they are not as highly funded as the development budget. These are issues that we have to balance. 

There is the issue of the Road Fund growing into a second generation. As a ministry, I think we are giving up because we have been fighting for this for very many years. The Act was very clear that the Road Fund should grow into a second generation so that all the funds collected in that direction are put on the Road Fund account. This is in order for the Road Fund to disburse money to the districts, as required. 

However, up to today, the Road Fund gets money from the Consolidated Fund and so, it cannot meet the demands as required. That is another matter we all have to address as beneficiaries of this. 

On the equipment, we got 1,151 road unit equipment from Japan. This was about 2017/2018. We distributed these to every district that existed then. However, we have a shortfall of 15 districts, including the new ones, which have not yet benefited from the road equipment. We need Shs 55 billion to purchase and distribute the equipment. Everything had already been negotiated and contracts are ready to be signed but we cannot sign them until we are sure of money from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We have not yet got that assurance and so, we cannot proceed to sign contracts for equipment for the 15 districts. 

We have also discussed this matter with our infrastructure committee and the Presidential Advisory Committee on Budget. Therefore, we are still pushing to get Shs 55 billion from the finance ministry so that we can get the 15 units for the districts.

On the issue of maintenance – thank you very much for the observation – the equipment are still under warrant. When the equipment is under warrant, the supplier identifies his agents in the country for the maintenance. 

However, we are planning and are already in advanced stages of taking over the maintenance to include the decentralisation of some of the regional workshops. As one of the Members observed, you find a district such as Moroto having equipment being maintained from Gulu, which is very far. Therefore, we are going to decentralise to create subregions where we can maintain these equipment. That is in process. As soon as the warrant time ends, we are not going to renew the contracts of the teams which are maintaining the equipment right now.

On the Kampala traffic jam, working with Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), we have identified some of the critical roads which we are working on to decongest Kampala. These include Nakawuka-Kasanje Complex Area as well as Kira-Kasangati-Matugga, all the way to Nsangi. Therefore, we have all these, plus the Mpigi Expressway, which we think will be able to decongest vehicles which usually congest at Nsangi and Kyengera and other roads which we are working on, together with KCCA.

KCCA, under the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area Programme, is also expending on the roads which they are maintaining to, not only stop in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, but also address those critical roads in Wakiso and Mukono because they have an impact on the traffic flow. We are working together to ensure that this is actualised.

On the standards of the roads, we recently passed the Roads Act, which spells out exactly the kind of standards of the roads which we can afford. For the roads that we are working on, the standard is that it must survive and be useable for 15 years.

About widening the roads, that is still a challenge because of our land laws and unplanned development which, sometimes, make the construction difficult.

Now, for every project, when it is finished, it has three-year defects liability period. If there is a defect that comes within that period, the constructor must address that defect. Therefore, for three years, we do not touch that road because the contractor must maintain it.

Now, about the local content, I do not know if there is a ministry, which has been aggressive about the local content as we have. We feel that the provisions now of 30 per cent are still not adequate. 

As we speak now, our technical team – the finance ministry and the ministry responsible for works – is working on a paper to bring to Cabinet on how we can improve the Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) policy. We have that in the offing. We have been encouraging the local contractors because in the law, any contract or project which is Shs 45 billion and below, is ring-fenced for local contractors.

We have had a lot of discussions with their unifying body, Uganda National Association of Building and Civil Engineering Contractors (UNABCEC), and we have even tried to engage banks to, possibly, find a way of funding local contractors under a special arrangement, not them borrowing at the open rate where businesspeople borrow money from. This is because, sometimes, it takes very long for these local contractors to be paid that if you use that kind of interest rate, then you kill his business.

We sat and discussed with UNABCEC and that is how this Cabinet Memo is being generated and supported. Therefore, we are concerned about our local contractors gaining capacity and being able to carry out these contracts.

Of course, even if it is now the Chinese doing the construction, will they come back to do the maintenance? That would be a failure on our side. Therefore, we should be able to build the capacity of our local contractors; they still have some issues but we are encouraging and showing them the way of how to get into the game. We are not leaving them out.

About the issue of equity that was raised by a Member, according to NDP III, I know and appreciate that everybody everywhere would love to have a tarmac road. Some Members have even written to me and said: “Please, tarmac the road of 1.5 kilometers to my home.”

However, I would like to say this. I saw the debate yesterday and the question was: does the Government have a national disaster response plan? Now, in the case of road construction, our entry point to determine what projects and which roads we are going to do is guided by two documents: the National Development Plan (NDP) and the manifesto of the party ruling at the time.

The good thing is that this time, the NDP III and the manifesto are kind of aligned. Therefore, the projects which we have been given by the NDP III are the projects against which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pegs the money. 

Therefore, if the project is not in the NDP III, for the next five years, it will be very difficult for me to implement it because that would mean that I take out another project and bring in that project, and I do not know what criteria I would use to take out some and bring another.

Now, on the issue of equity, for the next five years the central region will have 852.6 kilometres, western region will have a total of 548.8 kilometres, northern region will have a total of 1,135.30 kilometres because northern region was lagging behind in terms of kilometres constructed, eastern region will have 785 kilometres and southern region will have 360 kilometres. Those are the kilometres – and the roads are indicated and this document has been uploaded on your iPads.

Therefore, the roads will be done according to this NDP III and this is where we are going to concentrate so that we do not wobble around simply because everybody wants a road done.

I also want Members to understand that one of the considerations for picking a road is economic payback. However, it is just one of those because if it was the only one, which we base on, then areas like Moroto would not have got these roads. We have also realised that when you construct a road in that area, it picks up very fast. For example, you have heard the honourable member from Moroto complaining about vehicles, which are destroying their roads, which was not the case before the road was done. The economic importance is just one of those considerations but you have connectivity and other things, which are put into consideration. 

I also want to say that building a road, on average, takes about three to five years because from the time the concept is done to the time of construction and finishing, it has to take about that period. This also has a bearing on the law of procurement; you have to advertise, there are a number of months, which have to be spent before the bids come in and when the bids come in, you have to analyse them, among others.

As you go through those, there is a whistle-blower and once a whistle-blower comes up, that project will stop until you have answered the whistle-blower. When you finish the whistle-blower and you have awarded the contract, the dissatisfied person can also stop the contract from proceeding because he can ask for an administrative review and that can take between six months and one year.

Sometimes, when you see the project taking long, it is because of that process, which we have to follow. Some of these are forced on us by the law and we may not be able to change them until the PPDA law has been changed. That is when we can be able to proceed.

Some of the time is mandatory and we cannot circumvent –(Interruption)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been attentively listening to the minister and he was referring to the NDPIII. I had to immediately open it and see the number of roads that have been listed. The point of procedure I would like to seek from you is, now that there are some key important areas that have not been included, especially on the NDPIII and according to what I have heard from him, this project is going to last for five years. How can we amend this so that those important roads that have not been planned for in the NDPIII are also taken care of because they are also crucial? That is the procedural matter I would like to raise, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Did you rise on a point of procedure? 

MR AMOS OKOT: Mr Speaker, it is an important issue.

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR AMOS OKOT: Is it procedurally right for us to listen and keep quiet on this matter, yet, it is very important? Should we just keep quiet because they are not in NDPIII, yet, these roads are also important? Should we look at it like that?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are the one proceeding improperly. You can see how you are trying to coin a procedural matter but the rules are very clear about what amounts to a procedural point. However, you are excused because the matter you have raised also contributes to the debate. I think you would have been better contained under clarification, which I think the minister would have allowed you to make. 

GEN. KATUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To cut the long story short, those are the guidelines on the NDPIII. Of course, we cannot do everything at the same time. It is just like in a home where there are very many demands and you may not be able to address all of them at a go.

Secondly, the economy has a bearing on how much we can do. If the economy performs well, that is good. You know about the limit of borrowing; how much the country cannot borrow beyond. Therefore, while we would want to do all these projects, there are some limits, which we cannot go beyond.

Concerning issues on some of the areas, which have been coming on, for example the Rwenkunye-Apac road and why it is not moving –(Hon. Cecilia Ogwal rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you accessed the microphone before you were allowed.

GEN. KATUMBA: Mr Speaker, on two occasions on this Floor –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, the matter is quite urgent. Yesterday, we received this report and the clarification I would like to seek is that from 2014-2015 to 2019-2020, the ministry spent Shs 16.9 trillion in road construction. 

I would like to know because you have now given us a very good report on where you are going to construct roads, in what region, the kilometres, among others. May you also tell us how you spread out the roads utilising the Shs 16.9 trillion so that we know that the northerners are going to receive 1,000 kilometres of road in NDPIII because already so much has been invested under that programme?

I would like to get that clarification so that we understand because some regions may feel - When they listen to the number that you are going to construct under NDPIII, they may think that you have cheated them when actually they got a bigger share in the Shs 16.9 trillion. Can you clarify that to us? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister -

GEN. KATUMBA: Mr Speaker, I do recall very well that in the last Parliament, I presented to Members the distribution of the roads and the projects, which were ongoing and those which ended. On the issue of which roads are going to be constructed in which area, the document we presented is on the iPads and it shows which road, including the kilometres. That is how we came to the totals, which are here. If you check on your iPads, the document was uploaded and it has all the roads in detail; what road is going to be done, including the kilometres. That information is provided.

Mr Speaker, I want to respond on the issue of Rwenkunye-Apac road because it has kept on coming every other day. The contractor who is doing that road – One time there was a report here that Matrix Company is the one doing that road. No, the company is called Sadeem Al Kuwait General Trading and Construction Company and it is the one going to construct that road. 

Some of the delays have been because of the issue of the Ibuje rock, which has been identified as a source of material for the construction. I have agreed with the leader of the Lango Parliamentary Group that on the 30th we are meeting in Lira together with the Uganda National Roads Authority and Members of Parliament from Lango, including LCV chairmen of those districts so that we sort out this issue of Ibuje rock. That will hopefully solve the matter of Rwenkunye-Apac road because the owners are also members of the community. Possibly, we shall be able to appeal to them together, as a group, to stop what they are doing to prevent the contractor from accessing the rock. 
Those are my responses generally. 

Mr Speaker, as you guided that we should not go into specific small roads, everybody’s road has been taken. If it is not in the NDPIII, do not lose hope because there is NDPIV and NDPV. We shall progressively be able to do this. 

Again, as I said in the rejoinder, we need to improve our revenue if we are to be able to do all these roads without necessarily overburdening the country with loans. Otherwise, if we depend on loans, it will be very difficult for us to pay unless we increase our tax collection. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, debate on the roads in this country will always attract a lot of interest and time is needed to deal with it. The structure of this debate, however, as I said, since this is a ministerial statement, is without decision. We have spent almost two hours doing it.

Because the issues remain current, I recommend to our Committee on Physical Infrastructure to pick out these issues that have been raised and have a more comprehensive engagement with the ministries in relation to the funds that are being operated under them, including UNRA and the Road Fund so that they can come and we have a structured debate where we can take a decision, especially given the time now that the budget circular has been issued and the budget conferences are taking place. 

By 31 December 2021, we will receive the Budget Framework Paper. We should have a debate that can influence all those processes. That debate can only be shaped by a report that comes from that committee in charge of the sector, which can give us better guidance on how to debate this matter. 

4.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. I thank you for allowing me to raise this issue, which I think we have tried as a committee, but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been a stumbling block. Where I feel it is this House – 

Let me just highlight one issue of the district equipment. I am here in possession of a letter. In this financial year, we allocated money for road equipment for the following districts - at that time, they were 13 districts, but the minister has updated the list of the new districts and the number has gone to 15.

These 13 new districts were Nabilatuk, Bugweri, Kassanda, Kwania, Kapelebyong, Kikuube, Obongi, Kazo, Rwampara, Kitagwenda, Madi-Okollo, Karenga and Lusot. We did provide Shs 46 billion, but surprisingly, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in a letter from the Permanent Secretary, after the Ministry of Works and Transport had done the procurement of the road construction and maintenance equipment for the 13 districts, responded to them in the negative.

The finance ministry only provided Shs 26 billion, leaving a shortfall of Shs 20 billion. Now that the other two districts were added in, the bill goes to Shs 56 billion. It means they need Shs 30 billion now. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport – because this letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was written on the 6 March 2020 – is in a dilemma. I urge this House to implore the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to release the balance of the money such that these districts can be able to get the equipment. We do not want to see the Shs 26 billion again returned to the Consolidated Fund.

More so, we provided money. There is money under the law like hon. Opendi has stated. So, as a committee, we have tried to push – I think we need a committee of this whole House to put sense to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to help the Ministry of Works and Transport to achieve their objectives for those districts that have not got the road equipment. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this shows that we need an assessment. That assessment can only be done by our committee responsible for the sector so that they come back to us with recommendations that will include one of those things. If they could do this assessment quickly, we would be able to speak before the Budget Framework Paper is in place. Therefore, we would hold our position in the discussions of the Budget Framework Paper and maintain this stance until some of these things are sorted out. 

So, please, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure should take keen interest on this matter. Pick all the issues up and give us a good debatable motion or report so that we can pick it from there and take some decisions to guide on how we move with this particular sector. 

Thank you, honourable minister, for your responses. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO HIGHLIGHT THE DECLINE IN ETHICAL AND MORAL VALUES IN THE COUNTRY AND PROPOSE SOLUTIONS FOR REVERSING THE DESTRUCTIVE DECLINE

4.21
MR JAMES NSABA-BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, this motion is moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS Objective III of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy entrenched in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda obligates all organs of State and people of Uganda to work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability; 

AND WHEREAS Objective XXIX of the National Objectives outlines the duties of a citizen to include: being patriotic and loyal to Uganda, promoting citizens' well-being, engaging in gainful work for the good of citizens and contributing to national development; 

KNOWING THAT in a bid to actualise the said principles, the State put in place – (Interruption)”

MR KIRUMIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue that is being presented is very critical to our country and I wonder if we are proceeding correctly without the Minister of State, Office of the President (Ethics and Integrity). We are expected to be in Parliament especially when such issues, critical to our country, are being presented. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a private Member’s motion being presented to this House. Whether a minister is there or not is immaterial because we will take a decision eventually and send it to them. Please, proceed. 

MR NSABA-BUTURO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

“KNOWING THAT, in a bid to actualize the said principles, the State put in place institutions whose mandate is to foster strict adherence to good moral and ethical values, the rule of law, principles of natural justice and good governance; 

NOTING THAT, whereas the institutions constitutionally mandated to ensure observance of good moral and ethical values are in place, there is, nonetheless, notable decline of ethical and moral values such as honesty, care, thrift, responsibility, integrity, respect, transparency and accountability among the citizens; 

FURTHER NOTING THAT, the decline of moral and ethical values in the country has led to unpleasant outcomes such as an increase in unchecked theft of public resources, inability to apprehend and punish law breakers, disregard of the law, disrespect of authority, increasing land evictions, destruction of the environment and wetlands as well as emergency of obnoxious practices such as abortions, homosexuality and prostitution in society;

COGNIZANT THAT, the decline in the state of affairs has further caused lawlessness which is threatening a very important pillar of society, the family as seen by, for example, increasing cases of divorce, separations, disrespect of parents by their children and irresponsible parenthood; 

FURTHER COGINIZANT THAT, the moral restraint that informs our religious, cultural and social mannerisms as well as way of life is under threat in that when religious institutions venture to raise concerns on the declining moral and ethical values in the country, they are ridiculed and derided as being old-fashioned and puritanical; 

AWARE THAT, if this spiralling out of control of society’s moral and ethical fabric continues, the prosperity, stability, security, and unity of Ugandans will be gravely undermined, thereby rendering Uganda to become a fraying nation; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT, there is urgent need to rebut the decline in national morals and ethics in order to protect Uganda from widening social inequalities, ravages of underdevelopment, national indignity and exploitation largely by external interests; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by this august House that: 

    1. Parliament takes cognizance of the rise in moral and ethical decline in the country and leads by example the advocacy for the advancement of national moral and ethical values among the citizenry. 

    2.  Parliament urges Government to take urgent practical steps to address the increased decline of the moral and ethical values in order to place Uganda on to a pedestal of more stability, peace, security, unity as well as prosperity. 

    3.  Parliament urges Government to ensure that institutions, which are mandated with prevalence of ethics and integrity in society are themselves ethical and have integrity. 


    4.  Parliament urges Government to ensure that the education curriculum emphasizes character education, which should be examinable in our educational institutions. Alongside this should be a focus on teacher training institutions since imparting moral values relies on role-modelling and interaction. 

    5. Parliament urges Government to introduce universal moral education whereby knowledge of how to care, knowledge of how to live with nature, knowledge of how to share and be human will become an integral part of our lives.

    6. Parliament urges religious institutions to join the struggle to avert the ongoing decline in moral and ethical values in society.

    7. Parliament urges Government to wholeheartedly step up efforts to stop theft of public resources, apprehend and punish lawbreakers as well as oppose emergency of obnoxious practices such as homosexuality.

    8. Parliament urges Government to reign in on the media, that is television, radio, print news, which has become one of the biggest avenues and disseminators of immorality and fake news.

    9. Parliament urges Government to ensure increased budgets to accountability agencies such as the Judiciary, Police and Inspector General of Government.

    10. Parliament urges Government and religious institutions to set up peer review structures mechanisms and department to foster ethics and morality.”

I beg to move sir.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Members from Ruhama, Napak, Moyo West, Adjumani, Col Charity, Lamwo, hon. Musoke, Kassanda North, Masindi and Koboko.

Would you like to briefly speak to your motion?

MR BUTURO: Mr Speaker, I believe that this motion is one of the most important motions that have ever been debated on the Floor of Parliament by Members of Parliament. Ethical and moral values are determinant factors as far as our stability, integrity, security, unity, peace, socio-economic development and prosperity are concerned. Human relationships as well as equitable societies are spiced by these values to make life exceedingly enjoyable and worth living. 

Mr Speaker, we need to be aware that a silent and unseen revolution is underway in our nation. This revolution relates to a fact that the foundation of our nation namely ethical and moral values is slowly being eroded or eaten away by the pandemic of immorality as well as ethical atrophy. If we do not have to decide civilly and quickly too, our nation could collapse under the full weight of this pandemic.

For these reasons, Sir, I commend you for giving us the opportunity to debate this motion. The motion is about the Uganda we want; a nation whose citizens’ way of life is impeccable; a nation, which is informed by wholesome application and adherence to imperatives of ethical and moral values; a nation which is united, stable, secure and peaceful as well as prosperous. It is about Uganda’s present and future development, her viability and place among the community of nations around the world. 

Mr Speaker, it will please the honourable members to be reminded the framework which espouses common moral and ethical values that we are all obliged to respect and be guided by. What are these values? They include honesty, respect for the Almighty God, for nature, for leaders, for authority, loyalty, care, integrity, hard work and transparency, responsibility, hospitality, generosity, reliability, humility, justice and accountability. These and other values not mentioned here are a must for society to have. They are critical for human development and survival. They regulate, among other things, human relationships and management of national resources for human development. 

The values in question also prescribe modes of human behaviour to enhance and enrich our lives. Effective application of these values is a precondition for a stable, viable, strong, secure, peaceful, orderly, united and prosperous nation. 

Over the years, our country has been built on a moral and ethical foundation that encourages citizens to distinguish between right and wrong. What we are witnessing nowadays though, is a worrying trend whereby right is seen as wrong and wrong is seen as right. As a result of this, immorality in the form of unethical behaviour as well as immoral actions is increasingly becoming a norm. 

Mr Speaker, the main import of this motion is that immorality is assertively eroding our ethical and moral values and this is endangering the fabric of our society. The erosion taking place at a frighteningly relentless pace is one to be of great concern to all of us. 

Ethical and moral values are no longer carrying the tag of admiration and reward, as they have done before. Instead, they are increasingly losing their high premium. This is despite their being fundamental prerequisites for Uganda’s prosperity, stability, security, unity and socio-economic transformation. 

In many districts in our country, local leaders are frequently involved in destructive conflicts against one another over local issues. They have formed cliques and factions. Local people too, have become divided behind each one of the factions. All this is leading to paralysis and sufferance in service delivery. 

It is no longer a secret that our ethical and moral values are progressively and on a massive scale, being compromised to satisfy individual whims as well as interests of foreign nations.
 
Sadly, the country is not aware that its foundations are gradually being eaten away as a consequence of this decline. Members of Parliament have not been spared the bug of moral ethical decline.

You may recall that two years ago, in this very august House, some Members of Parliament were involved in unprecedented and ugly scuffles with security personnel. Early this year, it was extensively reported in the media that in the Tenth Parliament, Members of Parliament on some Parliamentary committees were involved in corrupt deals, which were aimed at enhancing their financial standing. 

Mr Speaker, forging academic documents by some individuals, which they then use as a ladder to higher positions has also become common and regrettable. In some commercial banks, one will find that a Teller has no difficulty taking customers' money off the latters’ accounts by forging documents. In schools, pupils and students have learnt the cunning behaviour of some of their teachers. We witnessed this activity in the recent primary examinations where teachers were aiding pupils and students to cheat. 

Whenever there is a general election, voters no longer care about the quality and character of the candidate they vote to send to Parliament and district councils to represent them as long as candidates are able to oil their palms with money and other goods. 

Earlier this year, the Auditor-General reported that there had been massive abuse of COVID-19 funds by some Government officials. The haemorrhaging of public funds by public servants - turned thieves, has assumed a dangerous practice. 

Nowadays, to get a contract or job, one often has to pay upfront. In some cases, some banks will not give you a loan unless you pay upfront to persons who process loans. A person supervising a contract will not pass the job application unless one pays. A clerk will not pass your file for payment unless you rub his or her palms. We can go on and on. 

Institutions, which are constitutionally mandated to fight corruption and other ills in society are overwhelmed by the enormity of the decline of ethical and moral values to an extent that renders them ineffectual. Some of them have been infiltrated and their operations are being influenced by unethical and immoral interests. Examples of decline of ethics and moral values are numerous all around us on a daily basis.
 
Mr Speaker, if this ongoing ominous decline is not dealt with head on and sooner than later by the Executive arm of the Government, in particular and society in general, I have no doubt that the decline will ultimately, fundamentally and radically frustrate the social, economic and political order we are aspiring to build. This will have far reaching implications on our security, peace, integrity, unity, stability and socio-economic development. 

The outcome will include a demotivated or demoralised public service, a growing generation of young and angry youth, unprecedented social and economic uncertainty, more injustice, and poorer work ethics, a deafening culture of more devastating run-away corruption, more poverty and therefore, more underdevelopment. 

The other outcomes will include civil disobedience, more indiscipline, acquisitiveness, incompetence, indifference, sectarianism, nepotism, tribalism, embezzlement, bribery, and illicit enrichment; a widening gap between haves and have-nots and violence. 

A state's relentless decline of our moral and ethical values is a threat to the rule of law and order in our country. Such a decline if not halted and reversed, will additionally lead to a poorer or substandard service delivery regime, weak representation in Parliament and elsewhere, poor quality leadership in the nation and more unemployment. With such a multiplicity of negative outcomes, Uganda’s quest to become a middle-income nation and later on a developed one would be a chimera. 

In the wake of this firmly registered moral and ethical decline, Uganda is in danger of becoming a weak state. Unless we hastily, firmly and genuinely embrace ethical and moral values, our country will become more dependent, exploited, oppressed and dominated by stronger nations, which are ethically and morally more upright. 

A weak state is prone to imposition of inappropriate externally induced policies as well as abominable practices such as homosexuality, bestiality and abortion, especially by nations from the western world whose norms and values are culturally and largely diametrically opposed to ours. A state that is weak is often bedevilled by internal conflicts. It hardly garners respect from the community of nations. 

Mr Speaker, doing something about the ongoing decline of our ethical and moral values should be a must for our Government and society. This is because our society is already teetering on a precipice of moral and ethical decline, which could soon reach a point of no return. In fact, we can say that Uganda is on the edge of an abyss. She has never been threatened by the bug of ethical and moral decline as she is now. 

Mr Speaker, the successful modernisation of Uganda, which entails improvement of socio-economic conditions of citizens and Uganda’s graduation to a more prosperous, peaceful, secure and stable status will only be possible when moral and ethical values are the bedrock of our identity, efforts, governance, existence as well as management of national resources. Short of this, we are a country that is headed for a conundrum of more underdevelopment –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are taking all the time for the seconders and the debate. 

MR NSABA-BUTURO: Mr Speaker, there are practical steps we can take with a view to place Uganda onto a pedestal of ethical and moral uprightness of necessity. The Executive must take the lead to reverse and halt the on-going decline. It can only do so by demonstrating its seriousness by, for example, putting its house in order and then setting up peer review structures, mechanisms and departments across the broad spectrum of national governance. The latter would be to ensure citizens do embrace and comply across the nation of Uganda. 

Hitherto, Mr Speaker, the Executive has sought to tackle run-away corruption from a narrow and timid perspective. Its main focus has been on tangible vices such as abuse of office. To this end, the Executive’s boldness to tackle corruption should change direction by focusing more on intangible practices such as ethical and moral issues as well as behaviour of individuals. It should wake up to the fact that such vices are a result of a growing deficit in the ethical and moral capital within the population in general and public service in particular. 

The formal school system should be reconfigured to emphasise teaching of good and deep rooted character and ethical and moral values. The Executive should, by so doing, put particular emphasis on character education. Through civic education, it should ensure that Ugandans understand, respect and trust our national values. 

Ugandans must pray with the mind of God. We must choose to return to a traditional view of human life, which honours God publically, restores the family and rejects all decadent and abominable practises, some of which we have discussed. 

The media should be restrained from playing a detrimental role, which undermines our values. Movies that popularise sexual scenes, homosexual scenes and violence should be banned.

The process of electing leaders to roles of representation at every level should be revisited. In this regard, the Executive should undertake the courage to encourage and support civic education among voters so that the nation is able to have more suitable, competent and qualified representatives. Leaders who are appointed must be able to serve society and not regard accumulation of personal wealth as their main goal.
 
Mr Speaker, I urge every honourable member in this august House to join the crusade to firmly anchor our country onto a more durable foundation, which is unambiguously informed by imperatives of ethics and moral values. For in order to engender a stable, secure and development trajectory for Uganda, we must choose to wholly embrace ethics and moral values. 

On her part, this august House can cement her worthiness, reputation and credentials in the annals of Uganda by establishing a committee which would act as her watchdog and also work with the Executive to truly and firmly place Uganda onto a new dawn of ethical alacrity. 

Ugandans have a stake in reversing the on-going moral and ethical decline, which we are witnessing today. This duty is not for Parliament alone; it is a national one whereby the choice facing all Ugandans is either to succumb to the hubris of immorality or rise to the occasion of ethical and moral uprightness. 

Mr Speaker, the motion has made a point that there is an umbilical association between unethical and immoral values and corruption of all types such as abuse of office. This is the reason why all citizens, including Government officials, should invest in ensuring that their actions and behaviours, relationships and management of state resources are grounded in and informed by imperatives of ethics and integrity. 

Finally, the other case being made is that there is a symbiotic relationship between ethical and moral values on one hand and on the other, the accumulation of wealth and all those ills that we have mentioned. I invite the honourable members to join the Forum on Ethics and Morality so that we are able to work together to save and push, on behalf of Parliament, for a more civilised, organised, morally upright country than we have right now. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing us to discuss this motion again. May God bless you, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ordinarily, I should propose the question now for debate but I will allow the seconders of the motion to speak and take care of the time that we have. I think there are two seconders. I will allow both of them to speak. Please, proceed, honourable member for Workers followed by hon. Sarah Opendi of Tororo District. Take a shorter time so that we can have a debate. 

4.50 
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Nsaba-Buturo for coming up with this very important motion, which is a concern of all citizens and leaders in this country. 

Allow me to talk about some of the areas where the vices mentioned by the honourable colleague and the mover of the motion have been more pronounced. One of the areas and evidence of moral decadence and unethical behaviour are expressed under the sub heading “Sexual Abuse and Incest.” 

A lot of research has been done since the last two lockdowns, which came as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The newspapers have given this information. 

Recently, I was in a meeting with the Minister of State for Gender and she also gave the same information that I am giving as far as this area is concerned. According to the records, 1,682 cases of defilement were reported. Out of those, sexual abuse of our daughters was registered by their fathers. 

In other words, fathers were responsible for the violation of their own girls. 175 were complaints of sexual abuse by members of the immediate families. To me, this is a case of abuse and incest, which is a great monster in as far as our ethical behaviours are concerned.

Mr Speaker, the Daily Monitor of 29 September 2021 reported that 1,300 girls from Rukungiri District alone had conceived in the last seven months and particularly because of the lockdown. Another report was about the areas of Kitgum, Ngora and Kyenjojo where 2,372 girls were abused. The 23,000 girls, who became pregnant, were from Lira subregion. I do not know what we can call it but I think it is a vice and an “epidemic”.

A report of the United Nation Population Fund released in September stated that 90 girls, under the age of 18, were impregnated during the two lockdowns. When you add that one, you can see that the numbers are threatening. 

We have another monster coming out of that: the child mothers. Most of these children were below 18. They do not know what to do and some of them are roaming the streets of Kampala and other cities. Others have even been denied by their own parents because they think that they have embarrassed them.

Therefore, we do not know – and we can reflect: what can a girl of 15 do if the parents chase her out of home because they feel that they are embarrassed? This girl has no place of abode and this becomes a problem.

The solution I can give for this is that the culprits, who are adults of sound mind, should be brought to book according to the law. The country should know that we need these punitive measures, which will help us to deter others who have similar intentions.

The ministry concerned should ensure that they put in place strategies that will help our children when the time for opening schools comes because some of them are psychologically traumatised and could even run mad.

The other issue that we need to think of is human trafficking. This exhibits moral degeneration because when we start selling our own brothers, sisters and children of relatives, I do not know what words I could use to bring it out.

It is also important to know that an NGO called ENACT, which operates in Africa and other countries, pointed out in July 2021 on their website that Katakwi is one of the districts where girls were being sold off like cattle or sheep. They are taken to markets and the buyers pay as little as Shs 20,000. Something has to be done about it. Many are sold as domestic workers to Somalia, Sudan and even Kenya. Some of these were retrieved recently and returned.

In the Daily Monitor of 16 September 2021, they talked about a medical doctor in Uganda who, allegedly, was working with others and persuading a woman to sell her three-months-old child and the offer was Shs 20 million. They wanted to take the girl to South Sudan. To me, when you read such stories, many times we get surprised but we are doing nothing as leaders and that hurts.

Allow me to mention that on 23 September, an article came in the New Vision where they talked about 145 girls that were found in holding houses in Rubaga Division and some of these had been there for a period of between two weeks and three months. The details revealed that more than 202 girls were found but the records were showing more than that number. In my mind, I asked: what happened? These girls were found in a place called Lusaze where we have a city council mortuary. I said: “If the numbers do not tally, I do not know if they did not end up being buried in the cemetery.” 

The ministry concerned should put in place systems that can help to closely monitor the activities of the suspected dealers.

Mr Speaker, in the past we had the 10-home cell system (mayumba kumi). Maybe it should be resurrected so that we can begin monitoring what happens in the neighbour’s home because a lot is happening and we do not get to know.

My colleague talked about the issue of corruption, which has not spared many people in the Government, yet the Inspectorate of Government (IGG) created a directorate of special investigations with a responsibility of investigating syndicated and high profile cases of corruption. 

The IGG report for the period of July to December 2020 talked about these cases and they said they were able to recover close to Shs 96 billion that was taken back to the coffers from our colleagues who are educated like us. They investigated UNRA, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and many others. There were different recoveries at different times.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, are you going to allow this House to debate this motion?

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Yes, I am winding up. Mr Speaker, something has to be done. However, I also remember that recently, it was reported that even Parliament has not been spared because they talked about some of our colleagues in the 10th Parliament that got money from a tobacco company; they asked for a bribe and they were given about $20, 000. Something has to be done.

We need to expose those concerned even if they are among us because if we do not do it, people will think we are not serious yet this august House has the responsibility and mandate to clear its own house as we go to investigate others.

Mr Speaker, I call upon us, as leaders, to take steps to make sure that we fight the moral decadence within us. The family should be saved because it is the smallest unit of a society yet it is falling apart just like Chinua Achebe said in his novel “Things Fall Apart” and that the centre cannot hold. I pray that we do not fall completely because the systems are falling. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.03
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do second this motion. We are talking about moral values that we all know, including respect, honesty, humility and compassion. As we speak, this is lacking amongst some of our population. 

There is clear evidence that even the religious, cultural and traditional values, have been abandoned. As leaders of today, if we do not do anything, then, the end will not be good for the future generations. We have witnessed scandals; churches have not been spared. We have seen offertory missing and church collections for fundraising go missing. It does not involve only public officers; there is degeneration across board. 

Today, corruption is as a result of poor morals. We all had hope because one of the NRM’s 10 Point Programme was to fight corruption. We need to appreciate the NRM Government because what it did was to ensure that the various laws to help in fighting corruption and institutions are in place. 

However, we have not achieved what we should be achieving. The anti-corruption institutions have also not been spared because we have seen some of those institutions degenerate into – instead of investigating, we find that some of the officers supposed to be investigating public officials go behind the scenes and get compromised. 

The Judiciary has also not been spared. Therefore, all the arms of Government, including this Parliament have not been spared. No wonder, the Corruption Perception Index Report 2020 listed Uganda as one of those countries that have not performed well in terms of curbing corruption. Actually, we are ranked 142 out of the 180.   

We need to task the citizens of this country to do what is right because it takes two to tangle and we all know that corruption thrives because the citizens end up complying with what is demanded by the public servants. We all know that the citizens are desperate to access services but on the other hand, the public officials are also eager to charge a fee for services that we all know are supposed to be free.

Mr Speaker, we all know that corruption compromises the State’s ability to fulfil its obligations. No wonder, Members of Parliament have been turned into some form of mini Government, where when a constituent voter is sick, the first call is to the Member of Parliament for that area. 

Members of Parliament have purchased ambulances but is that our work? Members of Parliament are busy fixing broken bridges here and there; is that our work? Let us deal with the corruption because, as we all know, this country losses over Shs 3 trillion to corruption. Just imagine how much we would do with such money? 

When you go to the Health Sector and the police, you notice that these have not been spared by corruption. Mr Speaker, there is wide spread political corruption and we all know what goes on. Corruption in public procurements, misuse of public funds and so, we need to deal with this challenge of the minimum wage: the lowest public servants earn about Shs 200,000. Just imagine if such a civil servant lives in Kampala, what can Shs 200,000 do for them? They need to take care of their children and feed their families, among others. Therefore, the only option is for them to resort to corruption.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to the 11th Parliament to lead by example. Let this Parliament be known as a Parliament that stood firm against corruption; a Parliament that did not entertain corruption within its committees and a Parliament that will not entertain whatever form of dishonesty.
Let us have openness and transparency even in our committee meetings. Sometimes, we go into closed-door meetings; what exactly are we discussing in these closed-door meetings? This is a public institution and so, business should be in the open. 

I would like to call upon the Executive, please, lead by example. We have spoken and the Executive has talked for the last 35 years but we are still talking about fighting corruption. It cannot be this time. 

Every year, it is this time and that means it will never happen. Of course, the idea by the President that he knows the corrupt ministers but that he is waiting for evidence - what evidence, when the President has the evidence?

Corruption thrives in this country partially because of that tolerance. The President threatened to read the names. It was very unfortunate to instead see permanent secretaries being dismissed with disgrace. It was very unfortunate and the names were read. He knows the corrupt ministers but he only shifts them from one sector to another –(Applause)- yes, this must end. Corruption cannot only be fought by targeting civil servants. We need to target the political leaders too. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, we had the Bamugemereire Commission. When we put such commissions in place and spend billions of shillings on them and they release a report, one year down the road, no action is taken on that report. Can we demand, Mr Speaker - justice delayed is justice denied. We need to get that report and take action against all those involved in dubious land dealings in this country, for example.

Mr Speaker, I would like to end –(Interjections)– I should not end? No, I should leave time for others to debate, ladies and gentlemen. 

Mr Speaker, you directed, sometime back, that Ministries, Departments and Agencies should not fund Members of Parliament. This is a move in the right direction but if there are no sanctions, this will continue. 

The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is reviewing our laws, I hope we can critically put clear sanctions against Members of Parliament, who go against the directives that the Speaker gives. 

As Members of Parliament, we play an oversight role. In order to successfully execute our mandate, we need to be united and put aside our political affiliations when we are dealing with cases of corruption. The caucuses are important but when it comes to corruption, let us not caucus and see how to save one of our own. We should stand firm and deal with these people without favour.

Mr Speaker, when the hon. Dr Nsaba-Buturo put up a list for Members to sign to become members of this forum, only three of us subscribed. Honourable members –(Interjections)– no, it was there on the table at the reception for over a month, there were only three names until I said, “please, let this list be taken away.”

Members, I would like to appeal to you; let us all be members of this forum so that we can closely, in a united way, fight corruption. 

I want to end with one proposal. When you look at other Parliaments; there are Parliaments like that of the USA, the UK and India that have established standing committees on ethics and accountability. This should be food for thought for this Parliament so that we can critically deal with the issues surrounding corruption.

Who is closely monitoring these anti-corruption agencies? I know there is the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and the Committee on Public Accounts. These people are dealing majorly with other issues and you find that not much attention is paid to these anti-corruption agencies.

We need to have this committee critically look at the anti-corruption agencies and also hold them accountable. If you look at the Judiciary, once we have increased the number of judges and staff, why should we have backlog? Why should we have cases lasting 10 years? Every time, it is an adjournment. To me, these are issues that this committee could critically look at. 

Maybe we need to benchmark and know how these countries go about it. For example, the UK has an office of congressional ethics which is an independent and non-partisan entity within Parliament. It receives complaints from the public against Members of Parliament and staff, investigates and submits its report to the Committee on Ethics, which in turn brings it to the House. These are things which we could think about if we are to end this vice of corruption.

Otherwise, for us to be able to change the moral degeneration in this country, we cannot do it alone as Members of Parliament. We need all actors; the Executive, the citizens, civil society organisations and the media need to get involved. 

Mr Speaker, I want to conclude with a quote from Albert Einstein who said, “Let’s not try to be men of success but rather try to be men of values”. I call upon Members of the Eleventh Parliament; the men and women of this gallant House to be men and women of values. Thank you, I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the question that I now propose for your debate is that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to highlight the decline in ethical and moral values in the country and proposed solutions for reversing the destructive decline be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now. 

Going by the numbers, I am seeing and the time I have, we have to agree on the time allocation. This is such an important motion that we should not have limited the time of debate. So, how do we proceed? Should we use two minutes each? Can I start with Col Charity Bainababo of the UPDF? 

5.16
COL CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Nsaba-Buturo for this important motion. First of all, we must plead guilty as parents and adults of Uganda that we have fallen short of what we are supposed to do because it is our duty as parents to ensure morals and ethics. As parents, therefore, we need to up our game. 

When you hear us say that children have become pregnant from home and therefore, schools should be reopened, we should appreciate teachers. This is because if we have failed to do what we are supposed to do, why do we want to pass it on to someone else?

Secondly, UCC has a duty to regulate the communication sector but I think they are also failing us because the content that the young people consume is unbecoming. For example, Uncut, Kalakata and all those things that the children consume are unbelievable. The UCC needs to up their game.

Thirdly, I appeal to us that while we go about our work in the constituencies, ethics and moral values should be up on our agenda. Let us not leave civic education to NGOs and civil society organisations. While we leave it to everybody else to attend to, it might not be attended to the way we want it done. When we let this go on, we will have rogues in the society and it will come back to us as leaders. I appeal to us, leaders, that while we do our work in constituencies, let us put that one top on our agenda.

Lastly, the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance, especially the component of National Guidance, needs to take it upon themselves to develop –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, we agreed on the time. Can I have Lamwo District? 

5.18
MS NANCY ACORA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion and also my colleagues who have also seconded it. 

On the issue of teenage pregnancy, I want to implore the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to take up our recommendations as Government to see what it is going to do for the young girls who have already become mothers without husbands. When you look at this situation at hand, most of these children who have been impregnated do not know the fathers of their babies. Others are unfortunately already HIV positive.

It is my humble appeal to the ministry to see what the Government can do to secure the future of this young generation so that they can have a second chance in life.

Secondly, on the issue of trafficking, this still goes back to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. They need to really regulate – Why is Uganda sending so much labour to other countries, especially the Arab world? Our young girls are sent there to work as housemaids. They are slaves. They are sexually harassed and yet they can also find such employment in Uganda. 

Worst of all, some of these small entities or enterprises who are taking our young citizens outside Uganda to work as housemaids are being paid highly and then, they give very little –(Member timed out.)

5.21
MS FLORENCE ASIIMWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing here as a sociologist whose profession is really to look at the moral behaviour of people in society. Thank you, hon. Nsaba-Buturo, for your paper and for all the contributions. 

I stand here to focus on family. Family is the agent of socialisation. Moral degeneration starts with family. The other agents of socialisation like peers come in later. Therefore, if we are to redeem the morals of the children of this country, we must start with ourselves; we must start with the family. 

A child, right from the beginning, listens to the parents. She greets people and does everything based on the parents’ command. As we groom them in better ways, they will become better citizens. The other agencies play a smaller role on their behaviour. Institutions like churches and mosques have to play a big role. They have preached enough – I know – but they have to continue preaching.

Social media is another agent of socialisation. Oh my God, the children are -(Member timed out.)
5.23
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the movers of this motion. It calls for self-evaluation. At this point, I would like to thank the Government; it has done its best to provide the laws and policies. We are the citizens and we have failed the Government. Therefore, we should self-evaluate and do the rightful things.

Mr Speaker, on this open statement about our institution, Parliament – where corruption is exhibited – I would like us to be cognisant of the steps we have taken. You have talked to us, the Government Chief Whip has also talked to us but the wave which is out there – which goes with our institution – is what hurts me.

Therefore, I propose that those who have the evidence should mention the people other than claiming that this institution is corrupt and putting all of us, as Members of Parliament, to be affected.

Mr Speaker, if you are going to take administrative actions, take it and report to us that you have taken it so that we are aware that the few people who engage in these actions are apprehended. 

Lastly, children, yes, have been abused but why should it be schools to be a safer place for our children than our homes? (Applause) Why should we surround –(Member timed out.)

5.25
MR GEOFFREY OKELLO (DP, Nwoya East County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion on the following points. One, let me reemphasise the centrality of the family in building our morals. Mr Speaker, most families in Uganda today, especially the rural families, are threatened because of lack of protection from the economy because they cannot make ends to meet. Families do not have enough resources they can depend on to create that defence line around their children. To tackle this is to tackle the economy.

Two, I would like to speak about empowerment of our partners in this fight. Specifically, I would like to speak about NGOs that have been struggling with this anticorruption fight. The civil society organisations, in their multitudes, have been trying to hold the Government, including Parliament, accountable on very many fronts.

Mr Speaker, instead, the reward they have got is the shrinking space. Civil society organisations are suffering with the laws –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let me have those who have not spoken at all.

5.27
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, the motion is well written and broad-based. It has not spared us. Therefore, it is a good motion and I stand to support it.

There is only one issue I would like to raise: we should go beyond preaching. Everybody is preaching; the clergy are preaching, the executive is preaching and Parliament is also preaching that we should have good morals. However, we are not taking the required action.

For example, the punishment for irresponsible parents – because we know that the family system has broken down: when we cannot even punish a parent for failing to take care of a child, what about the deeper parts of it?

When we say we would like to increase the detention period for rapists and serial defilers, the Members of Parliament will ask: what about if it comes back to us? Therefore, we are not saying it. If we want to punish criminality of this nature, which is affecting our society, let us go beyond preaching. 

There is a new trend of modern slavery where somebody earns half of your salary because they gave you a job. It is happening in Uganda and that is the reason why many of our children have found themselves in mental health units. They are stressed up and nobody is going to speak about it because it is affecting people who are big like us.

Therefore, I would like us to go beyond and take action and help our people if we really care about ethics in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.29
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover and the seconders of the motion on the decline of ethical and moral values. The bigger question here is: what went wrong? We all know that the strength of any building or structure is in the foundation.

The Bible that I read – Proverbs 22: 6 – says: “Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old he will not depart from it.” The foundations are broken; they are full of cracks. The family unit is the very first thing that we have to take care of. We have failed, as parents, to do our role.

In the old times, the clan heads and the clan unit was very paramount in instituting morals in our society but what has happened today? The faith that we confess: what has gone wrong, different from what used to happen?

Many of us here are professionals and every profession has got its own code of conduct. What is not going on right? The Constitution that we have – none adherence to what is embedded in the Constitution is causing all these. Can we, therefore, go back to the drawing board and be able to exercise and appreciate what we have as a nation? I thank you.

5.31
MS MARY BEGUMISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. Being a pastor and mother, please, allow me to say that even the time we have for this is not enough. However, we would like to thank the mover of this motion very much. We shall forever live to remember you for this because this country needs that.

I thank God that, that was part of the biggest vote that brought me to Parliament. My people want that and I am being a voice for them. 

All has been said but I will say a thing about our television and radio stations. Very early in the morning, you find a programme with nude people when parents are seated with their children. 

My prayer is that before this microphone goes off, they have talked about the churches and I am a pastor myself; it is already even in churches - in worship centres. Could you allow us, at least, a standing or an ad hoc committee of Members of Parliament – I volunteer myself for free to help where I can. This country needs our voice. We would not be here talking about corruption if this is well handled. A rightly brought up person will not eat up a road.

I would like to conclude with the motto for our country, “For God and My Country” is enough –(Member timed out.)

5.33
Mr nicholas kamara (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion because it has covered the ethics and morals of our society. 

I saw two former Members of Cabinet talk and in my mind, I was thinking that either they are now free to speak their minds - I would like to thank them for doing so - or they missed their chance to say the right things when they were still in Cabinet. (Laughter)

I would like to comment about one issue featuring in the motion and that is the one that says that some Members of Parliament were involved in the unprecedented and ugly scuffles in the Tenth Parliament. I would like to think that this should not have found space in the motion because the ugliest event that took place in the Tenth Parliament was about amending the Constitution to remove the age limit. (Applause)

Therefore, hon. Dr Nsaba-Buturo and the seconders may look at these Members of Parliament as villains but we look at them as the heroes of Uganda. People have used guns to fight for the Constitution and it is on record. What was wrong for the Members of Parliament to come here and use their fists to defend it?

The Speaker: Honourable member, you are completely out of order. Please, resume your seat. You cannot come here to preach violence for Members of Parliament. It is against the decency of this House and I am really surprised that you are a Member of this House. We do not talk like that in this House. Please, apologise to your colleagues. 

Mr kamara: Mr Speaker, I am not violent and I do not defend it. What I was saying –

The Speaker: Apologise to your colleagues and sit down.

Mr kamara: Mr Speaker, I apologise.

The Speaker: Thank you very much.

5.36
Mr ogwal goli (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion mainly because of what I see. The biggest challenge we have seen is: how do we develop the young? Early childhood development is not at its best. If you carry a baby on your back to go and steal cassava, that baby will be watching. If you build a house with proceeds of corruption, that baby will be watching. Do not then be surprised that the baby will follow the good example of the parent. Let us invest in early childhood development.

The other issue I will need to mention is related to bureaucracy particularly in support of businesses. Businesses are suffering because of bureaucracy created to form a centre for collecting rent. You find a hotel - why would you have 16 licences to operate a hotel? If you are dealing in fish, how many centres do you have to go through? It is Government bureaucracy, which leads to this also.

Let us invest in removing Government bureaucracy, which increases the cost of doing business while at the same time softening the ground for individuals to do business –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, I have a Member online. We are trying to test this technology to see if it works. Dr Charles Ayume is online. He wants to make a contribution and then, we proceed.

5.38
Dr Charles ayume (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko) (on Zoom): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. I believe that we should go back to the introduction line and like somebody asked, ask, “where did we go wrong?” Just like in the medical space, if you want a better product of babies or children, then you have to do very good antenatal care. Therefore, let us go back to the production line of society. That is the children. Let us go back to the schools and look at the policies. 

There are some policies that have stagnated like the school health and the adolescent health policies. These are policies that would help us ground these young stars and make them better people to contribute to society, but they have been ignored.

Right now, I can never walk across an area planted with grass because that was grounded in me in the primary and secondary school. Let us go back to the production line and see where we went wrong. I think the future is bright for this country.

Also on the issue of drugs and substances abuse – recently, the committee was in Butabika Hospital and we saw a newly built private ward for substance and alcohol abuse. However, it was to our surprise that this ward was built from internally generated revenue. This means that the ward is demand-driven. There is high level of admission for people abusing cocaine, marijuana, alcohol and all sorts of substances. So, it is a big challenge for the country. The youth are very idle and what they are going to turn to is alcohol and substance abuse. That is an area we need to look into. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Thank you. We normally record audio and video. I do not know how this will be handled but the technical people should be able to advise us. We will keep testing this so that as many Members as possible can be accommodated even when they are not in the Chamber for ease of participation.

5.41
Mr alfred edakasi (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Dr Nsaba-Buturo – I remember him as Minister for Ethics and Integrity – for bringing back this motion to the House. I stand here to support it.

Corruption numbs and I feel like we are in the times when our society is completely numb. The corrupt are more powerful and you can feel them. They can even make you feel useless. You can have integrity in this country and you are basically useless and powerless. 

Mr Speaker, we live in the times of William Wilberforce whereby, as a House, unless we put our feet on the ground, we too will be counted as corrupt. In this country, if you want a school, you pay for it. If you want medical services, you pay someone for them. Even if you want the police to investigate something, you pay for it. This is the country we live in. This motion has come at the right time, when the 11th Parliament is just beginning. If we do not pay attention to this, our country will go to the dogs. 

Whereas all this is happening, we have several institutions that have been put in place to fight corruption. Just like you and I know, corruption has grown even higher than it was before those institutions were put in place. Therefore, I propose that we empower the schools. Children live in schools more than they live at home and technology has displaced them from our culture. We can no longer use our homes to produce –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will go in this order and continue because this is an important debate. We will start with Members for Bulamogi, Pader, Adjumani East, Amuru, Moyo West, Dokolo District, Bugiri and Ochero County. Then we will take it again. 

5.44
MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to speak to the motion. The Government has put in place enough measures to curb corruption. There are many institutions but to our dismay, we normally get reports of corruption. We also recently found out that the Government is losing Shs three trillion to corruption. 

Mr Speaker, together with Members of Parliament, the best service and gift we can give to this country is to ensure that in this term, corruption is squeezed to zero level. We come to the Floor of Parliament and speak - it is annoying that there are even Members and people who are known to be corrupt but we end at that. Why can’t we start biting? 

I would like to implore the Government that we are tired of these endless threats and statements that we are going to fight corruption. It is high time you started showing us how you are going to fight corruption because if we can save the three trillion, I think by now, Saka Bridge in my constituency would have been worked upon. 

As I conclude, I would like to thank the mover of the motion because in my constituency, there was a nasty scenario, where a 13-year-old girl was impregnated by a 17-year-old boy. We all got stuck – (Member timed out.) 

5.46
MS PASKA MENYA (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the mover of this motion. I rise to support the motion, specifically for the girl-child future. When we see where this country is headed to, we realise that the future of Uganda is about to end. Teenage pregnancy is becoming overwhelming to our country. Yet, the future of a country lies in the life of a girl child. When we talk about rape and defilement, it zeros to the girl child. In all these, they have failed to attain justice because of corruption in our country. 

There are very many poor Ugandans that cannot attain justice because of corruption. I would like to implore the Ministry of Health, with the help of the scientists, to think far and look at a specific deliberate family planning method that will target men in order to secure the future of our young girl child. You find that one man can impregnate more than 10 women in a day and yet a woman can be impregnated once for the whole year. If we need –(Member timed out.) 

5.48 
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for bringing this to the House. 

I closely read the journal of hon. Nsamba in October 2019. It clearly indicated what has been brought today. We are very happy with that. 

The Government is trying its best to see that morality is adhered to in the country. However, at the community level, the roads are impassable. Why? 

Look at how girls are dressing now. You cannot pass there as a leader. The nature of clothes they wear are made at the factories. Why don’t we address some of these challenges at production level? Why do we allow industries to produce the kind of clothing that our people wear? We would like to implore the ministry to put some restrictions on production of certain items that cause immorality in the country. 

The issue of cultural institutions is very important as far as morality is concerned. Therefore, we would like to also implore the ministry responsible for ethics and integrity to see that cultural institutions are considered so that they can talk to the community and mortality is built up. Otherwise, we are totally off-track, as far as morality is concerned. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.50 
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak to the motion that is important to all of us. 

Allow me to also add my voice in thanking my good friend and someone I have worked with on a number of issues for bringing up this motion. I would like to say that for us to fight this, it is not going to be the laws but the foundation we put in our children. 

My child is in one of the private schools in the central region. One time, I was very disappointed when I went to visit and I found the whole school littered with very expensive posters. These children are as young as five or six years old. However, they were campaigning. What surprised me most was that one of the children offered the school a whole cow in order to be voted. Friends, this speaks a lot. What are we teaching our children? And by the way, it is parents who are buying the things and taking to schools. One of the mottos I saw in one of the platforms says, “No family, no children, no future.” If we continue in that, definitely we are not going to have a future. 

Mr Speaker, I recently attended a meeting and one of the issues that were discussed was this issue of rampant teenage pregnancies, and one of the presenters said, “If Uganda had accepted and ratified - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Moyo West. 

5.52
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, hon. Nsaba Buturo for this motion, about the declining ethical and moral values in our country. 

Mr Speaker, there is saying that goes, “a fish rots from the head down” –(Interjection)– “a fish rots from the head down”, I emphasise. Leaders from the village level, national level and also all the civil, political and religious leaders, military leaders, businessmen and women, elders, opinion leaders, senior citizens, cultural leaders, as well as parents are all to blame for the moral decadence in our country. 

For example, Mr Speaker, a headmaster conspiring with an investor to sell away a football pitch; a headmaster, who is supposed to protect a playground for children but sells it to investors! 

When you go to the law courts, to chief administrative officers’ offices, district service commissions, the police, and all departments there is corruption in all. 

Mr Speaker, why do we practise lesbianism? A lady having an affair with another lady? Why do we practise bestiality; a young man having sex with a goat or sheep or pig? Why do we go in for homosexuality? In Genesis 1:28, God told Adam and Eve to procreate –(Member timed out.)

5.55
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to give my opinion on this motion. At the beginning, I made it clear that I will neither support nor reject this motion because the mover is aware that there are critical issues that he has lumped up in an omnibus manner in that motion. 

The issue of homosexuality is still an issue which has not been resolved; it should have come as a motion. This Parliament should agree to actually pass a law - you know that is a matter that needs to be resolved by Parliament. 

The issue of abortion is a very serious matter; the issue of corruption. Therefore, I thought maybe this is just massaging our memory or exciting us, because after we have discussed then what? 

I would have wanted us to discuss the matter, pass resolutions and we take action because the situation is serious. Mr Speaker, for me, as an elder, I want to say, all of us should have repented before this motion was moved. Thank God, there is a pastor here because Jesus said, “Let the person who has no sin throw the first stone.” All of us know that Members of Parliament when there are issues, brown envelopes pass around; tell me who has not taken that brown envelope? We will prove it; the Holy Spirit will catch you – (Member timed out) 

5.57
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion. Listening to the motion, the justification and from the seconders, it is very clear that the motion appears more as a presentation of a state of crime in the country. It is highlighting pregnancies, corruption, abortion and the like, and has less to do with what we call moral and ethical values - that are neither legislatable nor justiciable. And that is my ground for opposing this motion. 

What we would be doing, is for us to look at the parameters of determining what is moral and what is ethical, and we focus the discussion on those parameters. However, we are stating crime. One of the seconders was even talking about the situation during the COVID-19 period; there was an increase in incest and teenage pregnancies. Does that in itself underscore the level of immorality or unethicalness of us, as a country? 

When you look at this motion Mr Speaker, it is also alarmist in nature; it does not give facts. It is also saying Members of Parliament (MPs) are not spared; who are these MPs? It is talking about levels of corruption; where are the figures for us to benefit so that we avoid being alarmist? 

Finally –(Member timed out.)

5.59
MR JULIUS EMIGU (FDC, Ochero County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just like many persons have thanked the movers of the motion, I want to thank them too. But I want to remember one time, Mr Speaker, when you were at a function you made a statement that all people are corrupt. When I was still gathering strength to stand with you, somebody shot that down and said except him. All the same, we are sure that actually there is corruption. In addition, there are actually all weaknesses that we are really talking about, in this motion. 

However, I want to say this, let the preachers preach against the wrong things in our society, let anybody speak anything. I would say we must look at the punitive action. Once you leave it behind, things will not work. 

It is very painful to find somebody who through corruption has taken money, and it is even known - Sometimes, the lawyers challenge us so much because we may not have evidence. But outside there we see that the person is actually swimming in the wealth that he or she never got in the rightful manner. However, here we are, we may not be able to prove it in courts of law. Shall lawyers really sit down to lower the level of how we can prove these thugs and we pick them? 

I want to also say that sometimes when you put sense in the minds of the people they will go by it, especially when we talk. If I take the example at a time when I was campaigning, I was the only candidate that they thought had no money but I had sense and I managed to pump sense in the minds of the people to the extent that even as they distributed money in bribing the voters, it never succeeded. So, I think if we put things –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I have Gweri then I have Ruhaama and Kajara.

6.02
MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you read Simon Blackburn, he asks you, “Where do morals come from? What do we mean by good morals?” When you read it, it tells you where morals come from and that is from us – they begin from our families. 

I support the motion but this must begin from our families and we have to begin by change of mind-set. If we do not talk to our children and family members, then we are doing nothing; we shall not change anything. After our families, we go to our institutions; Judiciary, IGG and we talk to NGOs that is a by the way. They will come and help us sharpen our morals; but not to say we begin from there.

My cows were stolen and I know the people who stole them. I am asking for compensation. Yes, let us first of all begin with those ones and tell them that cattle rustling is bad, so that they also change and their children will also learn from them. That is the message I would like to give and I am ready for – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.03
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the mover of the motion and the seconders. This motion is fundamental; talking about morals and ethics is very important for this country. Unfortunately, in Uganda, we teach ethics only in tertiary institutions. When people have already become corrupt, we teach them about corruption and other things, and instead, they learn to be more corrupt. That is why I propose that we should have anti-corruption education; we teach values and ethics starting from primary level such that by the time people reach in tertiary institutions, they are already taught and they know what it means to be unethical and how being ethical benefits the country. 

Secondly, we have to think about e-Governance to prevent corruption, because when you take a corrupt person to court, you might find a corrupt judge. When you take a corrupt person to the police, you might find a corrupt police officer. When you take a corrupt person to a subcounty court, you might find there is a corrupt chairperson. 

Therefore, I propose that we should capture corruption as early as possible from childhood starting with primary schools. Why? Children no longer spend a lot of time in their homes; they spend time in boarding schools and therefore, we should teach ethics there.

Mr Speaker, in Uganda, being ethical is very difficult. Actually, you are vulnerable when you are ethical in Uganda because we have very many unethical people surrounding us and some are extremely bigger than –(Member timed out.)     

6.05
MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this motion on time. As we speak, information moving on social media is that this Parliament uses 10,000 condoms in a month. 

Therefore, that to the public defines the Parliament of Uganda. This is the right time for us to talk about these issues but also to act about them. For example, in a country where we dream about equal opportunities and treating people fairly, we come here and talk about equity and fair distribution, but we do not practice it ourselves - we only talk about it and it ends here.

Honourable minister, we would be looking forward to action that you have brought a motion here and after debate, actions are taken. The country we live in - we have a responsibility of leaving a legacy to the next generation and it is this Parliament that will determine if the generation is upright or not. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. 

6.07
DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the mover of this motion, because this is a motion, which touches on our cultural, religious and social foundation. However, I also want to acknowledge the difficulties in dealing with this motion because it is cumbersome. It has a lot of elements, which are very difficult to deal with. There is only one aspect of the motion, which has interested me to contribute on; that is about corruption. 

I think we have been fighting corruption for a very long time and we have good laws; up to nine Acts and about five institutions that fight corruption. However, studies have showed that corruption in Uganda is increasing. There was a study published by Afrobarometer, which indicated that corruption in Uganda has worsened.

I, therefore, want to agree with the mover of the motion that we need to look at the tangible aspect of fighting corruption because everything has been said in these laws. This means that this particular motion brought forth cannot be dealt with by more laws, because we have a lot of laws already, especially on corruption and we have not realised their fruits. 

In 2006, there was zero tolerance to corruption. In 2016, that effort was reviewed and then, we had the 2019 Corruption Walk, but studies have shown that corruption has instead increased. 

I would also want the mover of this motion to go further and highlight –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, member.

6.09
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Due to the demand, I decided to change my party today. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that official?

MR ACON: I will sign the Memorandum of Understanding tomorrow. Sexual abuse and corruption existed before some of us were born, but it sounds strange to be blaming teenage pregnancies or corruption on Coronavirus. Let Coronavirus play its part and as law makers, we also play ours. 

I would like to request the Government to provide us with a DNA machine and another that detects pregnancy and they should be free-of-charge, like the way we are testing for the Coronavirus. In that way, we will find out the father of these children. 


All the burdens, from now onwards - all these teenage pregnancies, we are going to pay for the consequences because we must support the mothers as their parents. I already received a phone call that I am supposed to buy maternity stuff, yet I am not the father. 

Mr Speaker, let our country have the law. For example, if you look at the education sector, you find teachers or lecturers marking examines for sex. This is very sad for our country. I would like this law to be put accordingly. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

6.11
MR HASSAN KIRUMIRA (NUP, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need to thank the mover and seconders of the motion. However, in their presentation, they have generalised the whole motion because they lacked critical issues, especially the distinction between ethics and morality. 

I think literature defines those two concepts differently. When you look at ethics, we are focusing on individual character or what is deemed right or wrong, on individual basis. In terms of morality, we focus on societal norms in terms of defining what is right or wrong or how the society defines “right” or “wrong”. 

Therefore, that means that in fighting moral and ethical decay, we need to look at different approaches. For example, we could uplift education and our religious institutions to fight ethical decay. When it comes to morality, it is much bigger. We need to focus on our entire institutions, including governance and leadership.

This is because we are aware that part of the issues that are affecting our people, to the extent of leading to moral decay, is poverty. We need to get solutions to that. We need to uplift our families by creating jobs and uplifting the standards of our families to ensure that parents are in position to take care of their families. 

Maybe morality can extend to governance. Are we being the role models to our society? In leadership, are we causing peaceful transition in our country? What are the youth looking at in terms of leadership? Thank you. (Applause)

6.14
MS PATIENCE KINSHABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I second this motion. Today, when you look at Uganda, you see that morals have decayed. It has to be a combined effort to see what we can do to get back on track.

This should be the role of the ministry responsible for ethics and integrity.  I appeal to this Government to regulate the time when the bars can be open. Today, you find people, including our mothers, drinking at 6. 00 a.m. and we are here blaming our young girls for getting pregnant and young boys for impregnating our girls. Today, you do not find anybody at home advising this young generation.

If the Government, local leaders, cultural leaders, elders, senior citizens and the parents sensitise, mobilise and educate the children soundly and formally on how to behave, we will come with a solution on how we can get back in line.

I appeal to everyone to work together to interface and benchmark with societies that are morally and ethically upright to see how we can behave and do what is right. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

6.15
MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to talk from the rural perspective because I represent the rural people. Why our morals are not okay is just due to poverty, as some colleagues stated. Unless we, as the Government, empower our people economically and socially, there is no way we are going to change the morals of the people. 

In the rural place, a family can even sacrifice a young girl to someone who has some money because of lack of the basic needs. There is high level of defilement in the rural areas. I was one time a teacher. I used to empower girls. Some parents could even pull out their daughters from school to be married to some other people. I stood firm, however, and supported the girls to complete their studies. 

We need to campaign – we need to empower women because they are the base of the family. Everything lies on them. If the worst comes to the worst, men always leave their wives and get other women who have something and leave their wives with the children to suffer. 

A poor person’s voice cannot be heard. People always tend to listen to people who have something. Poor people cannot even speak because of fear and stigma. So, I encourage the –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I had already picked. 

6.17
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Morality refers to the way people choose to live their lives according to the set principles and guidelines that govern their decisions, as to whether to take something as right or wrong. 

Our children, even when they are young, are influenced by families, our cultures and religions to make a moral decision. Here, I am on the side of the girl child and women. Unfortunately, we all fall short of these morals. Why? The law that we have in this country is very lenient.

Mr Speaker, Uganda has the highest teenage pregnancy in the Sub-Saharan Africa with over 30 per cent of Ugandan girls having their first babies before they are 18. The HIV infection rates are nine times higher in girls than in boys of the same age. Uganda also has the highest maternal death rate in the world, of 25 per cent, which is as a result of unsafe abortions. Who are causing all these problems? The men are. 

It brings me to the law on bail. In this nation, we do not have a chance to appeal. You would find that my daughter has been impregnated and infected with HIV –(Member timed out.)

6.19
MS PERSIS NAMUGANZA (NRM, Bukono County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to appreciate hon. Nsaba-Buturo for this very important motion. I also thank my colleagues for the debate so far.

Some Members here think that when you are in the Executive, you do not talk about these things. That is not true. I want to inform you that issues that concern our country, when they are negative, involve all of us. When they are positive, we all enjoy.

I bought an idea of the Member from Bugiri that we should highlight these issues and take actions on each of them. For example, if I am to talk about the media, colleagues, we all see girls presenting on these televisions half-naked. They put on blouses instead of dresses. For clothes that are supposed to be blouses, they make them dresses and our children at home are watching all these. How can we sit here, as Parliament, every day when that is happening and we do not say anything? 

Secondly, the Member who moved this motion some time back also had a motion on the miniskirts. The motion came here and it was very controversial. I think it never passed. Am I right? Therefore, if we were looking at each of the items, probably, we would come up with - I heard that Members of Parliament were against the miniskirts. They said, “we shall not vote” –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Namuganza, you spoke in your capacity as the Member of Parliament for Bukono County. Can I have Dr Batuwa and then Member for Kabale District?

6.22
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is neither to support nor oppose the motion because that is not what the mover sought; the mover wants solutions to what is happening. 

In May 1968, soldiers belonging to a company called Charlie in the 11th Infantry Brigade entered Mylar Village in Vietnam and within three hours, over 500 civilians had been massacred. I am reading this from ethical decision-making, using the ethical triangle by Jack Dickens who says, “Doing the right thing is good and doing the right thing for the right reason with the right goal is better.”

The solution I am bringing on the table is: as the case is that for every decision that Parliament takes, there is a need for a certificate of financial implication. We should also add the importance and the need of a certificate of ethical and moral implication before we make any decision. 

I invite you to look at some of the decisions the Government has taken. You will realise that the moral degradation is being driven by the policies of the Government. Look at the policies that are inviting the army into business. The policies that are to the end that schools should be constructed by the army - they are also being involved in health facilities and agriculture.

Mr Speaker, I know the army as a highly disciplined institution, where even to move from one point to another, involves several processes. Now, are we going to motivate soldiers by business or should we motivate them through promotions? To what end would that be –(Member timed out.)

6.24
MR DAVID LAGEN (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to this motion. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for coming up at such a time, when we need our country to move upright.

When we talk about moral uprightness, there are key things that need to be put into consideration. One of them is policies. There is a need for us to review some of our policies. For example, the policy on wages. If you are employing a police officer to be a traffic officer on the road and paying him Shs 200,000, how do you expect that police officer to be morally upright?

If you are employing a chief administrative officer, who will administer the entire district, yet you are paying the person a very low salary wage, when the junior is getting a higher salary, how do you expect such a person to be exemplary in executing moral uprightness?

Therefore, there is a call to us as the Legislature to review our policies so that we can approach this issue amicably.

Secondly, morals begin from us and end with us. Therefore, we must begin to change our thinking. A good gift that you can give your children is not money –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I am trying to pick Members who have not spoken the whole of today. However, I have seen many of you who have spoken want to speak again. Can I have the Member for Kabale District?

6.26
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am extremely happy for what hon. Nsaba Buturo has done to help this country. 

Mr Speaker, you have heard that all the discussions are revolving around teenage pregnancy. This issue has caught fire yet the responsible citizens are comfortable in their zones.

Parents are busy negotiating for the price. We are asking: where is the law? Who is to guide? Women are being raped. Mr Speaker, the nation stands on a woman, who is the girl child. Now, we have spoiled everything and so, where is Uganda heading to? Can we go back all together to revamp our ethical and moral values for our baby Uganda to grow with dignity?

The law is crippling to penalise the people who are engineering teenage pregnancies. Research shows that almost all young girls –(Member timed out.)

6.28
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have spoken quite a lot but I think we have relevant laws that if enforced, they help to fight immorality, corruption among others. Otherwise, the challenge is the enforcement.

I happen to stay in a slum; I did not leave the slum. However, I have seen that poverty has created a lot of what we are talking about. You find a family of ten members sleeping in a single bedroom. What happens? When the mother and father are enjoying sex, these children are watching. They are so sharp that they cannot even sleep. This is all about –(Interjections)- it is happening because of poverty.

Secondly, we have a lot of unemployment. Today, as I speak, a girl child is looked at more frequently than a boy child. Yet, the future offender is not catered for. Even when it comes to employment, today, we are taking girls outside and we are facilitating them; they are going at no cost. How about a boy child who is unemployed and cannot go out of the country to get a good job because he has no money? Therefore, we must find ways of empowering the boy child.

When you talk about early pregnancies, the greatest method of keeping a girl child –(Member timed out.)

6.30
DR ABRAHAM ISAMAT (NRM, Kapir County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a scientist who studied psychology and behaviour, be it in animals or humans - the two are related. 

When you look at a human being and animals, environment is critical. The environment you are exposed to will determine the kind of person you will be.

Animals remain loyal to their bosses because of the environment they are in. In a human perspective, what is happening in our environment is dictated by very many factors. The fact that there are very many of them acting on us and sometimes against us, those morals that we are talking about get compromised.

I would like to agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that unless we make a thorough assessment of what is contributing to these problems, we may not get a solution to these issues of moral decadence.

I would like to suggest that let there be a –(Member timed out.)

6.32
Mr John-Baptist Nambeshe (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of the colleagues to appreciate the hon. Dr Nsaba-Buturo for moving this motion.

For the information of the House, it is a repetition of a similar motion, which was moved in the Tenth Parliament and we were tasked to give solutions. I remember that in my submission, one of the solutions that I submitted was that the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) should include integrity and ethics in the syllabus and make them examinable. However, why I am at odds with you this time round is because of not walking the talk; preaching water but drinking wine. Remember that we were at odds at the time of that controversial removal of the Presidential age limit and we were in the same caucus.

Mr Speaker, I expected the good Doctor to have conducted a deep assessment of the impact of those resolutions that we made before coming up with this motion. Remember and I would like to take you down the memory lane, I brought here a matter of national importance on the diversion of funds - Shs 10 billion - in the Ministry of Health that was diverted to procure creams but the funds were meant for fighting HIV – 

The Speaker: You are in your capacity as Member of Parliament for Manjiya as you speak to this motion. There is no other status on it. Your time is up.

Mr nambeshe: Mr Speaker, I am also doubling as Leader of the Opposition.

The Speaker: There is no Leader of the Opposition in this matter. It is a motion. (Laughter)

6.35
Ms Lukia Nakadama (NRM, Woman Representative, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that the moral values are lacking but like hon. Opendi said, all the sectors are involved in this moral decay. Corruption is left, right and centre. All the leaders are involved in this and I think it is high time that, as leaders, we went and talked to our constituents because I think the Bible, which talks about the 10 commandments, has been forgotten. Nobody remembers that!

Secondly, when a girl-child is defiled, it is us leaders who go to those places and request for the perpetrator to be released but we are here saying that there is moral decay.

We have shifted all the blame to Government and we have forgotten that the smallest unit in a society, which is the family, should be the starting point. Government has put all the laws in place but the implementers who are here have not yet played their role. I think it is time we stopped pointing fingers and work on the mind-set. 

The mind-set is very important and so when we go back, we should talk to our people so that there is a change. When we go to different countries, we find there people and moving on well and we admire them. When –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable member but you are speaking to this debate as Member for Mayuge District. If it were another kind of debate, you would have had another status just like the Leader of the Opposition was making an attempt to give me his status but for which I could get him more time.

Honourable members, while this is a vital motion, we should draw it to a close. I think it is time we expressed our views and decisions on this matter. The discussions of this nature must continue in every place where there is a human being.

The biggest ailment, as you heard here, is that in the society there is something called “moral disengagement”. This is simply humans having explanations for every bad thing that they do. They know it is wrong but they do and explain it. I heard an attempt made here that, “Anyway, everybody is doing it so it is okay.” You know it is wrong but you continue doing it. Why don’t you set the example? It is called “moral disengagement.”

“I did it because the orders were from superior authorities.” You know it is wrong but you still go and do it. “I did it because I was intending to achieve something better.” It is wrong to do that but you explain it away. That is the biggest problem.

I even heard an attempt to explain away highly immoral things in this House. I heard a Member making an attempt to explain because that is our default mode. The saddest bit is that the communities accept our explanations and so, we just continue. 

The purpose of this motion is to ignite a serious engagement amongst ourselves as leaders to see how we pass on these messages. It is a conversation that should not end even after adopting the motion because in it is the soul of this country.

We have to watch out on the children. Somebody said that every single day of our lives, we make deposits in the memory banks of our children. We have no capacities to withdraw those deposits from their permanent memories and so, let us be careful how we use our time and inspire our children; what we expose them to because they will end up the other side and start saying things.

I have heard other parents blame their children and colleagues who grew up with them. You are blaming this child but do you remember how you were? They start laughing and keep quiet because children have taken exactly how their parents used to conduct themselves when they were young. However, that is for today. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your decision is for a Resolution of Parliament to highlight the decline in ethical and moral values in the country and propose solutions for reversing the destructive decline. I put the question to that question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I am delighted that even the “no” that was expressed did not come out this time. That means we are all together. 

Honourable members, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 October 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)


