Tuesday, 30 October 2012

Parliament met at 2.17 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr Shem Bageine 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member. I am sure this is your maiden appearance in this House, so, I have to present to you the instruments you will use.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting, and I hope you had a good break and are now ready to proceed with the business that is pending before this House.

You are by now aware of the disease which will be a subject of a ministerial statement this afternoon. The preliminary condition given to us is to avoid contact. The way we handled the issue of Ebola is the same way we should be handling this particular outbreak. So, you are informed to that effect. Stay safe!

Secondly, last week, I intimated to the House that today, I will be reporting under our Rules of Procedure on the appointments that were recently made by the President and approved by Parliament. The Speaker has just come back, and we have not been able to consult on this issue and harmonise on the appointments she handled and those that I handled, so that a full report can be given to the House as required by the rules.

Therefore, that item will not come until we consult with the Speaker and harmonise on the full names that have been approved by the Appointments Committee of Parliament. This should be coming tomorrow or the next day, as soon as the Speaker is in.

The Leader of the Opposition consulted with me and we agreed to allow you raise some urgent matters.

You will recall that I made a ruling that matters of urgent public importance would be raised towards the end of our sitting. I will be giving space for that. But being the Leader of the Opposition, I am sure I can grant some exception to that particular rule; the rule, however, applies to all other Members. So, please proceed with the issues.

2.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for the opportunity and for allowing us to make some comments. Allow me, on behalf of the Opposition, to raise the following matters of public importance to which we need urgent response from Government. These include among others:

One, President Kabila of the DRC has questioned the presence of Uganda in his country. He made the statement as the UN was issuing a special report pinning Uganda as one of the nations assisting the M23 in their fight against the DRC Government. Ugandans would like to know whether and why the UPDF is in the DRC.

Two, a number of prominent people who include among others, Muslims and Muslim clerics, have been murdered in cold blood, but Police has not arrested those perpetrating this crime. What steps is Government taking to arrest the situation?

Three, the arrest and dentition of Opposition politicians in Police and safe Houses without charges or sometimes with trumped up charges such as murder, terrorism and simple robbery is on the increase. Can Government assure us of our safety to participate in political activities in Uganda? 

Four, some Ugandans are being kidnapped on a daily basis and relatives are not sure of their whereabouts. Can Government assure Ugandans that we are not going to the panda gari days?

Five, Police continues to use preventive arrests as a way of curtailing the political Opposition activities. Prominent among these include: Dr Kiiza Besigye, Lord Mayor and hon. Ssemujju Nganda, among others.

The Political Parties’ Organisations Act, 2005 guarantees political parties to mobilise and organise. Can we get assurance from Government that we are free to carry out our political activities in Uganda?

6. Corruption in Uganda is on the increase. In one of our PAC reports of 2005/2006, we recommended that the pension department be investigated. We further recommended that the principal accountant, Mr Obey, who is under investigation now, be transferred. This met with a lot of resistance from the ministry.

Mr Speaker, most of our senior citizens have died without getting their pension money. However, it has taken Government years to realise that pension money was being stolen and paid to ghost pensioners.

Office of the Prime Minister; this is where over Shs 20 billion and the Prime Minister has selectively sent some staff on leave and left others. Could we get some assurance from Government that our resources are safe?

From the above, Ugandans need assurance about their safety and the safety of their funds in Government hands given the fact that on a number of occasions, Government promises to give answers have not yielded results. 
For example, the IGP was invited by the Committee on Human Rights, but he refused to attend. Can Government tell us whether he is above the law?

Two, The Minister of Internal Affairs promised, on 3rd October 2012, to report to Parliament within one week or two about the killings, but to-date, no response has been made. We have the Hansard and we shall lay it on the Table. 

Three, The Minister of Internal Affairs further promised to give a response regarding the inhuman handling of Ms Ingrid Turinawe, but to-date, nothing has been done.

Mr Speaker and Colleagues, the safety of all Ugandans is our primary concern and Government, through the Leader of Government Business, should assure us that the events taking place will not derail the country. I thank you Mr Speaker. (Mr Daudi Migereko rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Leader of the Opposition. These matters are very involving and they are many, do you have a copy for Government?

In a spirit of having an informed response to that issue, I am not going to ask you to rush responses to those issues because you are not even from that sector. I propose that you go, discuss those papers with the people concerned and come back to Parliament tomorrow at 2 O’clock to make some responses.

2.32
THE MINISTER OF LANDS (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has tabled very weighty matters like Uganda’s role in regard to mediation efforts in the Congo, which is a topical issue not only in the region, but in the entire world. Your directive that we come up with a statement tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. is one that I am going to communicate to the Leader of Government Business, but it is a matter that may also require fairly substantial consultation given that we have a statement to make to the UN. I would, therefore, like to request, Mr Speaker, that I deliver your instruction to the Leader of Government Business, but also confer with you before Parliament opens tomorrow.

As regards the other issues that have been raised, I will go ahead and forward them to the relevant ministers so that they can be able to respond. I thank you.

2.34
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you Mr Speaker. I listened to your guidance and ruling on the matter that Parliament be given a response tomorrow. As you may realise dear Colleagues, these are matters of deep national importance which the minister is saying he intends to forward to the responsible ministries, but he is being non-committal.  Mr Speaker, I would like you to guide this House and the acting Leader of Government Business to be categorical to tell us as a country, because the issues raised, for instance, when you talk about corruption and we know that the PRDP is being suspended - we want to know the fate of Ugandans, particularly in the Northern part of this country, whose lives are at stake and all the projects which have stalled, and I thought these are really matters of national importance that ought to be answered in the affirmative or in strong and concrete terms. Therefore, is it procedurally right for the minister to dilly-dally on matters of national importance as if they were ordinary circumstances, yet we needed answers yesterday, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The directive of the Speaker remains the directive of the Speaker that this matter should come back to Parliament tomorrow at 2 O’clock. (Applause)

2.36
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I am standing here on a matter of public importance as provided for in Rules 39(1).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That rule is for urgent questions. Would you like to frame some urgent questions? Rule 39 is for urgent questions.

MR OKOT-OGONG: National importance. Officials of the Office of the Prime Minister are being investigated and some have already been interdicted for the same. As concerned and affected Members of Parliament from Greater North, we want to express our dismay and profound disappointment at the high level of misuse, plunder, theft and looting of monies meant for the suffering poor people in the Greater North.

It is no wonder that despite interventions in the development of the Greater North, there is still high level of discrepancy between purported money released and the actual results on the ground as per the socio-economic indicators. 

It is noted that in the North, there is still, among other things, high maternal mortality, poor infrastructure in education, roads, water and health sectors, high prevalence of disease and death, low agricultural productivity and also, high levels of unemployment, especially among the young people. 

Members also noted that the spirit of affirmative action which has all along formed the basis of post-war recovery and development has generally been ignored. For instance, some districts outside Greater North still get more funding. 

Following this disturbing development, Mr Speaker, the Members of Parliament from Greater North have held a meeting this morning and made some important resolutions which I beg to read:

1. That Government should conduct a forensic and comprehensive audit of PRDP, NUSAF I and II and all other Government and donor programmes and projects meant for the North in the Office of the Prime Minister.

    1. That the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament be urged to expeditiously handle the special investigations into the financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister.

    2. That as per Article 164 of the Constitution, the Permanent Secretary and other culpable officials in the Office of the Prime Minister be held responsible and be immediately interdicted as investigations are carried out.

    3. That the Prime Minister should as a matter of urgency come up with a comprehensive statement to Parliament outlining the loss of funds, how it came about and the measures being taken to reprimand and recover the money.

    4. That the Greater North Members of Parliament should seek an urgent meeting with donors to discuss the possibility of ways of channelling funds to respective districts in the war-affected areas.

We have also urged donor partners not to suspend support to programmes in the Greater North. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Like I said at the beginning, the rule under which you are proceeding is for urgent questions. The issues you have raised sound more like a motion than an urgent question, because you are even making recommendations on what this House should do and what different people should do. 

Can you get an opportunity to present, substantially, a motion to that effect so that it can be debated and Parliament passes a resolution to it, because the way it is structured, we cannot move on it. 

Therefore, go and organise yourself and see if it could come in another form so that we debate it properly and take some decisions on it.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

2.41
PROF. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, you directed following another directive to the Minister of Trade, to come up with a status of a certain company which has fleeced Ugandans like what hon. Okot-Ogong is saying. We have been waiting for that response from the Ministry of Trade - a company called Continental. The report was presented here, debated and adopted and we have been waiting to know what is happening because the same company is again in the field causing havoc to Ugandans. Can we get to know what is happening now that the minister is here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this matter has been outstanding, please.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter needed a study and yesterday is when we met all the tobacco people including Continental, which had had a problem. There were not very straight answers received from Continental and those received from the districts concerned. So, we thought we should take a bit more time and have it properly ironed out before we submit here a credible statement for both of us. I even informed the person who has asked the question that there is this confusion. We cannot go to Parliament with this type of confusion. So, this is a matter we are ironing out and we are coming with it next week. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next week. What day of the week, honourable minister?

MR WAKIKONA: As you direct, Mr Speaker, but Thursday would be very appropriate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thursday next week, we expect a statement from the honourable Minister of Trade on the issues of tobacco.

2.44
MR MOHAMMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Through the media or any other way, you could have heard of the fracas that took place in Entebbe. What happened yesterday did not just emerge yesterday. It emerged out of the blue that the leaders of Wakiso District including me as their Member of Parliament, have been trying to find answers in regard to the take-away of Entebbe Hospital by the Ministry of Defence - the Special Forces. 

The history of Entebbe Hospital, which is over 104 years old has not been expanded or had any such new development, but the population is growing. In spite of the fact that the historical population intended to be served was about 2000 people, Entebbe has over 100,000 people and Wakiso District has millions, but this hospital serves many districts from Kalangala, Masaka and the records have even people from Kampala. 

Mr Speaker, on 21 October, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health, Dr Lukwago, called the Superintendent of the Hospital instructing him to handover the hospital to the Special Forces from 1st November. This caught us by surprise. The cardinal authority, which is the District Council, that is overseeing management of the hospital, was not aware. The Superintendent of the hospital and all of us the area leaders including those of Entebbe Municipal Council were not aware of this development. So, yesterday, we had no choice but to get on the streets and protest this move that did not augur well in our minds. 

We appreciate development and all of us here, including the people of Entebbe would like to see that hospital expanding and growing to what is a sugar-coated message to us . The hospital has been enjoying a very good relationship with the external community. We have international agencies working in that hospital like the Medical Research Council, IAVI and the donor community that is supporting the hospital. 

This hospital serves over 4000 HIV/AIDS patients. When the Ministry of Defence takes over the hospital, we will not have the opportunity to serve these clients. Mind you, we have learnt that TASO is scaling down; maybe due to the dwindling funds, and the other centres where people have been getting services like Mildmay are scaling down on their services too. Therefore, we are supposed to provide services to our community. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, so what is it you want to be done?

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker, we have prayers that we are making to this Parliament. But before that, I want to state that the government budget allots about Shs 820 million, but annually, we hardly get Shs 400 million. This part of the hospital that Government is intending to take away generates over Shs 400 million to top-up on the funds for the other hospitals. So, we are going to face a number of challenges in case this happens. 

We are, therefore, praying to this Parliament to urge Government to stay the takeover. Secondly, we would like all stakeholders to be thoroughly informed about what is taking place. It is the first time I have heard of such serious transactions being done on a mere telephone call.

Thirdly, we would like Government to develop a similar or better facility elsewhere before this facility is taken over by Ministry of Defence. 

Before I wind-up, I request Government to come out – yesterday, the district chairman was molested, manhandled and imprisoned. He is the chairperson, the political head of the district, yet he was not aware of what was happening in his own district. We have had similar happenings, like in Moroto. People from that area can tell you. I think we need to handle Government business in a more serious and more formal way than the course we have taken now. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Member for Entebbe Municipality. I will allow the honourable minister of the sector to make a statement. (Members rose_) Honourable members, the rules are that you come to the Speaker if you have a matter to raise; you do not just come to the Floor and raise it.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Ms Sarah Achieng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What the honourable member has said is true. There are plans to hand over the hospital to the Ministry of Defence. However, I want to propose, Mr Speaker, that you give us time so that we come back with a full statement on this matter –(Interjections)– because we are in the process of consulting further. Therefore, my proposal, Mr Speaker, is that you give us time –(Interjections)– we have agreed as the political leaders and the technical officers in the ministry that we needed to have more consultations on this matter to involve everybody, because these plans date as far back as 2002. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you, therefore, saying that the date of 1st November is not valid? Can you state it clearly that there will be no takeover on 1st November so that people are at rest and you do your consultations?

MS ACHIENG: Yes, –(Interjections)– there will be no takeover on 1st November. We are going to have a stakeholders meeting so that we can brief all the political leaders in Wakiso and this will be within a week’s time. That is why I am saying, after this, we will come to this House and give an explanation – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the matter we are discussing now is very important. I cannot imagine that a government elected by the people for the cause of the people could take over a public hospital in the way it was taken over yesterday as described by hon. Kawuma.

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking is, you should be open and specific to us. Can we assume that the hospital referred to is now free from military invasion? 

MS ACHIENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I spoke clear English. There will be no takeover on the 1 November, and there has been no military invasion of the hospital. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of Entebbe Hospital is very important and sensitive. The guidance I am seeking is; the minister has assured us that there will be no takeover of the hospital on first, but it can happen on the 2nd November. So, let the minister be very clear and state that unless all stakeholders are brought on board and she brings a statement to Parliament after consultations with the stakeholders, no takeover will happen. Otherwise, just stating that there will be no takeover on 1st November is not clear because the takeover can take place on 2nd November. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to be clear on the issue of consultations and getting back to the House when these processes are complete?

MS ACHIENG: Mr Speaker, I want to be clear again. There will be no takeover of the hospital on the 1st of November – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue is, there will be no takeover on the 1st of November, but will there be a takeover on the second or third?

MS ACHIENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just like I explained, this matter dates as far back as 2002. There were plans to turn this hospital into a VIP treatment centre and all these plans have been there. However, following what appeared in the press, we have agreed to hold consultative meetings –(Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister first make her statement and then you can seek clarification.

MS ACHIENG: We have agreed to hold a consultative meeting with all the stakeholders and then thereafter, agree on a way forward and that is why I was saying –[Honourable Members: “When?”]– in a week’s time. So, this is why I am saying that can you give us time next week and by Thursday, we will come back to this House with a detailed explanation. (Interjections) I thank you.

2.56
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, three weeks ago, we were here in Parliament and I came up to say that there are people who are killing us; people are cutting off the heads of my people and I have lost six. They come at night, dig holes into the wall, pass through and cut off people’s heads. The minister was here and he said he was going to give me an explanation in a week, but never! 

Yesterday, I was amazed to see the Chairman of Wakiso District; a very big district and potentially wanted by many, being beaten by the Police instead of sending them to Kakiri to catch those who are killing our people. (Applause) Mr Speaker, is there preferential judgement? The people in Kakiri are being killed, the people in Namayumba – I also heard that in His Excellency the Vice-President’s constituency – no word! When we catch some people and take them to the Police - no word! And, after a week, they are gone –(interjections)- hold on. 

Now, yesterday, I saw many Police officers and what amazed me is how they were mishandling -[Honourable Members: “Tell them”] – the LCV and Chairman of Wakiso District -[Honourable Member: “ Lord Mayor.”]- I did not see the Lord Mayor. 

My second concern is over a population’s property that was given to us by the Great Empire of Britain so that there are two types of hospitals in Entebbe. There is a hospital for the commoners called Grade B and a hospital for the other category working in Entebbe called Grade A. Why are you taking it? (Applause) Can you take Mulago Hospital, which was given to us by the Queen of England? And you just take it away from the people? Can’t we build a hospital? And by the way, when people begin to talk about these issues, you just bash them. [Honourable Members: “Our man.”]

Mr Speaker, I am getting worried that issues are going hay way. I was listening to the honourable minister about this very important common man’s property – the Entebbe Hospital - and I thought that she would say affirmatively, “No touching!” But there was no affirmation. Let me tell you that that hospital belongs to the poor people of this country. (Applause) Please, let us not mince words because we can build other hospitals. Do not mince words. (Applause)

I worked in that hospital in 1978 and I enjoyed working there because I was seeing common patients coming and going away happily. Where will they go? So, I would be very glad if the Minister for Internal Affairs came here and explained to me, so that I can go back and explain to the people in Kakiri and my entire constituency, about who is cutting the throats of our people.

Secondly, I appeal to my honourable Minister of Health whom I know very well and whom I am glad to see here. I am sure that when you went to the Virus Research Institute those days when you were in Medical School, you perhaps went through this Grade A Hospital. “Hicho ni kitu cha watu wa Uganda.” (Laughter) I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think these issues are presented properly. The issue of the killings was also raised in the statement read by the Leader of the Opposition and I had directed that these responses be made tomorrow at 2 O’clock. I think this should be captured properly tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

On the issue of Entebbe Hospital, I think that the issues are also clear and honourable minister, you now know the sentiment of the House. Go and do your consultations and come back to the House, then move forward with what you want to do. Is that Okay? 

MS ACHIENG: I thank you, Mr Speaker. We will come back to the House on 8th Thursday, next week. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Jinja Central School, which is represented by hon. Grace Moses Balyeku. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Also, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Iganga Boys Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Milton Muwuma, the Member of Parliament for Kigulu South Constituency. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, there was item No.2 on the Order Paper. We were supposed to have two people. I think let us finish with that business and then move forward with the rest of the business. 

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, you are very welcome to the House again. You have been to this House before, so, we are receiving you again. The same spirit in the past prevails, but being new, I have to hand to you a copy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, as amended, and also a copy of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, as amended. These are tools that will help you in your engagement with this House. You have certainly come from the deep end again. So, good swimming and enjoy the House. You are welcome.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TRADE (LICENSING) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Trade (Licensing) (Amendment) Bill, 2012” be read the first time. 

I also lay papers relating to the financial implications of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it papers or a certificate of financial implications?

MR WAKIKONA: A certificate of financial implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the Bill and the certificate of financial implications. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee, which will handle it within 45 days and report to the House on the merit of the Bill. It is so committed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OUTBREAK OF MARBURG DISEASE

3.12
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Ms Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Health declared an outbreak of Marburg in Kabale District on October 19, 2012 after receiving laboratory results from Uganda Virus Research Institute confirming that two family members had died of the highly infectious viral haemorrhagic fever.

Three other members of the same family had earlier died of a strange disease in a period of one month. According to the report, the patients presented with symptoms of diarrhoea, vomiting, fever, headache, dizziness and generalised convulsions. Initial samples of blood and cerebrospinal fluid taken from the sick people ruled out malaria or meningitis. 

This outbreak comes barely two weeks after the Ministry of Health declared an end to another viral haemorrhagic fever, which was Ebola, on October 4 2012.

The last Marburg outbreak in this country was witnessed in October 2007 in Kamwenge District. Marburg is a very highly infectious viral haemorrhagic fever, which kills in a short time, but can be prevented. It has a high fatality rate, and it is caused by a virus that is spread through direct contact with body fluids like blood, saliva, vomit, stool and urine of the infected person. Compared to Ebola, Marburg is more dangerous, kills faster and is more fatal.

A person suffering from Marburg presents with sudden onset of fever and any of the following symptoms; headache and vomiting blood, joint and muscle pain and bleeding through the body openings, like the eyes, nose, gums, ears, anus and the skin. As I mentioned earlier, it is highly contagious and kills in a period of three to nine days. 

Our current update is that cases of this highly infectious and contagious disease are now reported in the neighbouring district of Ibanda. Two suspect cases from Ibanda were referred to Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital where one of them died on admission. 

However, the Ministry of Health and its partners are on the ground in the mentioned districts to contain the spread and manage the identified cases.

To date, Mr Speaker, the death toll of both the probable and confirmed cases stands at eight with the latest being the case that died at the isolation facility in Rushoroza Health Centre III on 27th October. The case that was referred from Ibanda Hospital in Ibanda District to Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital died on 24th October.

Since the onset of the outbreak, a total of 55 samples have been collected of which nine were confirmed to be positive for Marburg. These include: Five in Kabale, two in Kampala and two from Ibanda.

The United States Centre for Disease Control and Prevention has set up a field diagnostic laboratory at Rushoroza Health Centre III. All samples from the affected neighbouring districts and Kabale will henceforth be taken to this laboratory for quick diagnosis. This is expected to shorten the time within which results are obtained to just three hours from the 24 hours that process would take if the samples are to be taken from Kabale to Entebbe.

However, further serological tests are being undertaken at the Virus Research Institute in Entebbe. Due to the presence of cases in these districts, we have established temporary isolation facilities to accommodate the suspected and confirmed cases. In Ibanda, a temporary isolation ward has been established at Ibanda Hospital while plans are still underway to set up a proper isolation facility by 31 October 2012 at Ruhoko Health Centre IV. There are currently eight suspected cases admitted at Kabale Hospital, two are admitted at Mulago and three at Ibanda Hospital.

At Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital, a separate temporary shelter has been designated for the suspected Marburg cases.  Also, a tryout has also been set up at the casualty ward.

The Ministry of Health has assembled a team of experts to work in the newly established isolation facilities and they are expected in these districts by 31 October 2012.

Mr Speaker, I would like to also report that there are seven suspected cases and these are mainly nursing students, who have been isolated at Ibanda. These suspects attended to the confirmed case that later died at Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital. Other health workers who attended to that patient are also being closely monitored.

The Ministry of Health surveillance team has listed to-date a total of 316 contacts for close observations in the six districts of Kabale, Kampala, Ibanda, Mbarara, Fort Portal and Rukungiri. Those being monitored got into contact with either the dead or the confirmed cases. The team continues to monitor them on a daily basis for positive signs and symptoms of this highly infectious disease until they have completed 21 days of follow-up without showing signs and symptoms.

We have just completed an orientation training of the Kabale District Task Force on Marburg Case Presentation and Prevention. We also have done burial nursing and infection control. Plans are underway to conduct the orientation at Ibanda and Mbarara hospitals. I am also happy to report that a total of 42 volunteers from the Uganda Red Cross Society have been trained and deployed to conduct house-to-house community sensitisation and mobilisation together with case tracing.

A burial team in Ibanda is also being set up to manage burials of bodies of people suspected to have died of Marburg Disease. The team will be orientated on burial procedures and infection prevention and control.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has developed a costed response plan for the outbreak amounting to Shs 1.75 billion to cater for the central level activities. Kabale District budget has been costed at Shs 651 million, while Ibanda District has submitted a budget of Shs 280 million. We await a response plan and budget from Mbarara and Kabarole districts.

The central level budget and plan were submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 19 October 2012. The funds will be used for surveillance, case management, social mobilisation and procurement of some of the key equipment and medical supplies not readily available at the National Medical Stores.

This outbreak comes two weeks after the country was declared free of Ebola, which largely cost the Ministry of Health over Shs 1.8 billion. The lack of funds has heavily hampered the implementation of the activities. So, the bulk of the activities are being supported by our health development partners.

The Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had given the Ministry of Health permission to reallocate available funds within the health sector as the supplementary budget is being processed. Consequently, the Ministry of Health has transferred funds totalling to Shs 651 million to Kabale and Shs 284 million to Ibanda District.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health, however, faces challenges of inadequate resources to support a comprehensive response plan. These challenges include: Funds, human resource and other inadequate medical supplies. 

There is also a misconception by some people that Marburg is linked to witchcraft, which has resulted into poor health-seeking behaviour. And by the time they report to the hospitals, it is already too late.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Marburg is a very infectious disease with a very high potential to cause death if not well managed. So, its prevention requires raising community awareness on preventive measures and implementation of adequately infectious control measures in health facilities. Appropriate control measures require early identification of the cases through community sensitisation and contract tracing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you too. Honourable members, this is a serious matter and will certainly attract debate. So, let us have hon. David Bahati first.

3.23
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable minister for delivering that statement. First, let me send my heartfelt condolences to the people of Ndorwa West; seven out of the eight who have so far died are from the sub-counties of Kitumba and Kamuganguzi, both of which are in my constituency.

On 20th September, a person died in the village of Gwabirundo in Kitumba sub-county. On 4th October, another person died from the same family. On 17th October, I received a call from Madam Nasasira and another lady known as Christine expressing their concerns that people from the same family were dying of disease of similar symptoms without any help, and they were actually wondering whether it was scientific or not. I immediately called the district health officers, who were able to coordinate the samples and come to Kampala for testing. And on 19th October as the honourable minister said, we confirmed that indeed it was Marburg, which is a very deadly disease.
 
Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for the quick response they have given the people of Ndorwa West, but also for their coordination with other districts as we have heard now. 

On the 8th October, another person who was a mortuary attendant in Kabale District Referral Hospital died. We have since discovered that this person actually treated the persons who died on the 20th and the 4th of October. Over the weekend, the mother of this person, Mr Tumukunde who was the mortuary attendant, also died; the sister is in hospital and the brother is also being attended to.
 
It is a very saddening experience that I have gone through. It is very hard to provide leadership in a situation like this. But there are a few lessons that I have also learnt from this experience; that our capacity to detect a gathering danger of this magnitude is still wanting and we need to build this capacity.
 
Some of these people who were buried had relatives from other districts. I know for sure like the people who buried Mr Tumukunde in Mwendo Parish were from Ruhama and Kabuyanda, which is in Isingiro. So, the problem of Marburg is probably bigger than what we think. I would like to call upon the Minister of Finance to respond to the request of the Ministry of Health. They need money to ensure that isolation centres are put in place in the respective districts. 

But we also need to think about the health workers. Imagine this mortuary attendant who was just doing his job and got this disease and then the mother who was just at home and got it from this person. We need to provide protective gear for these health workers and to also support them. 

I would like to thank all those who are on the Kabale District Marburg Task Force and the leadership of the district that has come in to continue coordinating the efforts as we, the Members of Parliament from Kabale District, also coordinate from this side. 

The Ministry of Finance, as we have heard from the Minister of Health, is always slow. The request was made around the 19th but I have been told the money was released a few days ago. So, when a disaster of this magnitude hits, the Ministry of Finance - maybe we should create a contingency under the Ministry of Health. Because, Ebola was just a few weeks ago; we are now with Marburg and we don’t know which other disease is going to come next. So, we need to ensure that the Ministry of Health is given enough resources to build capacity to detect a gathering danger of this nature and make sure that our people are served and saved. 

I would once again like to thank Madam Nasasira and Christine who were able to alert us, and I know that their efforts saved some souls and some new infections. I would like to call upon all Members of Parliament and all the people of Uganda to listen to the doctors’ advice. I know it is very tempting, but when they say, “Don’t greet,” please, don’t greet. If they say, “Do not go to public gatherings,” do not go there. I would like to thank you.    

3.30
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municpality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleague, hon. Bahati, to mourn the people who have died in Kabale and Ibanda. But as one of the survivors of Ebola, because I was one of the doctors that were actually handling Ebola patients in Mbarara and I survived – I touched them with my hands as I told you. Now the situation in Mbarara is a little bit worse, Mr Speaker. The lady who died in Mbarara Hospital was referred from Ibanda with some bleeding, fever and other complications, and when she got to Mbarara they just took her to the maternity ward because she was pregnant from where she died.
 
A post-mortem was done on this lady because they had to remove the baby who was in her uterus. This means that the doctors who carried out the post-mortem in Mbarara Hospital are high-risk contacts and can fall sick any time. And as I talk, they are confined in the interns’ hostel in Mbarara Hospital.
 
The nurses who touched the body and patients right now total to 18 and some are hiding in Mbarara. The husband of the woman who died from Ibanda tested positive for antibodies against Marburg, which means that there is a problem in Ibanda where hon. Byabagambi comes from; my constituency is in problems; and of course Rwampara is not isolated. 

But what is bothering me most is that there is going to be an Independence celebration in Mbarara District on the 2nd of November. I have told the people that the Minister of Health has to come out very precisely and tell the people that there are no celebrations in Mbarara, Kabale, Ibanda and Rukungiri and even in Kampala, until we have got a proper clarification from the ministry that our places are Marburg free.
 
Mr Speaker, gatherings are a threat as far as Marburg is concerned. And remember His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda was in Rubindi just two days back. I even rang his personal doctor and told him not to allow the President shake hands with anybody, but because they had already arranged, they had to push the person inside there. I hope my President and the people don’t get Marburg from Rubindi where he was because remember that when the President is in a place, people move from various places to where he is -(Interruption)
 
MS BOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that I attended the function at which the President was yesterday, and nobody shook hands with the other, and before we entered the compound where the function was taking place, we washed our hands with Jik and water as a preventive measure, and we all heard the announcement that nobody should shake hands with another. I am just responding to the worry which my Member of Parliament has just expressed because he feared the President might have shaken hands with people in my constituency yesterday. We didn’t shake anybody’s hands. Thank you.
 
DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much for that information. But - (Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Emma Boona from Mbarara has said that there is no shaking of hands, but I know that in that part of the country - the whole of western region and even in other parts of Uganda now, there is hugging. So, does it stop at only shaking hands or it even goes further to hugging? Thank you. (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, hugging is also very bad because you get in direct contact with a person. What is bothering me most is –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform Members that in Western Uganda where this function took place, as hon. Boona has said, you don’t wait to get to the function to be advised as to whether to wash hands, to greet or not. As people are coming from all over to attend this function, they must have been shaking hands. So, the best thing to do is to discourage these gatherings rather than giving misleading information that let people get to the function, they will wash hands and they will be safe.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, my colleague for that information. As I talk, yesterday in Mbarara Hospital, there was a sit-down strike of health workers who had spent more than five months without receiving their salaries. There was a mishap; the Ministry of Public Service in collaboration with Ministry of Finance pushed monies on nurses’ and doctors’ accounts in Mbarara Hospital and the nurses and doctors celebrated that President Museveni had increased their salaries.

After some time, these health workers found out that it was an error and the money is being taken from their accounts. At first it was very small, but now they have nothing to eat. I wonder how the Ministry of Health is going to manage Marburg in Mbarara when the health workers are threatening to have another strike after next week in case their money is not released.

I appeal that one, the Ministry of Health should give us a statement that in Mbarara, Ibanda and Kabale should not have any more public gatherings for fear of Marburg in our places because you don’t know who is incubating the virus and we could have an outburst of this Marburg in Mbarara, and I can tell you Kampala people are also not safe.

Secondly, I am appealing to the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Health to work on the salaries of health workers in Mbarara Hospital expeditiously so that you don’t blame them for striking. These fellows are not eating at all. When they run away, who will look after these patients who have Marburg? Mr Speaker, I thank you.

3.38
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in mourning with the families who have lost their people to this disease.

Kanungu District neighbours Kabale and Rukungiri - and there are many sub-counties in Kanungu District, especially two of them, which neighbour Kabale, Mpungu and Rukyenga, which do not have a network and the roads are very poor.

I wanted to know whether there is any medication like tablets, that they can swallow, which may reduce the infection immediately in case somebody is infected. I am not in that profession and I do not know. Thank you very much.

3.39
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I think Marburg is more deadly than Ebola, and when we see this disease attacking areas where people are congested like urban areas, we should get worried. I believe the Ministry of Health should come up expeditiously to rectify or handle and isolate these cases.

First of all, it is very dangerous and can wipe out people very fast in urban areas, and if we do not pay attention - we are looking at Mbarara and Kabale, which are urban areas. When Ebola started from Kibale, it was easy to isolate people who were living in villages, but it is difficult to isolate people in urban areas where movement is very easy.

Therefore, the bat that transmits Ebola - we know that they are bats, but my worry is one: Where did that bat come from since they say these are wild bats? Have we tried to trace that lecturer of UMI and where he got it from so that we can trace backwards, so that it is easy to control the outbreak because it is wild? 

What about in our homes where we have these other bats? Can we have mandatory spraying of these bats so that we wipe them out? It is very scary because I was sharing recently with someone from America and they said that they are more worried with Marburg than Ebola. So, what can we do as a country in order to spray bats so that they are wiped out? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we now try to shorten our contributions on this debate so that we can cover as many as possible?

3.41
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I heard the minister very well, but I want to know, do you have enough money to carry out the operations in these areas where this disease is becoming rampant? I still insist that we need to give the Ministry of Health more money. When I was listening to hon. Bahati here, I was laughing in my heart because he was one of the Members who prevented the UShs 260 billion from being allocated to health with his own system. 

So, Mr Speaker, on the issue of health, we have the Centre for Disease Control -(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I am not fond of giving points of order because that is not my nature, but is the honourable Member of Parliament in order to try to divert to trivial issues when we are discussing a matter of this magnitude; to try to blackmail people that I was sabotaging the budget of Ministry of Health when in fact, when the ministry needed Shs 39 billion, we sat and whipped Members and we gave the ministry Shs 49 billion? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The most unacceptable statement made by the honourable member was the statement that he was laughing in his heart, when the subject matter we are dealing with is no laughing matter, even if the white teeth that Okot P’Bitek talks about make people laugh even at problems of this nature.

Honourable member, that shows a high degree of insensitivity and you may want to reconsider a statement of that nature and proceed with your contribution.

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. When an honourable Member of Parliament says that we should look for a contingency fund in the Ministry of Health, which means you want more money. When you talk of contingency, you have enough money and the other money is a reserve in case there is something happening. But here we are and we need money. If you want to control this Marburg disease, you need a lot of money. 

When you talk about Centre for Disease Control – actually, I was going to ask the same question. Mr Speaker, we need to know why we have these diseases. We have had Ebola and now we are getting Marburg. That means we have to work hard as a country to see how we control these diseases. And how do we do this? By using the Centre for Disease Control.

There is no way you can improve health in Uganda with limited funds to the Ministry of Health. Whether you want doctors or nurses, it is them to carry out that work. So, when you say we wanted Shs 49 billion, you are defending yourself all the time. Ministry of Health and the minister needs money. Nurses need money. When you want to draw people to cater for these patients, that is all money and that is why I was asking the minister whether they have that money.

I feel unhappy because  I see us getting these diseases. They could spread from Mbarara to Lyantonde, to Masaka and to Kalungu, and the only way we can control them is by giving attention to the Ministry of Health. 

So, this is a caution to Members on the other side - actually those who sit that side where they are arm-twisted – that we need money in the ministry!

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I pray that we look for funds. Next time we should prepare money for such occurrences because anybody dying in Uganda is as useful as a Member of Parliament seated here. I beg to submit.

3.46
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also mourn the death of our fellow Ugandans that-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we agree on a time in which we can engage in this debate? Three minutes.

MR KAWUMA: I mourn the deaths of our fellow Ugandans who succumbed to this sickness. 

Mr Speaker, I am disappointed. The Minister of Health made a statement and of course, some of the contents therein are very technical. Some of us are not professionals in this area and we need to refer to the statement after this and consult further but the statements circulated are a handful. You will find just about three Members of Parliament have the statement, and this is a problem that is ongoing. So, we have manifested our lack of seriousness in handling the matter right from the House here.

Mr Speaker, I just want to make an appeal to the Ministry of Finance and reiterate what my colleague, hon. Bahati, said; when a matter is urgent and serious, we should give it the attention and the urgency it deserves. When Ebola broke out, it impacted on the Ugandan community and specifically the Moslem fraternity; we did not perform Hijja. Similarly, on the international scene, people that read about this and learn about such developments are not coming here to invest, for tourism and the rest. So, when we are talking about funding for the Ministry of Health my colleagues, let us be united in this effort and we allocate the necessary funds that the Ministry of Health deserves.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I also want us to urge Government to suspend some of these gatherings because the problem is not only in western Uganda. This disease was detected here in Kawempe, in one of the clinics, and we do not know to what extent this problem has spread from that clinic where it was first detected in Kampala District. So, we need to put in more effort and show more seriousness than we are actually doing. Thank you. 

3.48
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Thanks a lot, Mr Speaker. Saving a life is the highest ethical act one can ever do for fellow mankind, and I wish to thank the Ministry of Health and the taskforce for saving lives. However, I wish to point out a number of issues.

One, we need to intensify awareness creation because although the disease has been noted in Kabale, Mbarara and Ibanda, in the whole region people need to know what they need to do. This could be through radio programmes, circulating leaflets and posters. We should intensify awareness so that we get to know how people get the disease and how we can prevent the disease. 

We should also intensify control measures including, as Members have been saying, limiting non-essential gatherings like fundraisings, some of the weddings and others. This is a very serious disease and it is very contagious; we need to be serious in the whole region not just simply those districts.

Thirdly, we need to look for where this disease is coming from. Although somebody said that when a snake enters your house you do not go to look for where it came from, but you should hit the snake and then get to find out where it came from. Was it the bush? In Uganda, we know very well that we had Marburg in Kamwenge and it was contained appropriately at the right time, but they identified bats as the major cause of that Marburg infection. Recently, we had Ebola and soon we shall have more epidemics if we do not intensify ongoing surveillance. We need to work with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Trade and that of wildlife to have scientists continue studying the bats and other animals. 

In Kabale, we need to find out this person who got this infection. Where did he get it from initially? We also need to be aware of biological warfare and sometimes shifting biological organisms to see the impact of the organisms once they go to populations. Therefore, the Ministry of Health and that of security also need to intensify measures to be able to notice why we are having these outbreaks one after the other. They should try to find out if there could be another reason or a problem that we are facing in the country and in the near future to be able to nip the problem in the bud. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.51
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister of Health for the statement. One, there seems to be a cyclic pattern with respect to the occurrence of some of these viral epidemics. Ebola had just hit western Uganda; we have reports of Hepatitis E in Northern Uganda; West Nile usually gets viral Meningitis; and now we have Marburg. I think the Ministry of Health should study the occurrence of some of these illnesses and be able to make accurate predictions and then guide Ugandans. However, we also need to address the question of budgeting, so that we are always prepared for some of these epidemics and also explain why they are occurring.

One of the fundamental issues is that there has been a breakdown of the basics of primary healthcare. The health inspectorate function has more or less collapsed. You do not get health inspectors, health assistants or health visitors. People are staying with animals in the same houses. So, there is need to reinvigorate the primary healthcare function of our health system.

That said, Mr Speaker, the mainstay of controlling Marburg lies in infection control measures and also barrier nursing methods, where health workers and all those who get into contact with patients and those at risk must be adequately protected. We want to thank the health workers in the various units that have been handling these reports, although we heard reports that health workers in Kabale at first were running away from the patients. That tells you the adequacy in terms of protection that health workers get. 

We want to support the minister by asking the Ministry of Finance to release the money required to ensure that we can control this Marburg viral haemorrhagic disease. We may be saying it is in Kabale, Ibanda and Mbarara but if we do not put in place proper control measures, it will spread. In some of the pictures published in the media at the beginning, at a funeral service I saw children in the background and the Bakiga peeping in the grave. I saw a coffin being removed from a house. These are not the measures that are recommended when you are handling a disease like this. It is a very serious matter. 

Money should urgently be found to ensure that we mount a campaign not only in Kigezi but in the entire country. We need to know how we should behave because we know we do not have a vaccine like hon. Karungi was asking. We do not have a drug which cures this viral illness. We can only provide supportive care to treat and manage the symptoms for the patients who present to the health facilities. So, money is needed and needed urgently because this is an emergency. This is an epidemic which is extremely fatal. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance, if it requires a supplementary budget I think we should be able to support this kind of initiative.

Lastly, the Ministry of Health should come up with a comprehensive programme to guide the people. For some of us who come from Kigezi, people keep asking us, “We are going to have a function, should it go on or should it not?” So, the Ministry of Health should guide and also provide information. We expect information to be provided to Members of Parliament, for example, which they can use in the various constituencies to educate the masses. Let us hope that the money will be released and Ministry of Health supported to have this kind of basic information to enable all of us participate in educating the masses and also ensure that proper control of this disease is actually maintained. I thank you.

3.56
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement in time. First of all, I would like to sympathise and send my condolences to the people whose relatives have died and my sympathies to those in that particular area. 

Marburg, as mentioned, is very deadly and it is deadly like a wild fire. Because of our Ugandans’ love for a patient and a dead person, you find that they do not care whether it is Marburg or not; they will touch and as a result, the disease spreads. 

Secondly, the issue of communication; we are talking of Kabale and Ibanda but it could be in Arua, it could be in Koboko now because of the transport system. Somebody takes a bus from Kabale, you are here in Kampala and tomorrow you are in Koboko. So, we must all be conscious of this Marburg and we must be aware that it is here in your district and in your area. We must really take precaution to make sure that we do not shake hands or even embrace each other. 

Also, many of us would like to travel abroad but they may not allow us to go as they did in Saudi Arabia. I would like to find out from the Minister of Health whether these test reagents are around so that everybody is tested, especially those who are coming from Ibanda and Mbarara. They can be tested before they come here and also if we are going out, we can be tested so that we are declared free from Marburg. Otherwise, Uganda is now feared. 

I would like to also talk about the nurses. Without the nurses, the disease will not be stopped. What measures are there to ensure that the nurses and the doctors are safe? We do not want the issue of Dr Lukwiya of Gulu who died because he wanted to save the people. What arrangements are there to make sure that my doctor who goes there will not die of Marburg? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these matters are very involving. I will be drawing this debate to an end but I will have Kibaale, Buliisa, Busongora. Let me take these.

4.00
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to borrow a leaf from the Kibaale case. There are subsequent effects when an outbreak hits an area. I will give the example of the Ebola case of Kibaale. We have a family in Nyamarunda Sub-county where all the old people died and they left a two-year-old girl and a 17-year-old girl who was in P7. There are only two people who remained in that family but they were not provided with anything. The other girl was supposed to sit for P7 but she cannot because she is looking after a two-year-old girl. Many other families were affected. I do not know what the case is as far as Marburg is concerned in other areas. 

When we are budgeting, we only focus on campaigns and maybe the health staff and the drugs and we forget that these people also need help. I want the Minister for Health to give us an overview of what they have done for such cases like those in Kibaale and what plans they have for those people especially those families that are usually affected. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

4.01
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister and the MPs for their awareness. The first time I got to know of this epidemic was from the press conference held by Members of Parliament. So, I think awareness is one very important thing. 

To my surprise, immediately after the Ebola epidemic, the country did not seem to be on alert. How can we sustain awareness to that level of alertness that we do not see panic? We have to be very careful in our campaigns. In our awareness, we should not cause panic because panic may again cause many more problems. Yesterday, I was talking to some tour operators who said that tourists who are going to that destination have actually cancelled their trips. This could also cause a lot of stampede. People are going to do exams. So, we need to manage it in a way that we alert communities but without necessarily causing a stampede. 

The other point I thought about was as we talk about how to avoid this recurrence, more so in these days of climate change, we should expect some new epidemics. The ones which used to appear 50 years ago may now start recurring because of the challenges of climate change. Therefore, I would be more interested in vector control and surveillance. Actually, a few minutes ago, we were discussing the land matters around Entebbe Grade A, Grade B and the Virus Research Institute. In the last Parliament, we were looking for money here for avian flu and we found that the research institute is purely supported by donors. Government of Uganda, including Parliament, are not giving money to research. So, how do we expect these people to sustain surveillance if we are not supporting research? 

These research institutions also have a connection with Grade A and Grade B hospitals. As a person who lives in Entebbe, I know Ministry of Health ceded a lot of land and property to State House fencing. Actually, I would even recommend that now that State House was built, the bigger part of land neighbouring Virus Research Institute should be given to Ministry of Health. 

If the ministry was doing the right thing, it should be the Ministry of Health, in an integrated manner, developing a health programme for Ministry of Defence and not the other way round. It should be Ministry of Health developing a programme which includes our army which comes from Somalia and from other countries but not a takeover by State House. So, that is wrong. Something is wrong in the thinking of whoever is introducing it; it should be coming from Ministry of Health. Even Mulago here lost land. We know the land of CMI was also originally for Ministry of Health. So, how long will health continue losing land as if the population is decreasing? I thank you so much.

4.05
MR WILLIAM NZOHGU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I basically have two issues to raise. One is about the manner in which we as leaders and maybe as relevant ministries conduct our business. Last week I happened to be in Kigezi sub region and I attended some of the gatherings there especially in church – (Interjections) – Yes, and mosques. I also visited schools and students and pupils were still assembling. When they are assembling, they actually get close to each other. I do not know how the ministry is going to control and also cause awareness in schools, mosques and churches so that as people go to their churches, they are aware of the do’s and don’ts to avoid escalating the problem.

The second issue I would like to raise is about the means of transport that we use in our country, particularly in Kibaale and Kabale. On a daily basis, there are buses moving from Kibaale to Kabale and vice versa. There are also buses moving from Kibaale to Kampala and vice versa. What is very coincidental is that there was Ebola in Kibaale and now there is Marburg in Kabale. I think there is a relation. There is a problem in Kabale and Kibaale. I do not know what the Ministry of Works and Transport is going to do to help the Ministry of Health solve this problem. The congestion in public transport is alarming! It would be fair for the ministries of health and that of transport to critically address this issue jointly. Thank you.

4.13
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Health has raised issues of funding. My concern goes to the Ministry of Finance. The Constitution directs, in Article 157, that, “Parliament shall make provisions for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of that fund.” 

Now we are talking of supplementary after supplementary. The minister comes here and says she wants money, ministers come here and say they want money and the situations are of an emergency nature. May I know from the Ministry of Finance how far they have gone in putting this Article into operation so that we have money available? We should not be debating about money all the time. How far have they gone with the Bill on establishing the contingencies fund? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.09
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I have been working with Ministry of Health and I know they are a committed lot, especially with the new generation of young leaders, but they are undermined.  The limitation they have has always been resources. 

My biggest concern - This goes to the Leader of Government Business; I can see my brother, hon. Moses Ali, is here. This is one government. It is not like the Ministry of Health in Uganda is seeking for support from another country. You sit together; so what is the problem? Is the problem Ministry of Health? Did they take time asking for money, or the problem is Ministry of Finance? This is the same Government; who is the problem in Government? You sit together and make decisions and you face all these challenges together. 

We saw this when it came to nodding disease in Northern Uganda. Ministry of Health played their part - they knew the challenges and they asked for the funds - but how long did it take for the same Government to acknowledge that this was a danger to the people of Uganda? So, the Leader of Government Business should let Ugandans know whether there is a government which works as a unit or whether some units’ opinions are not respected. If we do not listen to the challenges that Ministry of Health is facing, then we will be in big problems. 

Mr Speaker, I was reading on the internet a few days ago that there is Yellow fever in Teso in addition to Marburg. I really want the minister to allay my fears. If that is the case, then what action has Government planned to take?

I also want to make an appeal to Government through Ministry of Health. When we had Ebola in Northern Uganda, there was a lot of motivation to health workers; they were given risk allowance. I do not know what plans you have to support the medical doctors in these areas with risk allowance so that they can dedicate their profession and their lives to save the lives of Ugandans. With their normal salary, it is so risky for them. There should be some special package for these medical personnel so that they can have the morale to work. So, do you have any provision for that? Many members have expressed concern on that matter.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have just sworn-in a minister who comes from western Uganda, from one of those areas. I want to appeal to him to postpone the swearing-in party, if there is any. That will go a long way in helping Ministry of Health to achieve some of their objectives. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to express my condolences to all those districts which have lost lives. 

Mr Speaker, my people of Masaka are very worried. Masaka Municipality is a stop-over for heavy traffic coming from those areas where Marburg fever has killed people. When the buses are travelling on Kabale-Kampala Road, Masaka Municipality is a stopover for all this traffic. There is very heavy social intercourse between the people in the crowded buses and local communities of the town. The people of Masaka District are very worried that very soon, a case of Marburg is going to surface in Masaka and yet the people think that the hospital in Masaka is not equipped to meet the problem. 

I would like to appeal to the minister that while preparing and helping all these hospitals where Marburg has already appeared, do not forget Masaka because we are very nervous at the moment that anytime anything can happen. Let our hospital be considered for special equipment to handle the cases. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.16
MRS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my fellow Members of Parliament for putting their heads together and trying to find a way to protect our people. 

I think there are immediate things we can do. I know the Ministry of Health normally wait for problems to happen and then they look for money. Whenever I go to a hospital, I realise that our nurses and doctors who touch us as they are trying to diagnose us hardly wear gloves. Somebody is pricking your finger trying to get blood and you see they are not cautious about protecting themselves. While you are saying, “Does this person know what infectious disease I am carrying with me?” the nurse does not seem to be sacred about you as a patient. So, can we constantly ensure that the budget for protective gear for the hands and noses of our medical staff is actually prioritised so that we do not buy this protective gear just because there is Ebola or Marburg?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we have a culture of respecting the dead, which I also respect. However, the way we touch dead bodies in Africa is very dangerous. Somebody has died and people want to share the same bedroom with the coffin and you want to touch the dead body as we cry. We even have some religions that actually touch and wash the body. All this is a source and means of spreading disease. Although we are honouring the dead, we are also infecting ourselves. 

Finally, as I read the presentation to Parliament by the minister, she says that although this disease is highly contagious, it can be prevented and she gives us five sources of spread of this disease. She talks of blood, saliva, vomitus, stool and urine. (Member timed out)

4.18
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to join my colleagues in saluting the health workers that have offered their services in these very difficult and risky circumstances. No wonder some of them have been running away. Maybe that reminds us that when we are considering some of these things like the budget, we should know that being a health worker is a fairly risky business and they need special consideration in terms of remuneration. 

Mr Speaker, this brings me back to the point that was raised at one point in the press about the special allowances that are supposed to have been paid to the people who handled Ebola in Kibaale. It was reported that the health workers did not receive their special allowances. Can the honourable minister inform us whether this is true? Also, what special arrangements are being put in place for the health workers in the affected areas so that they are in a small way compensated for the hard decisions and risky job that they are doing in saving other Ugandans? – (Mr Besisira rose_) - Owing to the time constraint, Mr Speaker, and on your assurance that I will get compensated, I thank you.  

MR BESISIRA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I was the host of this Ebola epidemic and the fact is that these people have not been paid. They always call me and some ask me what they should do. It is really very painful because the money was sent but it has not been paid to these people. Some of them really lived through very difficult times. It is very disheartening to find that there are some of these Ugandans who hold onto money or are looking for how they will account for it instead of giving it to the rightful beneficiaries.   

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I also want to supply additional information. Over the weekend, on Sunday, I was the chief guest at a function organised by hon. Nabbanja and I think she had put out announcements. When they heard that the chief guest was a doctor from Parliament, some of the health workers who handled Ebola cases came and actually raised this compliant with me, that I should bring it to the Speaker. 

So, it is true that the health workers who handled the Ebola cases in Kibaale have not been paid. I just wanted to confirm that they have brought that compliant to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, could you wind up in two minutes.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, with due respect, you are the one who granted me the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said two minutes. (Laughter)

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. This brings me to another matter of the people who are participating in fighting this epidemic, the Red Cross. The Red Cross has been participating in numerous disasters, be it Ebola, floods or any type of disaster that you can think about. The Red Cross is a non-governmental organisation and offers services that would otherwise be offered by Government, and they are funded by donors of goodwill. It is reported that a number of Red Cross volunteers are already participating in this risky job. Can we call upon Government to also consider giving a small salutation - some amount of money - to help these people who are also doing this important job?

On the matter of sensitisation, people in the west know Ebola as a very deadly disease but Marburg is a relatively new phenomenon. Can we request the Ministry of Health to use radio in districts because people listen to radio and they are not sensitised about this deadly Marburg disease. Can we request that you use the radio stations and all the media so that the people may know about this disease? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.24
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I happen to come from Kabale where the disease has already reached and where it has been for the past one month. The disease that you are talking about moves very fast; actually to me, Uganda should be on high alert – the whole country. It is not about the districts in western Uganda but I am talking about north, south, east, central and west –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just hold on. Let me recognise these children. I was going to do so but they are already leaving. They are children and teachers from Wambete Primary School represented by hon. Isabirye Iddi, the Member of Parliament for Bunya South and also the Woman Member of Parliament for Mayuge District, hon. Rukia Nakadama, the Minister of State for Gender. (Applause)

MR BARYAYANGA: I thank you. Mr Speaker, the way this disease is spreading is not only through the so called shaking of hands but money is also exchanging hands. Once you are counting money from someone, the money may be dirty. It may come from a patient who already has Marburg and go to someone who does not have it and hence spreading the disease. Go to these markets; people are eating from the same plates which are recycled. Even when they try to clean them, they just dip them in water and then serve the next client. When it comes to transport - special hire taxis, buses and taxis - it is the same. You share the same seats and you touch where someone else might have touched. 

The way we acted against Ebola when the late Dr Mathew Lukwiya was around is the way we should act with Marburg today. Everywhere you went in Uganda there would be announcements in different languages. Everyone would know it was an Ebola announcement coming up because there was a drum that would play before the announcement would come. But the way the Ministry of Information and National Guidance is raising awareness on Marburg is not enough. It is still low, be it is on radio, TVs or newspapers. 

We need to get awareness all over the country. Discotheques should be stopped because there might be someone infected with Marburg in the discotheque and they would spread it since people sweat while there. Look at the glasses you use when you go to hotels; are they clean? This scare should be sounded across the board. It should not only be in Kabale; it should go across the whole country. Schools should be on high alert, especially the day schools. We do not know where these students go; we do not know their families. When they go home and then come back to school, the spread could be very high.

The rate at which the country is sensitising people is low. When I was speaking on radio, someone was telling me to stop lying to Ugandans. They said that this was witchcraft and that we should stop talking about these things. Imagine someone calling the radio station and telling you that you are lying! They said that how come the first person who died was vomiting blood and the other one who died in the same family did not vomit blood; this means it is witchcraft. The way we are sensitising the public is not up to standard. The rate of sensitisation should be very high. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for the concerns raised in your debate on this matter. Honourable Minister, it does not matter if you give answers now, except for specific ones, but what you need to promise the House is a continuous update on what action you are taking as a ministry so that the House is informed every other day and knows what is going on and what you are doing. But you can make some responses to some issues. 

4.28
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable members for raising these concerns. We have taken them and will work seriously on many of the recommendations. I will make a summary. 

Most of the issues raised were related. The surveillance division of the Ministry of Health is the least funded and the least staffed. We need to do recruitment and employ more people to be able to beef up that division. We can do this jointly with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service because it is now clear that we are an epidemic prone country and outbreaks are occurring very frequently. 

We have one of the best teams in Africa trying to manage viral haemorrhagic fevers, and we are also blessed to have upgraded our laboratory in Entebbe to be able to diagnose and confirm viral haemorrhagic fever viruses here, unlike those days when we used to take specimen to Atlanta. I must mention that these people who have been trained have been stretched because they are few. We need to train more. 

Members will recall the suits that health workers put on as they take care of the viral haemorrhagic fever cases. You cannot stay in that suit for more than 30 minutes; it is very hot and uncomfortable. We do not want to subject health workers to long periods of time because one can easily make a mistake and get infected. That means we need many trained health workers so that in case of an outbreak, we have more than one place where we can manage it adequately. So, those are some of the challenges that we go through.

It is true that we need emergency funds. My predecessors, hon. Mallinga and hon. Jim Muhwezi, had mentioned this earlier. Our country is epidemic prone, owing to some of our neighbouring countries who are not very keen with surveillance and preventive measures. So, we get importations of other diseases from the neighbours and therefore we need an emergency fund set aside to manage epidemics. 

I have also taken note - We are going to make a strong statement about public gatherings and suspension of other meetings for the meantime especially in areas where we have confirmed the outbreaks. 

Currently, we do not have vaccines for either Marburg or Ebola. The best way of prevention is the measures that we have always communicated to the public. That is why we do a lot of case tracing. Whenever we get a confirmed case, we have to trace all the people who have come into contact with this person and follow them up very closely on a daily basis, for 21 days in case of Marburg and for 42 days in case of Ebola. So, you can see the magnitude. That is why we have at present line listed 316 people who have come into contact with either the cases or the dead people. This needs a lot of funds and a lot of surveillance teams to be able to follow up these people on a daily basis. 

As far as other measures of prevention and research are concerned, the Ministry of Health and partners have undertaken anthropometric studies and ecological studies to map up the bats and the monkey families to see which forests and which animals harbour these viruses. In 2007, studies were done in Kamwenge, and in one of the caves in Maramagambo we found out that those bats had Marburg. Immediately, the Ministry of Health issued statements that tourists and the local population should not access those caves. Many other measures were taken to reduce the bat population then. So, these studies are continuing. We have sites in Luwero, Kamwenge, Kibaale, Kabale and many other places where we are expanding. 

We are also working with other ministries - the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of Works and Transport - to see how we can come together and step up our operations. I agree that we need more communication. We need to communicate to the people more precisely and using different media. Our only challenge is funds. When we approach the radio stations and other media, you have to pay for the airtime on the radios. We have tried what we can. If we receive more funds, we will be able to step that up. 

I agree with hon. Chris Baryomunsi that our primary healthcare functions have broken down. This would have helped with surveillance and dissemination of information to the public so that we prevent diseases before they occur and before they break out. So, we need to do a lot to restore our public health functions.

There was a member who talked about the testing of the masses. I would like to say that with the outbreak of haemorrhagic fevers, we follow protocols. When the contacts followed up develop signs and symptoms, this is when we take off the specimen for analysis at the laboratory. Otherwise, to do a massive screening is very costly and we cannot afford it.

There was a question on what we need to do to family members affected. I would like to say that we do daily counselling of the members from such families because we know the loss and grief that is suffered especially to diseases like Marburg and Ebola, which are very stressful. First of all, members of their families are admitted in the hospital but they are not allowed to access them, see and also comfort them. Worse still, if the person dies, they are still not allowed to participate in the burial. (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr Speaker, the minister is raising very serious matters. She talked about some activities to be carried out if funds are available. However, I have read her statement, copies of which were circulated, and I have tried to understand her prayers but what she has requested for here is only Shs 651 million for Kabale and Shs 284 million for Ibanda. I notice that for all the other activities, there are no specific identifications. 

I thought that all these things that she is talking about, for example the mobilisation of the masses and collaboration with other ministries, will require some resources. So, my point of clarification is: Where have you presented that request? I am saying this because I thought this would be the forum for you to inform Parliament of what your requirements are so that we can see how to assist you. As of now, you are just telling us stories; after listening to you, what will you do next? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Minister, for that clarification. I am interested in knowing whether the Ministry of Information and National Guidance can be of help to you in putting the country on alert. I am sure that as the regulator of all media houses, they would be able to guide them in disseminating some messages regarding this outbreak.

Also, I would like to know about the other angle of the faith based interventions. Churches and Mosques deliver messages of this nature to people for free. This would make the process cheap without necessarily looking for funding.

DR ONDOA: Thank you for those clarifications. On page 4, I have clearly mentioned something about the funding that we need – (Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, on page 4 the minister clearly states the amount of money that they want but we do not know their plan. This ministry is responsible for health and I am sure we budget for that sector, but we also have the ministry responsible for disaster. Anyway, what is this money for? Where is the plan? Is the money going to help you run workshops? Is it going to be used to block people from walking? Is it going to buy jik or what?

DR ONDOA: Mr Speaker, that is precisely what I was responding to. I gave an amount that the central team needs and it is Shs 1.75 billion. Kabale gave us their budget and we have details of that plan in terms of what they want to use that money for. This is just a lump sum. Likewise, Ibanda also gave us their budget, which involves case management. When you read the text below, you realise that the funds are to be used for surveillance, case management, social mobilisation and the procurement of some of the key equipment and health supplies not readily available at the National Medical Stores. If the honourable members need a breakdown of what these budgets from the districts entail, we can easily avail them.

Mr Speaker, to conclude my response, I would like to say that in our package for boosting the health workers deployed in risky areas like these, part of the monies that we request for cover allowances for the health workers.

On what we do for members of families and those who die when they are not health workers, I would like to say that that is not stipulated in our – When you are a civil servant, for instance, it is clear how you get compensated but if you are not one, the procedure is not very clear to us. For some of these people who have requested to be compensated, I would like to say that we have written to the office of the Solicitor-General to guide us on how we go about it.

There was a question from some member about Yellow fever outbreak in Teso. I would like to say that no district health officer has reported this yet. What I can say is that for now we will follow it up and see whether that is true.

I would like to inform you that we have also put all the district officials and authorities on alert as far as Marburg and Ebola spreads are concerned. We have a hotline on which they can easily call us. That line can also be used by members of the public when they have a suspected case. The hotline is 0750996034.

Before I came to this, I had been commenting on what we do with the family members. I would like to say that we usually counsel them on daily basis. We also follow them up to give discharge packages to those who have survived, which may include food items, beddings and other essentials that they may need. We also do follow-ups and supervise the burials of their dear ones who could have died of suspected or confirmed viral haemorrhagic fevers.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I urge fellow colleagues to join hands with us especially in giving out information about the control and the prevention of the viral haemorrhagic fevers in our country. I want to thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will need updates on these issues as Parliament. 

DR ONDOA: Mr Speaker, we are obliged; we will update Parliament on daily basis. We will use both the social media and the Floor of the House. Those of you who access emails will receive mails from us on the updates. 

One last thing, Mr Speaker; I would like to recommend that the independence cerebrations scheduled for 2nd November in Mbarara be postponed until we are sure of the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Finance, you want to announce the money you are going to give?

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I think there are two questions that have been raised upon which I should comment by giving information to the House.

While we were fighting Ebola in Kibaale, I had never seen the world come together in fighting a common enemy. I saw the whole world gathered in Kagadi Hospital trying to fight that virus called Ebola. I believe even with Marburg, there should be no difference at all. So, I want to answer my brother there who said, “Are you working as a government; why weren’t you releasing money in time to make sure that you help the Ministry of Health to fight this disease?” 

I would like to assure this House that the Ministry of Finance is doing everything in its power to ensure that funds are released, but the only problem is again the limited resources. We will not allow our people to die. Definitely, money will be released but that means that maybe another activity, either within the ministry or across the government, will have to suffer the consequences. 

This brings me to the question of the emergency fund. I hope before the end of this financial year we shall come back to this. This fund was prepared and we were even ready to put in money but because of other pressing needs of the State, we were not able to move. However, I presume the answer is in creating an emergency fund not only for health purposes but for other things like Bududa. We need something like that, which Parliament can easily allocate money to and either the sector or ministry is able to release money in a timely manner so as to handle these emergencies. So, I want to assure this House that the Ministry of Finance will do whatever is within its power and within the resources available to ensure that we overcome this Marburg fever outbreak. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was a question on the contingencies fund. 

MR KASAIJA: I thought I had mentioned something to do with the contingencies fund, emergency fund - (Interjections) - Yes, I know it is a constitutional provision; that is true. As I told you, we had moved very far in making sure this fund is put within our current budget but because of resources, again that was the problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, the Constitution directs how this should be done. It says, “Parliament shall make provisions for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of this fund.” Now, that requires a Bill on this Floor of Parliament. If you are just playing around with this and you are always talking about supplementary, this is where we have a problem. So, you should really be very specific on this matter as to when you think you can bring a Bill to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need a Bill to create the fund.

MR KASAIJA: Yes, that is very true, Sir and hon. Sabiiti. I have told you the process was started but we could not complete it until such a time when we have money to put there. So, we shall come here for enactment of the law. The Cabinet Paper for this matter was developed and it is before Cabinet but we could not proceed because – (Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, and thank you, Minister. I am rising on a point of clarification. Given the background information which the Minister has been giving us, he has looked non committal, which is similar to what happened to the Youth Fund. 

Marburg is a disease which will keep spreading every day.  People are daily coming from Kabale and Ibanda via Masaka through to Kampala and going up to Malaba, to Iganga District. Can the Minister rightly tell us which day of the week he will do this, maybe next week, so that we know that the Minister of Health is going to be empowered. I think Parliament supports this largely because we said we would only approve money going to health before we approve any other monies. Thank you. 

MR KASAIJA: Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, Cabinet on Wednesday instructed the Ministry of Finance to release Shs 1.6 billion. That was her prayer although in her statement here I see a slight difference, but that is not the most important thing. The process is ongoing; it cannot be done overnight. As we have told you, there are processes to go through. What I am trying to say is that there is always a process before money is released. All I can say is that money will be made available within the resources that we have got but another programme will have to suffer as a consequence. That is all I am saying. 

4.51
MR NZOGHU: Rt Hon. Speaker, I wonder what happens with operations of the minister. First of all, when they are purchasing tear gas, they have never even run out of funds. (Laughter) Secondly, when it comes to the facilitation of State House, they spend money even without Parliament’s approval. But when it comes to Marburg, he says there is no money and it has to go through a process. Is the Minister in order not to feel any sympathy for the families which have lost their people because of Marburg? We are likely to face another catastrophe when more families lose their members and he is just here bragging that there is no money and there should be a process; which process is he talking about? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the honourable member is very dissatisfied with your response on this matter. Would you like to put more confidence in the House about what is going to be done? 

MR KASAIJA: First of all, Mr Speaker, I have not said that there is no money. I have not said that, please! I would like the honourable member to withdraw those words from my mouth. 

When money is being released, it is not just like pulling it from your own pocket and giving it. You have to put in a request, there must be a warranty from the Auditor-General- (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, can I be protected? So, there is a process, which may take two days, three days or five days depending on the circumstances. I would like to assure this House that we shall do what Cabinet ordered us to do and what now Parliament is requesting us to do. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for those responses. This House will rise at 5.30 p.m. but we have two reports and a document to lay on the Table. I will allow the next item to be called now. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I wish to lay before Parliament a request for the proposed borrowing of up to € 55 million from the European Investment Bank for financing the widening and improvement of the Kampala Northern Bypass and the construction of the Mbarara Bypass. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such. That particular request stands committed to the Committee on National Economy to understand it properly and report to the House on their recommendations. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TRADE) (Mr David Wakikona): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the National Postal Policy, 2012.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. That policy document stands committed to the Committee on ICT to go through and get back to the House with those aspects that require the approval of this House. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to seek some clarification from the Minister of State for Finance as to when the loan for the Soroti by-pass will come to this House. Because of the heavy traffic and so many trailers going to Southern Sudan, we have had a problem. The main street of Soroti Town is very narrow so there is a demand from the people of Teso, and especially from Soroti Municipality, that there is need for a by-pass via Gweri, Teso College, Arapai to join the Lira-Soroti Road, and it was needed yesterday. So when is that loan coming for that Soroti by-pass?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to come back to this House and bring that particular loan request to develop this particular road. Please make your statement.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, the Ministry of Finance does not initiate projects. This is a job of the Ministry of Works and Transport and when they do come to us, we shall do what is required.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY THE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW 3.5 MILLION KUWAIT DINARS EQUIVALENT TO USD 11 MILLION FROM THE KUWAIT FUND FOR ARAB ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will give the chairperson very limited time to deal with this. Will 15 minutes be enough, Mr Chairman? We will not debate this but receive the second report, which is the next item, so that we can have sufficient time tomorrow to deal with it. Let us receive the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have just got a copy of the report but under rule 193, report to be signed by the chairperson and members, it says, “A report of a committee shall be signed and initialled on each page by at least one third of all the members of the committee and shall be laid on the Table.”

Mr Speaker, I have a copy of the report here and I do not see the initials as stipulated by the law. So, is it procedurally right that the chairperson continues breaking our rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is one of the rules that have been more in breach than in fulfilment. This would be the first time I am seeing a report that is initialled on all the pages. The normal procedure that has been used in this House is that the number required of the chairperson and the members should be at least one third; in other words, the number required to constitute quorum of the meeting. Looking at this, I think the signatures are more than one third of what is required. 

Regarding the requirement for initialling on each of the pages, we have not been observing that strictly and it might not be in the good order of transaction of business for us to start now when the photocopies have already been made. Four-hundred copies have been made for members and to initial on each one might take a lot of time. So, I think we should let this go and then for the next reports, chairpersons make sure that you observe this rule strictly and let the chair initial on each page of the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think you know the genesis of why these pages should be initialled. Sometimes these reports can be changed along the way. Before we can go on, I have a simple reason why I was raising this. The pages are not numbered but if you look at 4.4, among others - I just want to pick this so that members understand - it is about the project costs and financing. They have put US dollars on this side and the Uganda shillings on the other side; unfortunately, the pages are not numbered. 

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, since this year begun there is no way that a dollar has been at Shs 2000. I am raising this issue because if you do not correct it, we will have a problem. Now the US$ 1 million at a rate Shs 2000 per dollar; what will happen? They have even put an exchange fluctuation of 10 per cent down there, Shs 2.26 billion, to take care of price changes and exchange fluctuations. We are costing the dollar at Shs 2000 yet it has been at an average of Shs 2300 and Shs 2600. It is very dangerous if we leave it like this as we are opening up another corruption tendency in the ministry that will implement this project. 

So, Mr Speaker, I plead with you that they go and initial this report and bring it here as we continue with this; otherwise, for now we should not break our rules.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I was just looking at the cover page and I think the title is not complete. It says, “The report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million (USD 11.9 million) from the Kuwait Fund for Arabic Economic Development” and it stops there. What are we borrowing for? We always state this, but here it is hanging.

THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for guiding on the question of initialling. I also want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for putting the whole House on alert. It just happens that Committee on National Economy is the one on the stage but by practice, we have not been receiving initialled reports.

On the heading, I did observe this when the report had gone to the printer. The technocrats, the clerks, advised on this. We have given you the brief to Parliament and you can see that it is a very long title. So for tidiness, they requested that since it is on page 1, the introduction, the heading could just provide the figures and the source of the funding and then item No. 1, on 1.1, gives the details.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, can I seek your indulgence because I am just presenting the report. After presenting the report, it will be discussed. I can see you are debating even before I have presented the report. Can I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that you guide the House and allow us to present this report? We are giving you accompanying documents and when it is time for debate, I think that will be the right time to raise all these matters. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you have given him 15 minutes and he will not be able to read the whole report. That is one. That is the reason for our file records; we need a document, which is right and complete. For it to be complete, it should be well done and initialled by the committee. 

Mr Speaker, the genesis of this problem was when members came here and complained that a report being presented was not a true representation of what was discussed. I am sure that regarding the Shs 2000 per dollar, some members never agreed but the chairman wanted it done quickly. In that regard it is a crisis, and if we allow this report to go like that we are going to lose about Shs 13 billion. So, we rather correct it now than it going.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of money is so sensitive to the extent that Parliament would be glad to do a clean job from the onset. Under the circumstances, I would propose that we skip that particular report because the second one which the chairperson is due to present is smarter. Maybe we would deal with the next one and then allow the chairperson time to rectify the errors so far observed and he comes back to the House. I beg to propose. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen the copy of the second report so I am unable to - I think hon. Epetait is looking at a document which is not a report. It is a detailed response to parliamentary - Honourable members, how do we proceed? Issues have been raised. Mr Chairman, can you help us to move on this?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with the Leader of the Opposition and honourable colleagues; the title was a deletion from the Clerk’s office but the first item is the preamble. I would like to plead that we look into the substance of the report and not the form. We are giving you additional attachments, which you can look through and when we debate tomorrow we can sort out these issues. That is my prayer, Leader of the Opposition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said at the beginning, this would be the first report that I have seen initialled on each page. 

Now, usually when situations arise of that nature, members of the committee would raise objections which would alert the House that there is a problem with the report. More than a third of the members have signed. If they can come and later disown that the content of the report is not what they agreed upon, then we could take a decision at that stage. 

I am going to propose to the House that we receive what is prepared by the committee and then during the debate and all those detailed discussions, we can point out all those issues and take responses on them. If we are not satisfied, then we do the usual thing we do - we reject - but do not stop it from at least being received by the House. It is only upon presentation that it would be properly before the House with a copy of it laid. That is when we can scrutinise it properly.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Looking at the title of the report above all things, I think this is setting a very bad precedent, especially since Parliament has been on recess. Parliament and the Parliamentary Commission have all the competent staff and when you have an oversight on a matter like this, I do not think this is something that we can compromise on. I am not going deep into the content of the report but a report that has failed to have numbered pages, a report with a wrong title that is not clear, and yet we have been on three weeks recess or more and then we receive such a report, I think will be encouraging some form of incompetence.

Mr Speaker, it would take this issue less than 30 minutes to be corrected. So, I think we can be able to receive the chairman’s report. Hon. Mukitale is my very good friend but I do not think we would be really willing to continue with such irregularities under the circumstances. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.   
 
MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, while I agree with colleagues that we should do things meticulously, - I have no quarrel with that demand and request - at the same time I would pray this House to be more practical. I would like to call your attention to page 1 of the report- (Interjections) - I am not repeating, I am only passing on information. Item 1.0 clearly states the purpose of this report. Let me read it. Can I read it, Mr Speaker? 

Point 1.0 of the report – (Interjections) - This is a report of the Committee on the National Economy on the request by Government to borrow Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million which is equivalent to US$ 11.1 from the Kuwait Fund. I hope we are together now. If I go to paragraph 1, introduction - (Interjections) – No, I am passing on information so that we can resolve this matter quickly. I am giving this information so that we can resolve the matter. 

Point 1.0 - This is a report of the Committee on the National Economy on the request of Government to borrow that much from the Kuwait Fund for the financing of the reconstruction and equipment of four technical institutes in the technical vocational education and training programme. This is what I am sure is not going down well with the members. They are saying that it should have appeared on the title. That is what I think they want, if I understood my honourable friend from Kasilo very well. So, I would like to support my chairman that we receive the report and then this report can be tidied later. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we therefore say that the chairman of the committee should make some corrections on those issues raised. We are unable to proceed with this business. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.12 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 31 October 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 

