

Wednesday, 5 October 2016

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. And I hope you heeded to the communication of yesterday about keeping the ground parking of the South Wing of Parliament empty. If there is a Member who did not receive that communication and could have possibly parked his/her vehicle there, this could be the time to go and move it away. We have a guest to be hosted by the Speaker; we need that area cleared for that purpose. 

Honourable members, today we have the Prime Minister’s Question Time, starting at 3 o’clock. So, those of you with issues on policy matters, please prepare to raise them.

There were Members who needed to raise some matters but they do not seem to be here. Yes, Member for Kongasis?

2.06
MR REUBEN CHELIMO (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance. 

Mr Speaker, on 3 October, at around 3.00 p.m., there was a heavy rainstorm that hit one of the sub-counties in Kongasis called Kamet Sub-County. This rainstorm affected seven villages in one parish. It hit all the houses, crops like bananas and coffee down. It also hit Kamet Secondary School, with its roof being blown off. The same rainstorm affected Kamet Primary School. One of the teachers’ houses, which was recently constructed, was also seriously damaged.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness should come in to assist the affected seven villages in Kamet parish.

My second prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports should come in to assist the affected schools, that is, Kamet Secondary School and Kamet Primary School. This is because as we speak, there is no learning taking place in the said schools. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think there is a catalogue of these issues of disaster and responses. And we have a motion that is coming up later. We reserve and make responses at that time. Yesterday, we had a few of them and we still have some today. So, let us receive them and then we see how to process them. Thank you. 

2.09
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance that requires urgent attention by Government.

Mr Speaker, we thank Government for finally giving licences to oil companies. But the host communities in Bunyoro and Acholi have not got any information from Government. And we would not want a scenario where oil companies come before Government engages with the communities. 

Mr Speaker, this is the Tenth Parliament and most of the Members are not privy to the laws we passed; they do not have the policy and the regulations. It would be proper that the minister brings a comprehensive statement to Parliament so that we all speak at the same wavelength. We thank Government for putting in place the National Oil Company - the institutions we put in the law and the authority. They have management but they do not have the funding, yet they are the ones who are supposed to work with all these companies. We have a pipeline that goes through Tanzania, but Parliament is not privy to the details. We have a refinery investor from Russia who has pulled out; we do not know the alternative.

My prayer is that the ministry and/or Government bring a comprehensive statement, including the development plan of oil, so that we are able to help this nascent industry, if we are to achieve the target of 2020 to have the first oil output. 

Without this comprehensive information and with a timeline and budget requirements of other ministries apart from energy - the Government expects to put in not less than $5 million – because the investor is also bringing about $15 billion –this is a counterpart funding, which requires parliamentary appropriation. Until we have a comprehensive report on what the investors will do, what Government will do and what different ministries will do; I can see us completely stuck.

So, my prayer is that the ministry brings a comprehensive report. Also, for us the host community, we get an early engagement before the oil companies come to our communities. Thank you.

2.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I respond to him, allow me time to inform this House that today we had a special Cabinet meeting chaired by the President. That is why my ministers are not yet here. I had to request for special permission to come here; I left the President chairing Cabinet. But they know that there is plenary and the Order Paper was circulated in Cabinet; I expect them to come.

Therefore, regarding what hon. Mukitale has raised, I have taken note and I will tell the minister in charge of the sector to prepare information and bring it to this House, so that we are all abreast with what is happening. Guidelines are there but we need spontaneous communication, so that we all get on board.

2.13
MS BETTY BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the Order Paper. I thought that Government had taken note of the fact that today is the International Teachers’ Day.  The reason I did not come to your office to raise this issue was because I knew that the Executive would raise something to do with teachers in order to remind the country, through this House, that today is the International Teachers’ Day, so that it is not celebrated in vain.

However, the Order Paper shows that Government has prepared nothing in relation to the celebrations of the International Teachers’ Day. 

I find this, Mr Speaker, to be a big omission. I would like to ask whether it is procedurally right for Government to keep quiet about this important day and its relevance to our education, as a country. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I expect a short statement concerning this matter from Government before we rise today. In the event that Government is not ready to present it, I will ask the Shadow Minister to say something about this.

2.15
MR MBABALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto South County, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. This week, the State Minister of Finance, hon. David Bahati, said that there is a shortfall of Shs 300 billion in revenue collection. As you may recall, we operate a cash budget. So, I thought this is very important and it needed to be brought on the Floor. Now, there are causes I can attribute to this shortfall.

In the recent past, there was a lot going on, regarding the distressed companies and bailouts. This matter was misconceived and some authorities thought that the distressed companies were looking for cash bailouts. The truth is that, they were looking for restructuring their debts for longer periods with less interest rate. 

As you may recall, we have two types of commercial banks in Uganda – the ones which lend short-term loans, from day one up to 10 years and the development banks, which lend for medium and long-terms, ranging from 10 to 15 years and above.

Mr Speaker, concerning the distressed companies, it is true we have champions in Uganda when it comes to revenue. They are partners with Uganda Government in economic development. They are a force that creates and generates money as well as employment. 

It must be recalled that Government has been applying indirect borrowing to these companies, through supplies where they are not paid on time. This period ranges from one to five years without paying while the commercial banks charge them high interest rates.

To add on, these private companies pay corporate tax, which is 30 per cent; they pay property tax, which is 20 per cent; they pay import tax, which is 30 per cent; and contribute to NSSF 10 per cent and above all, they also pay indirect tax. 

However, this must be clear to all of us that Uganda scrapped the direct tax in 2005 and that is whoever was 18 years above had graduated tax abolished in their respect.

Therefore, these are partners of Government. Therefore, I appeal to Government to find a mechanism of how to solve the problems of distressed companies by restructuring their debts for longer periods with less interest rate because they are partners in development. Everybody is ready and looking forward for 2020 for Uganda to attain a medium class status.

One of the pillars of a medium class is the entrepreneurs and the private sector. Therefore, I urge Government and all of us to find a mechanism for these companies so that they can be rescued and start their normal business in order for Uganda not to experience revenue collection shortfall. I rest my case.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter raised by my colleague is very important. In the last financial year, at the State of the Nation Address, the President said that he would recapitalise Uganda Development Bank by sending there Shs 500 billion. 

A Member later questioned how Government would restructure? Why? Because doing business in Uganda is very difficult due to the absence of banks that give long-term loans. It is only through our development bank that we can support our local industries and entrepreneurs.

Therefore, I would like to know from the Government Chief Whip – when a President makes a statement at the State of the Nation Address, it is a directive. When the President says he would give Shs 500 billion to that bank but he does not rise to the occasion, what should happen, Chief Whip?

MR MUYANJA: Thank you, my colleague. I sit on the Committee on Security and Internal Affairs, and I have noted that the Ministry of Defence has got domestic arrears of Shs 72 billion owed to the private sector. When you check with police, they have got domestic arrears of Shs 92 billion owed to those who supplied police years ago. All these added up, distress companies. 

I, therefore, urge the Government to come up with a mechanism to rescue the business community. I rest my case.

2.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Hajj Mbabali for raising the pertinent issue. 

Mr Speaker, when this bailout matter was published in the media, Cabinet established a committee, chaired by the Prime Minister. The Attorney-General, Government Chief Whip, Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development and Foreign Affairs are all members. We worked out the arrangement where the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development was instructed to sit with the representatives of the private sector.

It is unfortunate that the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development is not here; he would have briefed this House on how far they have gone with this issue. 

Otherwise, the matter was listened to intently and the President directed that although Government cannot come out directly to find money to bail them out, a mechanism that reduces stress on them had to be found.

Regarding the shortfalls about what the Minister of State for Finance reported, I would like to say that since we collect revenues on a daily and monthly basis, we always register shortfalls. 

At the end of the financial year the Minister of Finance declares wherever we have not managed to recover the shortfalls that we have encountered during the course of the year; he announces that in this year, we did  not make it to our expectations.

Therefore, in the first quarter, we have obviously encountered this. We hope that situations will change, so that at the end of the financial year, we have a small amount of money that we will have not recovered. Shortfalls are always met during the course of the year, but the general picture is given at the end of the financial year. 

Anyway, the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development will tell us about the recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank, and also the interaction with the business community who are suffering.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I would like the Government Chief Whip to clarify to this House. 

When this story about some companies seeking bailouts broke, a number of them came out and denied that fact. Now that Cabinet has set up a committee to look into this matter, can we get to know these companies? Why are these companies seeking a bail out? I think if you clarify to us that issue, it will assist this House to debate that matter in a better way. Thank you. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. Betty Nambooze to get me clearly. Bailout does not mean giving somebody money. It simply means helping someone come out of a tough situation, either by paying what is due to us, in terms of domestic arrears or talking to the people who are putting pressure on them. Bailout means talking to the banks or Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) to help them. That is the bail out which the business community was talking about in –(Interjections)- I am sorry I do not have the list of the companies right now.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am giving relates to the information from the business community that when a company is stressed because Government has not paid its dues, in terms of domestic arrears, the business community would be right to say they do not want a bailout and just for payments in regard to their money. 

Therefore, I wanted to correct the context in which my sister internalised this matter. The private sector would be right to say that they need what they would have supplied Government. It is a bad practice, in terms of a macro-economic stability, if Government fails to pay its obligations. By policy, we are supposed to be running a cash budget. That means there is no MDA, which would commit Government without funding.
 
As Parliament, we would also be playing our part when the minister responds to Hajji Mbabaali’s request on why entities are spending beyond what they have, if you are running a cash budget. I think we need to support hon. Mbabaali’s point. 

The reason as to why we are failing to collect taxes is that the taxpayers are constraint. So it is a bit cyclical. We are failing ourselves by not paying the private sector and so we cannot collect taxes from them when we are the ones constraining them. 

I, therefore, agree that we should support Hajji Mbabaali’s point. As Parliament, we stayed our motion for bailout for three years because we expected Cabinet to come in. I thank you so much. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek for your indulgence on whether it would not be prudent enough to have a statement brought on the issue of bailouts because the understanding varies. 

From what we have heard in the corridors and from the Government Chief Whip, we may not be able to have the correct picture. Therefore, I am seeking for your indulgence, whether it is not prudent for a statement to be brought, so that we understand what has been discussed outside. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to help this House deal with issues. For example, on the Order Paper, I have seen item No.4 (f), which reads: “Alleged suspension of construction of new roads as reported in the media.” Is this how we are going to do business? Let us do real business. Thank you. 

2.28
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to raise an issue of national importance. 

Three weeks ago, I raised the issue of insecurity in Kitgum Municipality where I said that people have been gunned down; we brought the names and by then a reverend’s wife had just been killed before we made a plea to Government to come to our rescue. 

Four days ago, as we were burying hon. Samuel Odonga-Otto’s Daddy, another person was killed and we went for burial. Last night, at 8.25, Mr Tony Olanya, a former URA officer was gunned down in front of his house. This brings the total to about six people being gunned down in just two months. 

Mr Speaker, as we speak, people are already gathered at the bus park. Last night we did not sleep because we had to make all the necessary contacts. People are in panic and fear and they have now gathered at the bus park, demanding to know, from Government, if it cares. The issue was raised in this House and we prayed to Government to beef up the security. 

I also made a statement to the effect that the issue of human resource on security is not disclosed. However, six of the few who were there were also removed and brought this way. 

We have literally been talking to the minister of state about this but we still do not have security on the ground. It is strange that as early as eight people are being gunned down. They do not come to pick anything but just take life and walk away. 

Mr Speaker, the situation in Kitgum is now tense. People think that the police and Government are not doing enough. Our prayer is that we lead with Government to immediately beef up the security personnel in Kitgum Municipality and Kitgum District as a whole. 

We also want to probably see the deployment of the military alongside the police, if we do not have enough, so that we calm down the situation. We would want to see more police posts created in the division and in the municipality and outside. There is a lot of panic.

Yesterday, while in Kitgum with my fellow honourable colleagues, each of us had to rush to the police post to pick a policeman. I usually have my dogs at home and I sleep, but that is no longer viable. Everybody is in panic. We would want the Government to immediately put in place security measures to stabilise the situation. We want to see the minister or the Inspector General of Police (IGP) travel to Kitgum and give that assurance. We need to reinstate the relationship between the Wanainchi and the police to do the policing. Otherwise, even –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Beatrice Anywar, for giving way. The Member is lamenting and expressing sadness at the way human life is treated in Kitgum District. 

The right to life is a constitutional right and it does not matter whether one is in Kitgum, Lwemiyaga or Kabale. That means the matter being raised by the Member is constitutional in nature. 

The protection of the right to life is a constitutional provision under Article 22 where, as it is put, “No person shall be deprived of life intentionally except in execution of a sentence passed in a fair trial by a court of competent jurisdiction….” 

Mr Speaker, when a Member stands here and puts it succinctly that the trend of gunning down people has been on, and there is neither response nor intervention from Government - as early as 8.00 p.m., the Member is telling the House that people are being killed with no property being taken - to that extent, Mr Speaker, may we be informed as Parliament, what the nature of the killing is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on what point did you rise? I thought you rose on the point of information.

MR SSEKIKUBO: It is information, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please let us respect the rules, honourable member.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Can we be informed by Government on what they are doing about this taking away of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you now let the Member raise the matter; those are the matters she was raising.

MS LAMWAKA: Point of information.

MS ANYWAR: Just a minute, I am going to give you the opportunity. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the colleague for the information. We have the crime preventers who have been trained and used during elections, but they are idle and frustrated. We heard the President say they would be incorporated into the police but when will this be done?

We have porous borders with South Sudan. We actually have a whole market selling guns at the border with South Sudan at between Shs 250,000 – 300,000. This situation must be addressed by the Government immediately. I now give you the opportunity honourable colleague; I have wound up.

MS LAMWAKA: Thank you very much, hon. Beatrice Anywar, for giving way. To add my voice onto what she has said, yesterday at 7.30 p.m, a retired citizen was gunned down at his door by unknown gunmen. These are the very men who keep killing people and run away.

Last week when we were in Kitgum with hon. Beatrice Anywar, we conferenced with the police and the DPC told us that they do not have enough policemen; that out of the few policemen there, eight were taken to the training school.

There is a kennel that was built for the police dogs at the station two years ago. But up to now, the Government of Uganda or the police management have failed to send dogs there, yet such dogs would be helpful in investigating such situations. 

Another point is that -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of information and now you are giving – please just give information.

MS LAMWAKA: Another piece of information is that the guns, as she said – in fact along the Kitgum - South Sudan border, the soldiers are always very few. We, therefore, request the Ministry of Defence to at least send in more soldiers to curb this insurgency, which is now rampant in the district.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you colleague for giving the information. Mr Speaker, I – (Interruption)

MS LANYERO: Thank you very much, my colleague for giving way. I rise to give information and to add my voice to what my sister has just raised. In June, I remember I raised this issue on the Floor of Parliament about the security situation in Lamwo District. I talked about the porous border and by then we had lost two people; gunned down in their houses.

On 30th July, another person was gunned down in Padibe West. On the 4th August, another person was gunned down in Lamwo Town Council. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to commend the security people in Lamwo because they launched an operation on the 16th September and were able to get one person before recovering a gun too. When they investigated, it was discovered that these guns were coming from South Sudan. And this is as a result of the porous border that we have always complained about. 

Mr Speaker, the situation is getting worse. Yesterday, we got this information about this person who was gunned down. I would like to pray that you increase – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on information. You have already given that information. Please honourable, wind up. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thanks colleagues, for giving that information. Mr Speaker, as you are aware our people have literary lost hope. So, we need to re-instate citizens’ hope in the police force. Our prayer is that - who would not want to see police officers travel there to talk to the community?

However, I would like to put it on record that, we have been in touch with the State Minister for Internal Affairs. As I speak, before I walked in, I received some delegation from the Office of the IGP trying to reach out and find a way forward. We would like that to be improved upon, and we also travel to the district and see how to beef up the security there.

Lastly, we would like also to see the welfare of these police officers improved. They are frustrated. When you talk to them individually, with their “yingiya pole” and other frustrations - they cannot really do much. So, we should not leave their welfare in isolation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, let me begin by passing on our deepest condolences to the families of the six people who have been reported by hon. Beatrice Anywar, as having been gunned down; it is really sad.  

Mr Speaker, when an incident happens, say somebody is killed, the District Police Commander in the area where the incident has happened, is tasked spontaneously to call security meetings and find quick measures to handle that.

I know this was done and a number of issues were identified. One of them was the training of our police officers. Some of them need training. The issue of the thin strength on the ground has always come up. 

The new information I have heard, but which has shocked me is the market which is selling guns at the border. We launched disamourment in Karamoja and Northern Uganda, we swept the entire place. Such markets that existed ceased. The re-emergency of this is absurd. 

I am, therefore, going to instruct the minister in charge, to come here tomorrow afternoon and tell us what they have done so far because I know - from the information given by the Member of Parliament from Lamwo - that operations have been done – 

MR SSEMUJJU: Point of procedure. Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Parliament approved the hon. Ruth Nankabirwa as a minister and not a supervisor of other ministers. She is now telling Parliament, “I am going to instruct.” 

Mr Speaker, either the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and his deputies have resigned their positions and the hon. Ruth Nankabirwa has taken over all those four positions - because you see the matter being raised is a serious one.

How can we have someone at the same rank with ministers tell Parliament - and it is being recorded on the Hansard - that she is going to instruct ministers in charge? If she made a pledge to Parliament that she will deliver the message to her colleague, who should come and explain, that would be something understandable because the colleague is not in the House. 

However, for hon. Nankabirwa to stand here and say she will instruct - is she proceeding well or are we proceeding well by allowing her to instruct, and yet we know that she will not instruct because she does not have that mandate and to mislead Parliament that now part of her brief is to instruct other ministers? Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, all I know is that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa is a Government Chief Whip and a Cabinet minister. I have not looked at the schedule of duties given to her by the appointing authority. So, I am unable to guide on this matter, one way or the other.  I will need to ask for the instrument of appointment to see - but that is difficult for now. By the time it comes, this matter will be over.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. For the information of the House, one of the tools I use to whip is the language I use. It helps me whip them and I choose my words deliberately.

The matter is very serious, it concerns lives of people. I cannot massage; I must instruct people to work. (Applause) Tomorrow afternoon, the Minister of Internal Affairs has to come here and brief us what they have done so far. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister’s Question Time is coming in 15 minutes but I still have some urgent matters. I do not know whether we can pause this and go back to the Order Paper? Can I take the Member for Pallisa if he is here?

2.52
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to raise this matter. This matter is in relation to the eminent closure of the Department of Dentistry at the College of Health Sciences of Makerere University. 

Mr Speaker, this has threatened -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is being closed?

MR JACOB OPOLOT: The Department of Dentistry at the College of Health Sciences of Makerere University, but which is based at Mulago Hospital.
 
This comes as a result of a joint inspection between the East African Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Council and National Council for Higher Education.

The department, which trains dental surgeons, was found inadequate, in terms of its capacity to meet the modern standards of an institution training that calibre of people.

Mr Speaker, I want the House to note that this is the only institution in Uganda where dental surgeons are trained. If it is closed, then what awaits this country? 

As you are all aware, dental problems are rampant and I am not very sure, Mr Speaker, whether you have encountered a dental problem but when you do it, is when you realise how important this particular training is, both to Uganda and the wider East African Community.

The reason given for the closure was that, the infrastructure at the place does not meet the minimum standards. This is an institution that was set up about 34 years ago and there is very little that has been done to improve it. Now the East African Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, which inspected this place sometime back on 12 November 2015, gave them a year to improve their infrastructure, staffing and other materials.

However, to date, nothing has been done yet they promised to come back after one year, which is next month.  The university and the Ministry of Education and Sports  have done nothing to ensure that by the time they come, they find an institution or a department which is compliant with the minimum standards as required.

I, therefore, raise this issue so that, as a House we can compel the Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development and even Public Service in terms of staffing and the management of Makerere University to institute measures that will guarantee that by the time the team comes for another inspection, this school will not be closed. 

Mr Speaker, thank you for availing me this opportunity. I am sure with the Government Chief Whip here, she will be able to instruct again and hopefully something will be done to save our dental school. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Jacob Opolot shared with me that information before he came to this Parliament and I want to thank him.

I would like to inform the House that I interacted with the Minister of Education and Sports. However, I am not able to give a time frame - that sector involves more than three ministries. I cannot stand and give a vivid time frame when they shall come and report.

However, aware that Parliament is going on recess tomorrow, I think whether it is in recess, Ugandans will want to know what is happening. Therefore, a statement can be made either, through a press conference so that we get to know more. If Parliament was not going for recess tomorrow, I would have promised that on Tuesday a statement is made here. My dilemma is that tomorrow, we are likely to break off for recess. However, we need information from the three ministries which information I currently do not have. That is my dilemma, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would find a way of giving a notice to these people. Clerk, extract these minutes and let us write to the ministries concerned for some actions to be taken. Thank you.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Takafa Secondary School in Mwanza Tanzania. They have come here to observe our proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have members from the civil society who are here to witness the presentation on the motion on Alcoholic Drinks Control, Bill. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEES

2.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, Rule 148(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament enjoins the party whips the authority to designate Members to standing committees of Parliament.

I have designated the following Members of Parliament to the following standing committees:

Hon. Lamwaka Catherine, District Woman Representative for Omoro, to the Committee on Government Assurances committe; hon. Noeline Kisembo Basemera, Woman Member of Parliament for Kibale, to the Committee on Local Government Accounts; hon. Jennifer Mbabazi Kyomuhendo, Woman Member of Parliament for Kagadi, to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises; and hon. Prossy Akampurira Mbabazi, Woman Member of Parliament for Rubanda, to the Committee on Human Rights. I beg to designate these members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finish reading all before I put the question. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I need to clarify why I am re-designating as advised by the Clerk. A number of times I stood here and designated Members of Parliament, some of them remained unsure to which committees they were in. I am not changing the status quo but I am reaffirming. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have we already adopted those names here?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, but some of them were captured on both committees which was confusing. Anyway, I wish to designate the hon. Denis Sabiiti, the MP for Rubanda County, to the Committee on Science and Technology not Human Rights.

Hon. Nelson Lufafa, the MP for Butembe County goes to the Committee on HIV/AIDS, not Human Rights; hon. Michael Ayepa, the MP for Labwor County goes to the Committee on National Economy, not Human Rights; and the hon. Samson Lokeris, the MP for Dodoth County to the Committee on National Economy, not Human Rights. 

Hon. Richard Gafabusa, the MP for Bwamba County goes to the Committee on Science and Technology not Rules and Privileges; the hon. Lawrence Biyika MP for Ora County goes to the Committee on Science and Technology not Rules and Privileges.

Mr Speaker, I wish to designate the hon. Aston Kajara, the MP for Mwenge County South, to the Committee on National Economy not Rules and Privileges; the hon. Andrew Marshal, MP for Igara County East, to the Committee of Government Assurances not Rules and Privileges; the hon. John Baptist Lokii, the MP for Matheniko County, to the Committee on Public Accounts not Rules and Privileges; hon. Julius Bua Acom, the MP for Otuke County, to the Committee on HIV/AIDS not Local Government Accounts; the hon. Godfrey Onzima, the MP for Aringa North County, to the Committee on Local Government Accounts not Government Assurance; and the hon. Dede Stephen Mayende, the MP for Bukhooli South, to the Committee of Government Assurance not COSASE.

There is one Member who I would like to designate according to Rule 173 (2). The hon. Joverine Kaliisa, the Woman MP for Ibanda goes to the Committee on East African Community Affairs not Public Service and Local Government. I beg to designate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are Members that have been re-designated but we had already put the question to their membership, as I understand. So, we do not have to put an approval question to that again. But Members who were affected take note - and can the Clerk extract the minutes of this and update the list of Members on those respective committees. 

However, for the four new Members who have been designated to the respective committees, I put the question for their approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.05
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The following Members due to over subscription on the Committee on Public Accounts have been shifted: hon. Twinamasiko Onesimus to the committee on Government Assurances, hon. Onyango Gideon to Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

Hon. Annette Nyakecho did not have any committee; at first she thought she was in four committees but later she found out that she was not designated to any of the four committees and she is now on the committee of Human Rights.

Hon. James Kakooza from the committee of COSASE to the Committee on Budget, hon. Stella Kiiza from the committee of COSASE to HIV/AIDS committee, hon. Tubo Christine Nakwang from COSASE to Equal Opportunities committee this was due to over subscription by Independent Members on COSASE.

On sectoral committees, hon. Mafabi Ishama did not have a sectoral committee and he is now on the committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry, hon. Nokrach William did not have any sectoral committee and now he is designated to the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Services.

Hon. Latif Ssebbagala did not also have a sectoral committee and he is now on the committee on Foreign Affairs. Hon. Nyakecho Annette also did not have a sectoral committee and is now on the committee on Health, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, there is one Member who did not have a committee. I put the question for the approval of that Member to belong to a committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the rest of the Members who have been re-designated to different committees take note, and Clerk please extract the minutes and update the list of those committees. Thank you.

3.07
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Mr Speaker, it was brought to our notice that we had not designated some MPS and others were designated to more than one committee. Therefore, I would like to first correct that mistake.

Hon. Musoke Wakayima his name appears in two standing committees; committee on HIV/AIDS and committee on Government Assurances. Accordingly we would like to withdraw his name from the committee on HIV/AIDS and designate him to the committee on Government Assurances.

Hon. Okupa Elijah’s name was also appearing in two sectoral committees the committee on Natural Resources and the committee of Physical Infrastructure. 

I, therefore, would like to withdraw his name from the list on the committee on Natural Resources and designate him to the committee on Physical Infrastructure.

Mr Speaker, I also have two Members of Parliament who were not designated to standing committees, first is hon. Nabila Naggayi, I hereby designate her to the committee on Human Rights; hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel to the committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. In the event that there are Members who do not belong to any particular committee, I put the question for the approval of those names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

However, for those Members who are already in committees and have been approved, Clerk extract the minutes and update the list of those committees.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification from the Opposition Chief Whip or the Government Chief Whip?

MR HAMSON OBUA: Mr Speaker, under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, a Member of Parliament is supposed to be designated to two committees – a Standing Committee and a Sessional Committee.

According to the list read by the Government Chief Whip, the four Members were designated to Standing Committees only. I, therefore, wanted to seek that clarity from the Chair because that is the provision of the rules and you are the custodian. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what they are going to do now. (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am designating all the new Members – hon. Lamwaka, Woman Member of Parliament for Omoro; hon. Kisembo Basemera; hon. Mbabazi Kyomuhendo and hon. Akampurira – to the Committee on East African Community Affairs. This is because the other committees are oversubscribed. It is only the Committee on East African Community Affairs which was majorly undersubscribed. 

For the first year, I beg that they serve on that committee and probably since sessional committees are annual, next year we will be able to rectify it. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question for the approval of those names to be part of the Committee on the East African Community Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I designated hon. Elijah Okupa to the Committee on Commissions, State Authorities and State Enterprises but he tells me his name appears on another committee. For the records, I want to repeat that hon. Elijah Okupa is deployed to the Committee on Commissions, State Authorities and State Enterprises.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this the first time? Do we need to approve it or it was already done before?

MR SSEMUJJU: I think because he appears where I did not designate him; I take it that his name is not approved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committee is he going to now?

MR SSEMUJJU: We designated him to COSASE, but his name appears on another committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, was his name approved on this committee of COSASE?

MR SSEMUJJU: That is what I know, but the fact that it appears on another list creates doubt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the avoidance of any doubt, can I put the question for the approval of hon. Okupa Elijah to be moved to the Committee on COCASE?

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is five minutes past three o’clock and under rule 34, this is the time designated for the Prime Minister to interact with Members. Remember we had agreed on some parameters that we deal with the policy issues that the Prime Minister can handle properly. Let us start from Kioga.

3.13
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, for over five years now, a strange water weed invaded Lake Kyoga, to the extent that it has affected navigation and fishing expedition.

During the Ninth Parliament, I raised this issue and your response was to the effect that Government had picked samples of this strange water weed for experiments, and also that our friends from Egypt were preparing to come and help us get rid of the weed. It is now over two years and we haven’t seen any action. What plans does Government have, Mr Prime Minister, to get rid of this strange water weed that seems to propagate unabated –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you were in the Chair when we were reminded by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi on the rule on the Prime Minister’s Time. Under that rule, the Prime Minister should be asked questions of policy, but not problems that we encounter in the constituencies. The first question now is on a weed on water. The procedural issues I am raising is whether now, with your permission, the rule has been relaxed to allow us ask questions that we meet in the constituencies every day, that ordinarily we should be putting to ministers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have given guidance on this matter that we do not expect the Prime Minister to know factual matters all over the country. Therefore, if you ask that kind of question you will not get a response because he would not humanly know what is happening in a particular area. We said “broad policy questions” should be the one posed to the Prime Minister so that he can make responses. We expect him to know those ones because he chairs Cabinet occasionally and coordinates ministries. Therefore, let us try and deal with those ones, please!

MR OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether conservation of our water bodies is not a policy matter. I put this particular question to the Prime Minister about one month ago. It has been in the office of the Government Chief Whip and they took it upon themselves to get the Prime Minister informed about this likely matter of policy that is coming on this Floor-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you could then make it brief so that the Prime Minister can respond to it. The matter is already known. You have taken almost three minutes asking the question. We need to share the time properly.

MR OKELLO: Let me now make it brief. What programme does Government have to get rid of the strange water weed in Lake Kyoga as a policy matter? (Laughter)

3.17
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I will ask the Minister responsible for Water and Environment to make a statement on the matter within two weeks, so that Members of the august House and the country can know the measures Government is taking against this specific weed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That should be amended to say, “When Parliament resumes”. This is because when we go on recess, we will come back around 14th of November. That is it.

3.18
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am raising a policy question to the Prime Minister. The question is in regard to the policy of Government in responding to disasters in our constituencies.

Mr Prime Minister, many of us stand here and raise matters of national importance with many of them being matters to do with disasters. Of course, I had one disaster in form of a hailstorm in Igara West just yesterday. The issue is that many of us start running up and down between ministries and we get frustrated in terms of Government response. Many of us find this Floor as the only way out. 

Mr Prime Minister, what is the way forward? How can we improve on what is in the pipeline in terms of the policy of Government in responding to constituency issues in an orderly and timely manner? Would you move this House and Government to make a special consideration? Shs 3 billion may not be adequate, but I think in a situation like this where almost all of us have issues if we had a special session, it would take almost three hours. What can Government do to raise a special budgetary request or contingency so that we address these disasters that are upcoming?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, if you could, make the questions brief so that we can use the time better.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the matter of disaster and emergencies raised by Ndugu Magyezi is a very serious matter. It has also been discussed with a number of other colleagues from different parts of the country who have had emergencies from earthquakes, rainstorms, hailstorms among others. 

Mr Speaker, you may also be interested in knowing that only today, under the chairmanship of President Museveni, Cabinet discussed the very same issue. Cabinet resolved that Government was going to take extraordinary measures to ensure that it effectively responds to the emergencies that have affected many parts of the country - natural calamities, famine and other related emergencies.

Mr Speaker, a team has been put in place to follow up this matter. I ask colleagues, who have been affected by these emergencies, to give information to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees so that Government can get all the required information and effectively and expeditiously respond to them.

3.20
MR MAJEGERE KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Someone is disturbing the Prime Minister and yet I want him to listen. (Laughter)

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the process of parties choosing their flag bearers for the general elections, there was widespread violence across the country. People were beating each other, police beating people and even police ballot stuffing for their favourite candidates. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have been in Parliament for some time but I have not heard any Government official make an official statement about the widespread violence during that process –(Interjections)- Members, allow me to proceed. Therefore, as -(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to allege that the Police of the Republic of Uganda stuffed ballot boxes? Can he substantiate? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the statement you made is actually a serious statement. You need to either substantiate what you are saying or withdraw it. 

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, you gave me an opportunity to ask the Prime Minister a question and I am asking it in my capacity as Member of Parliament, Bunya County East. I also have a basis as to why I am asking the Prime Minister this question. This is for the good of this nation, because that violence was all over the country. It was not only – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member -

MR KYEWALABYE: Let me conclude my question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, there are rules that we follow. You stated that the police ballot stuffed in favour of candidates all over the country. Honourable member, would you like to substantiate or withdraw that particular statement?

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I am speaking out of experience because I was a victim. I request that you allow me ask the Prime Minister the question. If he is able to answer - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please resume your seat.

3.24
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I rise to ask the Prime Minister a question. Yesterday, while I was watching NBS TV, I saw a news piece in which people were carrying someone who was dying of hunger in Serere District. Famine is a problem in the whole country but it is pronounced more in the east, north and West Nile.

Mr Speaker, I know that a motion is coming but urgently, may I know from the Prime Minister how Government is going to cater for families, which have lost their dear ones and those who are on death row. In Butaleja, they called and said people have no food. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA:  Mr Speaker, I have just told this august House that this matter is being taken seriously by Government and that Cabinet, under the chairmanship of the President, devoted a lot of time to it. Cabinet took positions on the measures to be taken to deal with these urgent issues. 

Actually, the situation in Serere was one of the issues that was used to illustrate the gravity of this very matter. So, Government is seized of the matter and it is dealing with it with all the seriousness.

3.26
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. During the campaigns, the President laid a foundation stone for the COMESA market building in Masafu. However, ever since then, we have never heard information from the Government about this. Is there any development or it was just a presidential vote-catching issue? Thank you.  

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the President and the NRM meant business. It is the intention of Government, within these five years, to ensure that all those promises made are implemented. Although it might take some time and sometimes implementation is done in phases, it will be done.

3.27
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to inform you that there is an escalating practice that is happening in four districts - Isingiro, Kiruhura, Kasese and Ibanda. More than 46 motorcycles have been impounded by the police in conjunction with Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). These motorcycles were in the hands of people who did not have the right documents. The particulars on the engine numbers, chassis numbers or even the number plates are in the names of the person owning the motorcycle but in the records of URA, the particulars are different. 

Police has been doing its operations by making sure that those people get proper documents. However, the penalties being inflicted on them are more severe than the price of the motorcycle. Is there any plan through which those people can be saved from what is happening to them? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that suggests that some people have been fleecing the country and the police has caught them. I, therefore, think this is a straightforward matter. The law should take its course; simple!

3.29
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about a matter I raised some time in this House - the machine for cancer treatment at Mulago Hospital and other scan machines in other referral hospitals.

Mr Prime Minister, we have a problem with cancer, which you well know, and other diseases that are eating up Ugandans; what is the way forward?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there have been some challenges in regard to medical equipment in our hospitals, especially purchasing and maintenance. Government is now considering new modalities of acquiring medical equipment, including leasing some of them. This affects equipment like radiotherapy machines and other lab equipment. 

I believe the Minister of Health will brief this House when we come from recess. The House requires the minister to give an extensive explanation on how Government is tackling the issue of medical equipment, so that in turn you can go to your constituencies and explain to the people Government’s position with regards to equipping our hospitals. It is the intention of Government to equip our hospitals and health centres adequately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please extract the minutes of that and submit it accordingly.

3.31
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister regards the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). Uganda is one of the African countries that benefits from AGOA, which was established by the United States Government in 2000 and last year, the Act was renewed on 29 June 2015 till 2025.

The key benefit expected from AGOA was to ensure eligibility of Ugandan products to the tariff-free and quota-free access of markets in the United States of America. This was to translate into increased foreign exchange earnings from trading Ugandan products in the United States.

The question is: Mr Prime Minister, how much has the country economically benefitted from AGOA in the period 2000 to 2015 and how is its performance compared with the other 37 African countries benefitting from AGOA? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda championed the cause for AGOA. Unfortunately, Uganda has not gained as much from AGOA as we struggled to get it on the ground. However, Government is putting in place modalities to ensure that we indeed benefit from AGOA and compensate for the lost time.

As for the comparison with the other countries, I have not carried out a study on this comparison, but I am sure Uganda is going to benefit from AGOA.

3.33
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister. My issue is about Lake Bunyonyi, the deepest lake in Kabale. People cross the lake and go to the other side to cultivate, harvest crops, attend school, visit health centres at Bwama Island and travel to and from Mwanjali Market in Kabale. However, many people drown in the lake - an average of two per week. Recently, five members of the same family drowned in that lake and it took time to retrieve the bodies, since this is the deepest lake. 

Another case in point -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is?

MS NDAMIRA: The question is: What is the Government doing to mitigate the situation, given that people have to continue crossing the lake to cultivate and conduct business across the shores? Can the Government provide lifeguard jackets on the lake for the meantime for the people around the lake to cross the waters safely? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the problem raised by the hon. Ndamira is a very well-known problem. Government is making arrangements to procure a ferry for the lake. The ferry will have life jackets on it. 

3.35
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Uganda ratified the Rome Statue, which established the International Criminal Court (ICC) in 2002. However, on many occasions, the President of the Republic of Uganda has been reported bashing the ICC as a useless court targeting only the black race.

This was echoed on 9 April 2013 at the swearing-in of the Kenyan President, H.E Uhuru Kenyatta, and on 9 of October 2015 when we were commemorating our independence. In May this year, at his swearing-in, the President also made the same statement. My question to the Prime Minister is: What is the status of Uganda vis-à-vis the ICC?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda, like many other African countries, is reconsidering our position and relationship with ICC because of its well-known position especially with regard to cases from Africa. We believe we are not the only people involved in cases triable by ICC, but when you look at everyone that has been tried by ICC, there is an unusually high preponderance of our people. Therefore, Africa is reconsidering its position.

3.38
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, how far has the Government gone with the arrangements of paying off absentee landlords to enable occupants have full ownership of their land? 

I am asking this because of weaknesses in Bugangaizi East, where some descendants of absentee landlords have been threatening us with evictions. They have been going to court to acquire letters of administration to evict us. So, how far has Government gone with the arrangement of clearing those absentee landlords in Bugangaizi East? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government established the Land Fund; this is really just a budgetary issue. Every year that passes, we try to increase the amount of money available to purchase land from absentee landlords so that the peasants and other people can then have proper titles for the lands they own. Although it is still a budgetary matter, Government continues to mobilise more resources. 

3.40
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Uganda signed and ratified the Paris Agreement and went ahead to formulate and pass our own climate change policy to protect our farmers. How far have we gone as a country to prepare the climate change Bill, and consequently the law? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda is a firm believer in taking measures that will reduce global warming and mitigate effects of climate change. The policies and laws in that respect are coming; the details will be made available by the responsible Ministry of Water and Environment.

3.41
MS MARGARET MBEIZA (NRM, Woman Representative Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inquire from the Prime Minister about the issue of the vehicles for Members of Parliament. (Laughter) This is not a laughing matter; it is a necessity, a right and a matter of national importance (Laughter). 

For how long will we be using boda bodas and risking our lives? In Kaliro, I use my vehicle, a land cruiser, and another vehicle whose engine is down. I am working at a Government entity; can I still buy a vehicle on my own yet I work for Government? Mr Speaker, I would like to inquire from the Prime Minister when we shall get the vehicles. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is a matter not for the Prime Minister but for the Parliamentary Commission. If I had known what was coming up, I would have advised that we address that internally within Parliament. The Parliamentary Commission is handling that.

3.42
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about matters of policy related to our national Independence Day celebrations. We are in October and every year, we celebrate Independence Day. In districts, there are complaints from the citizens and the local governments. They have not been shown the importance of this day. What is the policy of Government on the celebration of Uganda’s independence? Is there a policy? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is very well known by honourable members that 9th October is a major national day when we acquired our uhuru. It is not only a public holiday but the day we celebrate our independence. 

Every year, there is one centre where the leadership and the people gather to celebrate this day. However, it is also true that this day is celebrated in district headquarters and in other centres. Therefore, the matter is clear; it is a national day celebrated - [HON. MEMBER: “What is the policy?”] - Well, policy in this respect is very well illustrated by the practice. (Laughter)

3.44
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda West County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Parliament in 2010 enacted the Physical Planning Act, 2010. The Act provides for the development of national physical plans, district development plans and local development plans. It further stipulates that no development shall take place unless these plans are in place.

Mr Speaker, today, the national physical development plans are not in place and therefore, the district and local development plans are also not in place because they have no national plan to guide them. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is now six years down the road and development cannot wait for this very long. I am sure development is ongoing even without these physical development plans and it implies that it is expensive – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ask the question.

MR SABIITI: When are these national physical development plans going to be put in place so that the other subsequent plans are put in place and development in Uganda is properly guided?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, planning in the country has been taking place over many years. It is true there is new legislation, and the details of implementation of the new legislation will be expounded on by the new Minister of State for Urban and Physical Planning. Therefore, the details will come. 

Actually, of great interest is that I had a discussion with hon. Musumba only today and we discussed those very points and the need for him to come to Cabinet and then Parliament. Therefore, I expect that when we come from our recess, Ndugu Musumba will be ready to give this august House the plans we are talking about.

3.47
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you know that there are so many Karimojong children that are littered on the streets of Kampala. What plans does the Government have to help these children because these children are being trafficked by evil people? When tourists come to Kampala, they get the impression that Uganda does not care for the children because they are begging everywhere. Please, can you explain?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the primary responsibility of children is with parents. Let us, as parents, ensure that we do our best to nurture, keep our children and ensure that they are not exposed to all sorts of vultures and negative elements. 

Secondly, there is the administration. Authorities at the level of the district and also urban areas like Kampala should ensure that they work with communities to deal with the problem that you are talking about. However, the fact of the matter is that it is a well-known position and policy of Government that these young stars will be assisted as much as possible and where possible, repatriated to their homes or in some cases, supported in some centres. 

Therefore, this is a problem that the country is facing and Government, parents and the administration should work together to resolve this matter.

3.49
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. My question to the Prime Minister is about the issue of bicycles to LCIs. Some of the districts in Uganda received bicycles and my LC chairpersons are also inquiring about their bicycles. I need an explanation.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a fairly regular issue. About the LCs that have not received their bicycles, I have just had an exchange of views with the Minister for Local Government that has assured me that his ministry is organising the requisite funds to get the bicycles.

3.51
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I do appreciate the fact that, as a country, we are striving hard to reach a middle-class status in 2020, which is about four years away. My fears are that there are areas in the country where 74 per cent of households live below the poverty line, with Karamoja and Teso as some of the worst hit regions. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what strategies does Government have to overcome or ensure that these areas are also brought up to a status that can bring our country into an equitable development status?

I also have another proposal, which if you can accept – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you already have the answer?

MR TERENCE ACHIA: The proposal is that will you, as Prime Minister, accept to have a meeting with the MPs from these areas, and some development friends as key partners to harmonise and find out how this can be overcome? Can you have such a meeting organised?

DR RUGUNDA: Government is always receptive to good ideas from honourable members and other people concerned. We will be more than happy to get those good ideas.

Secondly, it is true that Karamoja is one of those areas in Uganda where the poverty level is still high. However, as you very well know, special programmes have been put in place, to ensure that affirmative action takes place not only in Karamoja but also in districts, especially in northern Uganda that was disadvantaged by war. We are confident that Karamoja and other disadvantaged districts will be able to catch up so that Uganda reaches a middle-income status in 2020.

3.53
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Two weeks ago, I raised an issue of urgent public importance regarding the use of UPDF soldiers in a land conflict. These soldiers were commandeered by a civilian. A directive was given by the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF), Gen. Katumba Wamala, that those soldiers be withdrawn from Harriet Aber, the wife of Gen. Salim Saleh. However, these soldiers, to date, are still harassing people, burning people’s huts and destroying crops. I would like to know from the Prime Minister since when the UPDF is involved in land conflicts.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if these were soldiers commandeered by a civilian, then they were soldiers definitely not on official duty. (Laughter) The UPDF, true to its characteristic tradition on discipline, will handle that and the Minister for Defence and Veteran Affairs will take up the matter.

3.55
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question to the Prime Minister is about provision of health centres III to subcounties that happen to lie in the upper zone of Sironko. Whereas Government is planning to upgrade health centres III to health centres IV, we in those areas do not have health centres III to speak about. What is Government doing to ensure that these areas are provided with health centres III, and they are also upgraded to health centres IV? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, through increased budgetary provisions, we intend to ensure that every subcounty gets a health centre III. Sironko will not be an exception in that respect. 

3.56
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Government for the good Arua-Koboko-Kaya Road. However, I have seen that on all the highways –(Interjection)- You know how I see. Please, do not disturb me. 

On all the highways where there are schools or small towns, humps are placed. However, on the Arua-Koboko-Kaya Road, there are no humps and people are being knocked down every day. Two days ago, four people were knocked and one died. May I know why there are no humps along this highway? I thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Humps are not necessarily a solution in some of the situations. In fact, sometimes humps put on highways can be a source of trouble. Nevertheless, the point raised by my sister is going to be taken up by the works minister, to look at her complaint and see what appropriate remedy can be put in place in order to avoid the problem of road accidents.

3.58
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, you are aware that we have been handling issues of resettlement in the Sebei sub region. Even up to the end of the Ninth Parliament, we still had several engagements and very good ideas that we thought were going to bring these issues to rest.

We do not have social services in that region and I know that the Prime Minister is aware. Last month, the Uganda Red Cross tried to construct pit latrines for two primary schools in Benet Subcounty. Last week, I went to their offices and on three occasions I met their officers. 

My questions are: One, what is the status of the resettlement of these people in Sebei sub region? Two, what advice are you going to give, especially now that we are going home; what am I going to tell these people? Latrines were being constructed by the Red Cross but they were stopped; what am I supposed to tell my people, the rural people? 

DR RUGUNDA: My advice to my sister is that, after today’s session, we could meet at my office with the people concerned and we resolve this matter. 

4.00
MAJ. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the economy is suffering the effects of stress, shock and turbulence. I do not want to paint a negative picture but that is what it is. About 15 fish factories have closed. Our import bill is almost three times our export component. Gambling is on the increase in the country, particularly by the youth. The production figures of the various commodities like cotton are very low. Revenue collection in the country has also gone down. 

What specific economic measures do you intend to put in place to redress these imbalances before we experience more companies going out of business?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the situation in the country is not as grim as hon. Guma has put it. As you very well know, in comparison, I see Uganda among the best 10 of the fastest growing African countries. Therefore, whereas we have some challenges, we are doing well. 

The position of our economy is very well known. We have already said agriculture is the base of our economy and, therefore, increased agricultural production is indeed a priority. That is why Operation Wealth Creation is trying to add momentum on increasing agricultural production. 

Secondly, the export of cheap raw materials should come to an end. We should focus on value addition so that our exports can indeed fetch us more money. 

Thirdly, we have said that we need investments. That is why we are encouraging local and external investors to come to Uganda and help rejuvenate our economy and create jobs. All in all, the economic strategy, in my view, is correct and Uganda is on the right path. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the time is now up. Shortly, I will allow three more Members to contribute before I call the Leader of the Opposition to summarise and then the Prime Minister will close. 

4.03
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the last seven years, the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has received Shs 9 trillion. Out of that Shs 9 trillion, Shs 4 trillion has been stolen. This was emphasised by the President in his State of the Nation Address in 2016. What practical measures are you putting in place as Government, to curb your incurable corruption in this country? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: This incurable corruption, Mr Speaker, must include my brother Nzoghu seated across. Corruption is indeed a war that all of us must fight. There is no doubt that the various investigations set up by Government, especially on UNRA, expose the determination and resolve Government has to fight and defeat corruption. 

The investigation on Katosi Road is further illustration that Government will not tolerate any abuse of money meant for roads. Therefore, Government is vigilant and will catch the thieves, punish them and ensure that the money for making roads is protected. 

4.05
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you realise that in 2014, Government, through the ministries of health, water and education, in the Sanitation and Water for All (SWA) high-level commitments in Washington D.C and also the different UN instruments ratified, committed themselves to ensuring that sanitation and hygiene becomes top on the agenda in achieving Sustainable Development Goal No.6 - sanitation and water for all. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how far has the country gone in terms of harmonising the modus operandi and implementing sanitation and hygiene in the country, as we celebrate the Global Hand Washing Day on 14 October and as we celebrate the Sanitation Day in October this year? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda has done very well in the area of water and sanitation, especially in making sure that the people of Uganda, both in urban and rural areas, get access to safe water. We are now in the range of 70 per cent or so. 

On the question of sanitation, we are also making progress. The indicator one can take is on the issue of infant mortality, where diarrheal diseases due to poor sanitation cause a lot of morbidity and mortality. The fact that infant mortality has rapidly come down to 50 or so is further evidence that sanitation is picking up. Nevertheless, the campaign to promote safe water and improved sanitation must be intensified. 

4.08
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that for more than 10 years now, Uganda has not had LCI elections. We are going for recess and questions are going to arise. What plans do you have to ensure that elections are conducted within this year? What is the status? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We had made some directives from the Chair on that subject but proceed. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am sure you saw me and the Minister of Local Government consulting. The authoritative information I have from the Minister of Local Government is that LCI elections are expected in December this year and at the latest January next year. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I will give a chance to the Leader of the Opposition, then you will wind up. 

4.09
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will, first of all, thank the Prime Minister for labouring to answer certain questions. However, I request that he possibly gets a notebook and notes a few things because I will ask my questions and also comment on a few things as catered for under Rule 34(5).

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, all of you are aware that early this year, Uganda, through the Ministry of Internal Affairs, sponsored a candidate for the Chairperson of the African Union Commission. Colleagues, you are aware that I gave full support to this candidate. We thought that it should be bipartisan support, this being a country’s candidate. 

Despite the bipartisan efforts to secure victory for a Ugandan candidate, questions were raised as to the process through which the candidate was selected and more questions keep coming up. You are aware that elections were postponed even when our candidate had not made it.

In many previous secondments for international positions, the process as to how national candidates are arrived at has never been clear. The selection criterion has never been explained, and it is a common occurrence for the country to know about placements long after the appointments have been affected. The question has always remained, and this is the question that I am asking the Prime Minister so that it is clear to Uganda: As a country, do we still intend to participate in these elections?

Secondly, Ugandans out there would like to know the process and criteria that they can follow in order to show interest in taking up this position. Please, make it clear to Ugandans so that we, in the Opposition, can also put forward our candidate and maybe the ruling party can come up with a candidate, so that at the end of it all, we get a candidate that will be acceptable to all of us - (Interjection) - Even the Independents could possibly have interest and maybe the representatives of the army and the young persons can also bring in theirs.

The other issue, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is in regard to the operationalisation of our Constitution. Article 129(1)(d) of the Constitution of Uganda empowers the Parliament of Uganda by law to establish subordinate courts, which, among others, include the qadhis courts for marriage. Since 1995 when this Constitution was promulgated and possibly even after the amendments, the Executive has never initiated a Bill to establish the qadhis courts. May we, as a country, be informed when Government intends to come to Parliament with a Bill that puts in place the qadhis courts?

Hon. Prime Minister, as a country, we have gone out there to tell people to have nurseries that we shall tap into for purposes of wealth creation. However, the procedure on who should be a supplier is not known, but even when we have chosen those to supply, we have not paid them. (Applause) Many people out there have participated in the wealth creation programme by providing our farmers with seedlings, most especially the coffee farmers. Those who own nurseries have not been paid for the last three years. What is Government’s policy on identifying the suppliers and subsequently paying them?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as a country, we are aware that we have a department called the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS). However, in its operation, NAADS is supposed to have a board. As we speak, NAADS is operational but without a board. May we be informed when this board will be put in place? If it is with army men or it is the army men who will run it, we may not care much; all we want to know is that there is a board. When will it be put in place?

I will now make a few comments on some of the issues that were raised by colleagues. I will start with the colleague who talked about the policy on Independence Day celebrations. This is a House of policymakers but when even the policymakers are not aware of a Government policy on Independence Day celebrations, then we are in trouble as a country. It means that many issues are not explained.

Many MPs do not know how to explain to their people how to celebrate Independence Day. There are some individuals who have wished to celebrate Independence Day in their own style because it is about independence; when I am talking about independence, it is up to me to decide on how to celebrate my independence. Some of them have been curtailed from celebrating Independence Day. 

Independence Day celebrations have ended up being a party affair that some people who do not subscribe to particular parties are left out. Even the Women’s Day celebrations and Youth Day celebrations have turned out to be party affairs. Some individuals are now feeling out of place and uncomfortable to attend the Independence Day and Women’s Day celebrations. What is the policy on national celebrations as far as this country is concerned? Are they supposed to be party celebrations or national celebrations that bring everybody together?

The other issue, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is on AGOA. A Member asked how Uganda has benefited from AGOA. Much of what AGOA does depends on standards. I can tell you that as a country, we have been too laid-back in talking about standards and ensuring that our products are of high quality that can be accepted in the outside world. Until we identify our particular product that we can be proud of and market it and put a lot of safety measures in place to ensure that it is of quality, we may not be able to meet the AGOA standards. Therefore, as a country we need to re-think. 

I just wish to use this opportunity to invite you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to call upon your minister in charge to come with a full statement to the House on the performance of AGOA, so that we can discuss it and give some input to ensure that as a country, we benefit from AGOA. It is for our own good, as a country, so that when we join these institutions and harvest bountifully from them. We should not pay our money to organisations where we are not getting benefits. Can we get a statement that will brief us, as legislators, on how far we have gone, where we have reached and maybe the measures that we intend to put in place to ensure that Ugandans fully get out of poverty using AGOA?

The final bit that I would like to bring to your attention is the issue that the Member from Buhweju talked about – the issue of our participation in ICC. When we domesticated the Rome Statute, Parliament heavily participated; it is the Parliament of Uganda that entered into this deal. It is unfortunate that as a country, we are now going to the international stage, through our fountain of honour, to say that we are considering getting out of ICC. I am even surprised that you have also said it here that we are considering getting out of ICC and yet you have not informed Parliament.

We still have culprits that we committed to the ICC but we now want to get out of it and leave them there. Are we losing interest in the case as a country? Are we still interested as a country in using Parliament to help us to domesticate other obligations that we have entered into outside of this country? 

I expect that if we are no longer interested in this matter, then we should come to Parliament and declare that we entered into a raw deal and see a way forward to withdraw the cases and then Parliament would give us a go ahead and we start internationally to talk about it. In addition, as people, we would go and tell our people that this was a raw deal for us as Africans. 

Mr Speaker, these are some of the issues and I would like to wind up with the matter that the member brought on board, of the LC1 bicycles. If we were not being deceived - because we have been hoodwinked for long as Parliament that something will happen and it does not happen - if we would be put to notice like the Minister of Local Government has said, I would be happier that the bicycles are not procured until we get the right occupants of the seats. Everybody is aware that the LC1 chairpersons masquerading out there are illegal and therefore, if we continue putting our money as a country into illegal offices then we are illegally spending.

On that note, I request that the LC1 elections are expedited and therefore, we begin lobbying for funds for office bearers who are legal. Let me hope, hon. Minister of Local Government, that these elections will take place before January such that as we go for recess, we can mobilise our people to participate in these elections. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and may God bless us all.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for raising quite a number of serious issues and it is my pleasure to make some comments and responses on them. The first question was whether Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe would be going back and if her selection is supported as a candidate. 

First of all, I must salute this House and the country for having united and supported our candidate, Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe. (Applause) I commend my sister the Leader of the Opposition and her team. It is clear that she had some concerns about the candidature and how selections took place, but in the interest of Uganda, they agreed to support this candidate and that is how things should be.

With regard to selection of candidates, it is a matter that normally the responsible ministry takes lead on and in this case, it is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. If it was something to do with water, it would normally be the Ministry of Water and Environment but the point you are making of further clarity in terms of selection procedures is good.

Indeed it is also true that as a country, we need to see how best we can strengthen ourselves so that we can be more competitive in getting jobs of international nature. Are we presenting the candidature again? The responsible Ministry of Foreign Affairs will clarify that position. There have been speculations in media about this but it is not my intention to be carried away by speculations in the media. 

Concerning the question of Qadhis courts, we agreed in the Constitution to establish the Qadhis courts. Therefore, it is a question of the ministry responsible to actualise this and the minister responsible will tell the House when the Qadhis courts will be actualised.

On the issue concerning nurseries and failure to pay people who have supplied planting materials and other requirements; it is true that there are quite a number of supplies that have not been paid and Government is actively following that to ensure that payments, including the delayed payments, are expeditiously carried out. These include coffee, tea and other materials supplied.

Concerning the NAADS board, all institutions are supposed to be having fully effectively functioning boards. If the NAADS board is not in place, it will be expeditiously put in place because we cannot allow that gap to take long unfulfilled.

On Independence and other national days, this independence is a national day for all the people of Uganda. It is not for one sex, gender, political party, group or the other and indeed we should endeavor, as Ugandans, to respect and celebrate it together. If there are hitches, then the Government and the Leader of the Opposition sides should be able to sort it out. It is the intention of Government and the Leader of Government Business to soon invite the Leader of the Opposition so that we can revise the medium of being able to sort out some of the irritants when in fact they are relatively easy to be resolved.

However, Independence day this year will be in Luuka District and all Ugandans and leaders are informed accordingly and many of us on both sides of the House are invited to be in Luuka to celebrate this important national day.

The points made about AGOA are good and I accept the proposal made by the Leader of the Opposition that the minister responsible for trade should come to the House, when we resume from recess, with a statement to update honourable members and the country about how Uganda is doing with AGOA and with strategic goals of Uganda with regard to AGOA. 

The issue of the ICC; if there is anybody who is well informed about the ICC, then Mr Speaker you are perhaps the one, because I remember you preparing the legal framework and proposals for domestication of the ICC Statute in our own laws. You have further given a lot of wise counsel on this subject matter.

However, colleagues, you also know the challenges that we have faced where attempts to bring our brothers together in the region - leaders - has become a problem because the ICC is pointing a finger at them and yet we are firm believers in putting our heads together as a country and a region, when there is an issue, to be able to get answers for them. We will not allow anyone stand in our way in a bid to look for a stable region because of a number of factors. 

Nevertheless, a good point has been made and we should discuss it and see the best way forward. It is not too late for this matter to come to the House. If I may remind you, Uganda was the first country in the world to present a case to the ICC. I better not go into the details now. 

I also agree with the Leader of the Opposition that when the Minister of Local Government procures the bicycles, they should be for the newly elected local council leaders. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the time you have given us under the rules and for the questions and responses that have been made. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Advanced Citizens High School, Masindi. They are represented by hon. Jalia Bintu and hon. Ernest Kiiza. They are here to observe the proceedings, so please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rule 34 (2) (a) of our Rules of Procedure states, “The Prime Minister may make a statement.”  Rule 34(2)(b) is what we have just concluded.  

As a procedural matter, my request is that we pay particular interest to Rule 34(2)(a) that when the Prime Minister shows up every Wednesday, we might probably have to begin with a statement from him. The statement could be sector by sector because I am yet to recognise the value of a question and answer session when we skip Rule 34(2)(a). 

Is it procedurally correct for us to continue with questions that originate from the Members, while we are not getting an official statement from the Prime Minister, Mr Speaker? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. Honourable members - are you seeking clarification from the Speaker? Please, that one is closed. We have now moved to another matter altogether except for the procedural point that was raised. We closed the Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

Honourable members, the rules are implemented in the best way possible and what is not prohibited by the rules is allowed. A question and answer session is specifically allowed by the rules. Which one serves this Parliament better in the circumstances in which we operate? Is it the Prime Minister coming up every Wednesday and making a statement that might take 20 minutes, is debated and then we do not have the question and answer session with him? Which one would be more beneficial to the Members? 

This is because it is not just the provision of the rules; it is also the practice. The practice over the years, while you were not yet here, has been that we use this time this way because it is more beneficial to the Members to engage directly with the issues that are urgent and deal with them. That is why we have been using it this way. 

If one day the Prime Minister came and said that he wanted to make a statement first, that would not be prohibited. However, we cannot direct the Prime Minister to come here with a statement when you have the option of asking him questions. That is why we have been proceeding the way we are proceeding.

Honourable members, we have item No.4; it includes a series of statements to be delivered today. We are going to make some alteration on these statements; in (b), the presentation from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on World Habitat Day requires a power point presentation and the set up was not put in place. We shall, therefore, do it tomorrow when the setup is done and Members can look at the presentation from the minister. 

The statement in (c) was already made so we are supposed to debate it. That statement also combines (e) and (f) so we will not be expecting any new statements on those. We will just have the debate on where we said we are going to debate this matter. Therefore, there will be no statement on (e) and (f), except it will be in the discussions as we wind up on item (c). Thereafter, we shall see how to proceed with the rest. 

On the statement on the teachers, we will give the opportunity for this matter to be raised tomorrow because today we are quite loaded with what is already on the Order Paper. I think let us proceed that way.

Honourable members, we need to have debate on the issue of roads that we deferred and conclude it quickly before we move to other matters.  We have had this discussion very many times. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Item No. 4(a) talks about illegal tree cutting in Adjumani District. On 24 March 2016, the Minister of Water and Environment was requested by Parliament to provide a broad status report of all forests in Uganda and game reserves. Even on the business on the Order Paper to follow, there is an item of the status report on the decision by Cabinet on de-gazettement of forests.

Mr Speaker, the minister was required to bring a status report for Parliament before a decision of Cabinet. If we discuss item (a), it means we are receiving these remaining items before a status report is given to Parliament. Are we proceeding right, Mr Speaker, if we allow discussing small items instead of a broader picture on all forests in Uganda? I therefore seek your guidance on this, whether we are proceeding well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that the request was made for a statement to be made by the minster responsible for forestry on the status of our forest coverage and the things that are connected with it. However, also if you look at business to follow, item No.2 is, “Status report on the decision by Cabinet on the de-gazettement of forests.” That matter came in the previous Parliament and it has come back in this Parliament and it is still pending. The question is, which one comes first?

 It will be easier for this House to receive the status report from the ministry, before we start debating the de-gazettement. I think that will sequentially be proper so that we can deal with the statement and understand where we are in terms of forests and then if there is a request to de-gazette others, we will then be sufficiently resourced with information to be able to do that. I think that would be the proper way to proceed.

However, specifically on 4(a), this is illegal tree cutting. We do not know which trees these ones are. Are they in the protected areas of forest reserves or are they just any trees at the moment that are being improperly handled?

I also see that the minister responsible for this statement is actually not the minister for environment; it is the Minister for the Presidency. I do not know how that is going to work.  We should give the opportunity to the minister to deal with that statement and then we see where we go with that. However, on the issue of the forests in the forest reserves, I think we need a status report on the forests and then we can deal with the issue of de-gazettement. 

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether we will be proceeding well because – you know that the bicycles for the LC chairpersons were procured, only that the money was stolen. However, it was meant for the existing LC structures. If the Prime Minister says that if the bicycles are procured, they will be for the new LCs I don’t know whether we are proceeding well as Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point being made by this House is that there is no existing structure. Why are you insisting on a structure that does not exist? (Laughter) The point being made here is that the LCs that exist now are there illegally. So, which existing structure are we talking about here? Let us proceed with today’s business, please.

There is another item that I need to clarify. This is item 4(d) on Hepatitis B. Honourable members, you recall the direction we made yesterday. I think the proper way to conclude this matter would have to be tomorrow because we gave the Minister of Health the opportunity to make the request that was required by the minister of finance and to complete that by today. We will expect a response on what has happened so far, tomorrow, when all those things are done.

We want a complete statement saying that the request was made and we have released the money. That, we can do tomorrow. Would that not be proper? Okay, let us deal with the first item and then we conclude this particular area with the debate on the matter.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ILLEGAL TREE CUTTING IN ADJUMANI DISTRICT

4.37
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a statement on the illegal cutting of trees in Zoka Forest. On 14 July 2015, hon. Jessica Ababiku informed this Parliament about the depletion of Zoka forest –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, you are aware that some Members don’t have iPads, and the few that have say they are not functional. Mine here – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do we have hard copies of this statement? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] Honourable members, the business has come to the Floor of Parliament; the Member from Adjumani who raised the issue is here; this is an information statement, not a policy statement. This is because the Members had requested particular information on what is going on in Zoka Forest. Can we receive the statement? Honourable minister, please proceed. Let it be uninterrupted, honourable members.

MS MBAYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise guidance. On 14 July 2015, hon. Jessica Ababiku informed this Parliament about the depletion of Zoka Forest. 

On 15 July 2015, the Clerk to Parliament forwarded instructions from the Speaker of Parliament requiring me to take up the matter because it implicated the RDC for Adjumani District, who falls in my docket.

On 8 August, I led a fact-finding-mission to Zoka Forest. Amongst the team I led was hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny, the State Minister for Northern Uganda, Dr Kitutu, the State Minister for Environment and hon. Persis Namuganza, the State Minister for Land and Hajji Mayanja from the RDC’s desk.

Background

Mr Speaker, Zoka Forest is approximately 6,089 hectares. It was gazzetted in 1958 and is currently under the management of the Nataionl Forestry Authority. It is located in Itirikwa and Ukosijoni sub-counties in Adjumani District and Pabbo sub-county in Amuru District.

It is a high rain forest and rain shade for Northern Uganda with rich flora and fauna. The dominant trees are Mahogany and Mvule. There also exist rare species of wild coffee and it is a home of flying squirrels. The current estimate of depletion of this forest is between 30 to 50 per cent. I held two meetings on that day. One was at the district headquarters and amongst the people present was hon. Jessica Ababiku, the RDC Adjumani, the Deputy CAO, the LC5 chairperson, the NFA officers, the UPDF, the RPC, the DPC, UWA, Secretary for production and the district forest officer.

Methodology

The public meeting was held at Itirikwa Sub-County headquarters and local council officials were present, opinion leaders and the Wanainchi that made testimonies about the Zoka Forest.
A review of documents and photographs of files of timber trucks used in ferrying the timber and people involved in lumbering was made.

Findings

Mr Speaker, there is evidence of depletion of Zoka Forest.Illegal lumbering in the central forest involves security personnel, some politicians, NFA officers, timber traders, charcoal dealers and the locals from the sub region.

The Adjumani District leadership especially the older administration led by the district chairperson, Nixon Oweri, the CAO, Mr Balaba Dunstan and the Secretary for Production, Mr Kaijuka Richard, sold 10,000 cubic millimeters of mahogany and mvule trees to Wood and Living Co. Ltd at an equivalent of Shs 149.5 million although only Shs 100 million was deposited on the district account. A balance of Shs 49 million is not reflected anywhere.

Mr Speaker, NFA officers specifically, Joseph Otim, confiscated several illegal licenses issued to lumberers in the forest and arrested several power saws used in the illegal activities. Three quarters of the people admitted that NFA officers are involved in illegal timber sales. 

The border dispute between Amuru and Adjumani districts in this forest especially at Apa remains a contentious issue which affects surveillance and enforcement in the forest reserve.

There is lack of clarity on the roles of different stakeholders in the management of the forest that is the district, the NFA, and the police.

Mr Speaker, evidence of tribal sentiments against non Madi Government workers was reported. There is also illegal impersonation of timber dealers for example Mr Katera who claims to be from State House or from the Office of President.

Mr Otim Joseph (NFA officer) confiscated illegal licences and arrested power saws but he was also greatly involved in illegal activities. I instructed the RPC to keep him under custody but he was released a day later. It is maintained that the wide spread forest illegalities could not continue without the involvement of NFA headquarters.

Recommendations

The central Government should intervene and evict all encroachers in the forest to restore its ecological integrity.
The environmental police and the UPDF officers should be stationed at Zoka to rid the forest of many suspected gunmen and lumberers.

Mr Speaker, the central Government should conclusively resolve the boundary disputes between Amuru and Adjumani districts.

A comprehensive management plan involving major stakeholders - that is the district, NFA, UWA should be developed.

Creation of a strong joint patrol squad consisting of NFA, WFA, police and UPDF is required.

The Government should also carry out afforestation in the degraded areas to fully restore the forest reserve.

There should be sensitisation workshops to the communities living around because they are the beneficiaries of this forest.

Thorough investigations on the perpetrators of the destruction of the forest should be carried out.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, the rate of depletion of Zoka Forest is very high. This requires all stakeholders, including the central Government, to assert authority to prevent further destruction.

Sensitisation of the forest district leaders at all levels should be carried out. Sensitisation of the wanainchi as the biggest stakeholders to the ecological health of the forest - they should actively participate in this conservation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural point I rise on is that if you look at the report critically, the minister mentioned clearly that some politicians, UPDF and NFA officers were named in the illegal tree cutting. However, she did not mention the names of those politicians and the UPDF. The report needs to be concrete and complete. 

Secondly, from the report, she admits that Zoka Forest borders Amuru District and on the other side Adjumani District -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it does not border; it is in two districts.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Yes, it is in two districts; Amuru and Adjumani. However, from the meeting, the team of honourable ministers did not include the leadership of Amuru District. The procedural point I am raising is that, would it be right for this report to be deferred since it is incomplete, so that more investigations and information can be included in this very important report. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From the minister’s statement, the recommendations were to the Government; in other words, the minister is recommending to herself. I wonder what Parliament should debate.

Are we proceeding well, receiving recommendations from a minister recommending herself and again requiring Parliament to debate the same? I thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened well to the statement from the minister. She is the minister for the Presidency, which means that she waived her authority and hon. Kasibante has touched it. I personally perceived her statement to be from either the committee or any Member of this House but not in her portfolio as Minister of the Presidency.

Mr Speaker, it would be procedurally right for the honourable minister to re-orient her report for Parliament to be able to debate it. Otherwise, the state in which she presented the report gives no clarity on what Parliament should do and what Government should do.

Therefore, is it procedurally right for us to debate this statement, which has no clear framework, that Parliament or Government can pronounce themselves on to take particular actions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the beginning of my communication when I was introducing this subject, I said the statement is not a policy statement that has arisen from the minister. It came as a result of a matter that was raised by a Member of this House and the minister went on the ground and is stating to the Member and to this House what her findings were. 

This is not a statement, which would ordinarily attract debate because information was sought and now it has been given. Is she making these recommendations to herself? Well, that is what she has been able to find and that is what she is going to do. She is saying when this matter came, I went on the ground and this is what I found and this is what we recommend we will do and they will do it. Is there a requirement for a debate on this?

The issue of excluding people of Amuru was because the issue as you can see was, “Illegal tree cutting in Adjumani District.” The Member for Adjumani raised it that way. If there is a need to enlarge this to deal with the bigger issues on the two districts, that need might come later. 

I would like to thank the minister because she has been very straight forward with her findings. The gaps can be either dealt with by the committee or a further investigation on this matter.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the minister, her statement sounded like a committee report, making recommendations for adoption by the House. I appreciate the maiden statement from the minister, but we need to guide her such that these things do not happen in future. 

Some statements in the report remain hanging like the issue of the money, which some politicians or contractors who cut the timber collected - Shs 149 million is talked about, but only 100 million was recorded. Being the Minister for the Presidency, I expected to have heard a directive or what she did in order to have the other balance recovered but it remained hanging. 

I think the technocrats should have guided the minister in writing this statement. This is not the first time we have a minister in that docket. They have been having ministers and they have not been producing such statements. Therefore, the technocrats should guide the minister on how she presents and gives directives; “That I found this and this in Amuru and I have directed that this man be arrested to recover the Shs 40 million.” That is what we expect from her and not mere recommendations. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot debate procedures now. The minister has made recommendations to herself –(Laughter)– I am directing her to go and implement her recommendations. (Laughter)

Honourable minister, thank you very much for this quick response. This matter was raised just the other day, she went on the ground and has come back with this report to Parliament. I can see the honourable member who raised the issue is happy. Go and deal with the gaps that need to be handled, so that people can be happy. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said that this matter was for debate and it is going to commence now. However, there is a particular aspect of it that I require the minister to make a very short statement about in three minutes, specifically because she said that the big statement covers all the other aspects. 

I would like her to highlight the issue in (e) on the tarmacking of Kapchorwa-Suam Road, then we can open up.

5.01
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Ntege Azuba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, a statement was made yesterday on the status of roads of the national network and in that paper, we mentioned that Kapchorwa-Suam Road is under procurement. 

Like I explained earlier, procurement is a lengthy process right from the beginning. For example, for that road, the detailed engineering designs were completed in 2011 using Government funds. The project appraisal was given to ADB in 2015 and also expressions of interest were sought from the interested contractors for design, review and construction supervision. The bidding documents have also been obtained and submitted to ADB for the civil works. 

What does this mean? It means that we have been very proactive. Much as the loan has not yet been approved by Parliament, all the other processes are going on so that by the time Parliament approves the loan, the actual physical construction will begin.

The land acquisition report was also made in 2010. It is now being updated and reviewed so that compensation starts in December this year. The ADB has given a no-objection to carry out advance procurement. That is why we are saying it is “under procurement”. However, the loan is still in the approval process. It will be coming to Parliament here for approval. It is after the approval that the agreement will be signed. 

We want to assure everybody that this road is very well planned for. In the budget for this financial year, there is Shs 89 billion for this road. The total budget for the road is Shs 336 billion from the funders and Shs 14 billion from the Government of Uganda. Once the loan is approved by Parliament, the actual construction will begin. Many people understand construction by seeing the road equipment on the road. That is all I have in regards to that road.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this specific road which was mentioned in item No.4(e) - the debate will now cover this brief statement and the rest of the bigger statement, of which this is part.

Honourable members, you recall that we were required to debate this matter and conclude it. Are we now sufficiently resourced to do it? Are we ready to debate this matter? Let us start from here. This matter is not coming here for the first time. It has been here many times. Therefore, we are going to have short interventions and see how to conclude this debate. If we can allow that to happen, that would be good. Can I start with the honourable member for Luweero District?

5.06
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I have some concerns and will also give information. First of all, I note with concern that most of the projects presented here are behind schedule. The minister was reporting on the status. However, there is no reason that has been given as to why all these projects are behind schedule. We do not know nor do we have information on who is constructing which road. Possibly, we could be able to tell that some of the contractors have been given a lot of work. Usually when we have delays, it comes from the part of the client or on the part of the contractor. 

The case in point here is the Musita-Lumino-Busia/Majanji Road (104km). It is on page 8 of this document. The project commenced in 2014. Right now, half of the project time has elapsed and we have 0.7 per cent physical progress. This is worrying and it goes for almost all the projects. Therefore, I note with concern that the minister needs to give some more information about most of the projects here, highlighting even the contractors and the consultants.

Mr Speaker, allow me to give a few remarks on some of the projects as vice-chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. On page 10, let us look at Mbarara Bypass (41.7 km) where the ministry reported that the project cost is Euros 49.02 million. I am reliably informed that the project cost was revised to Euros 51.1 million by the consultant. 

Also, my committee visited this particular project of Mbarara Bypass on 25 August 2016 and the project time was expiring the next day on 26th. Right now, the ministry has reported that the project is still on-going. I do not know if there has been any legitimate extension offered to them.

Mr Speaker, let me speak about some of the projects in the east. Let me talk about Namunsi-Sironko-Muyembe/Kapchorwa Road which is on page 11 as well as Iganga-Kaliro Road and Nakalama-Tirinyi-Mbala Road. I note with concern that when you read the status of most of these projects, there have been serious delays, but it is not clear who caused the delay.

Mr Speaker, we are reliably informed that these particular projects commenced as maintenance projects, but they have been reported here as rehabilitation projects. At that time, the scope of work was different. When they changed scope of work, they did not come out well. 

Even the consultants that were assigned are saying they are still in the process of designing. Therefore, when you report here that the projects are behind schedule and you do not indicate who caused the delay: is it the client or is the delay due to the contractor? We need to find that out from the ministry.

Mr Speaker, allow me to draw your attention to the Namunsi-Sironko-Muyembe/Kapchorwa Road. I note with concern that at the commencement of the project, which is 65 kilometres, designs were only issued for 19 kilometres. Therefore, the contractor has been delayed because of the client. I, therefore, have questions about the competence of the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) in trying to find appropriate interventions on this particular road.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, let me draw your attention to page 41 of this statement and comment on the Tororo-Mbale-Soroti road. Members, you will note that what has been presented here is worrying. If more information had been given on most of the other projects, I would be in position to make meaning out of this statement that Dott Services is probably incompetent or has been given too much work. There is a question that has been put here. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to read this out: “Dott was awarded Iganga-Mbale Road, also to spoil it; the bridges are incomplete. Dott has spoilt roads beyond imagination. The road has become very dangerous. Hasn’t Dott been blacklisted?” This is the response –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, allow me to conclude and the honourable member will come in later. I have sufficient information. 

I also need to find out from the minister about this statement; allow me to read it: “The issue of blacklisting of those services is being considered and would be handled according to the PPDA Act”. However, blacklisting does not apply to already awarded contracts. This is the response from the same ministry.

Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that since this document does not have sufficient information for me to make meaning; that possibly the delays are due to the contracts being overloaded or due to delays of clearing paths, I pray that the minister in charge of this ministry issues another statement on the projects in the country. I also note that most of the information given here was last updated in July 2016 – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank   hon. Nakate, Woman Member of Parliament for Luweero, for giving me the opportunity to give her information.

Mr Speaker, this report is quite lacking, and this Parliament does not deserve to own it. Reason being that I represent the people of Ngora in this Parliament. In this report, they clearly mention Agule-Aleles-Ngora Bridge. This is a bridge which the President has always promised and told people that it would be worked on, year-in and year-out. The ministers have visited it, but nothing has taken place in that area. It is also stated in this report that the work in Agule-Aleles-Ngora Bridge is completed, open to traffic and due for inspection. That is the information I wanted to give. 

Mr Speaker, as I speak, the people in Ngora are suffering because they cannot cross over to Pallisa; the road is impassable. Nothing has been done there apart from the local communities who are maintaining the road not the bridge. I can assure you that nothing has been done on the bridge. So, this report should not be taken as a true record.

MS NAKATE: Mr Speaker, allow me to conclude and then the Members will supplement. I wish to end with the project on Page 11; the rehabilitation of Nakalama-Tirinyi–Mbale Road of 102 kilometres.

At the commencement of the project, the contractor was given designs for only 3.5 kilometres out of the 102 kilometres. Honestly, how do you expect the contractor to carry out his/her work well?

I also note with concern on the same project that at the beginning, the contractor’s sum was about Shs 73.36 billion. However, according to the information from the consultant, the cost is likely to go up to Shs 130 billion; this information is important. The time that has elapsed is now half the project-time but the physical work is at 7.1 per cent. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if this was a statement that had been originated by the minister, procedurally, we would have processed it better by referring it to the committee. However, this particular statement was a result of interventions from Members – the member for Busongora North and several other Members raised issues and the conclusion was that the minister should come back with a status. It was sourced by Parliament that the minister should come back with a status report on the issue of roads among others. The minister has now made two attempts.

The first attempt was to send the minister back and asked him to improve on it because the debate showed that some roads were not in place. Now the minister has come back with more information. However, from the debate, according to the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, there are some little gaps.

Honourable members, if this House is to take a proper decision, don’t you think we should refer this matter substantially to the committee? The committee can ask those specific questions - the Members concerned can present those specific questions and then the committee can report back like the honourable chair has presented. Would that not be better?

Honourable members, I am hoping that Members have listened to the Vice Chairperson of the Committee of Physical Infrastructure. There are members of the committee who have visited some of these places. Don’t you think that as part of the oversight responsibility of this committee, now that we have some of this information, we can allow the committee to interact with the ministry in detail and come to us with recommendations? The way it is structured, we will not be able to conclude reasonably on the matters that are in the interest of this House.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to agree with you that this matter could be handled better in a committee.

We appeal to you to allow Members – this touches each and every one. They can just add something, like what the vice-chairperson has stated, so that when the minister goes back he has a picture of the gravity of the problem.

The vice-chairperson alluded to the issue of the ministry and UNRA giving contractors work without the designs, and before the feasibility studies are ready. On the Soroti-Tororo-Mbale Road and the Iganga-Trinyi-Mbale Road, the contractor was given the job in 2010, but it took two years for the contracts to be assigned and for the designs to be ready. For Tirinyi, they were given 3.5 kilometres – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a matter of procedure, honourable member.

MR OKUPA: The minister is saying that we either blacklist them or not. We are not sure what she meant. Mr Speaker, the problem lies with the ministry and UNRA. Please, put your House to order first before you start pinpointing others.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for you to be humanitarian and allow Members add a few things to this report before we proceed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is becoming a habit of the House to debate through procedure. However, it is in the interest of this House that we have information that is debatable. If I am going to extend parliamentary time for members of Parliament to give the minister information, what kind of use of parliamentary time is that? That every Member that rises will say “honourable minister you have missed out this road and he sits, honourable minister, you have missed out my road”. Will that be a debate? We shall take a decision after that. That is why I was saying, it would be better, honourable member for Bunya East County, if all this information is acted upon by the committee. Let them ask for specific resources from the ministry, analyse it and come back to the House with recommendations on what should be done and then that report can be debated. 

Otherwise this statement is not debatable in the state it is in now. What you are going to start doing now for the next five hours, if time allows, is to give the minister information. I might also slot in something about some roads from Omoro, which I have not seen here. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I really seek your indulgence on this matter. In order for us to proceed properly, let us refer this matter and do write-ups to the Committee on Infrastructure so that it is more comprehensively covered. By the time the minister is interacting with the committee, it has information on basically what is happening in the country; something we cannot do right now.

Therefore, this matter is referred to the Committee on Infrastructure to handle within the framework of the rules. They will then come back and advise the House so that we take decisions on the way forward.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I agree with the decision you have made, but what we have received, as Parliament, is a statement of lies on the status of roads by the minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you cannot rise on procedure and start using unparliamentary language. (Laughter) By the time you are rising on procedure, you should insulate yourself from breaking the rules.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to beg for your indulgence. I have read the Order Paper and found that one of the items listed is a motion to be moved by myself.

Mr Speaker, I am currently not feeling well and I beg you move that motion forward so that I present it and thereafter, you allow me go.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the Order Paper, we have three Bills that are only for laying. They are not for First Reading. They have already been read and even the certificates have been advanced to the committees. We are now re-laying them for purposes of the records capturing them so that they are sent to the committees. Now, I have received an additional list which I am allowing to be laid. 

Hon. Nambooze made a request and she has based it on her health.  Members, you know she has not been feeling well. I do not know how to proceed, but can I just accommodate the Bills so that they can go to committees to allow them start their work and then, we come back to hon. Nambooze’s motion?

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling of sending this statement to the committee. However, there was a statement within a statement yesterday. My concern is particularly on the BKK statement which, in itself, seems so conclusive, but with a little bit of what Members will add. I seek your indulgence to accept us debate only that statement within statement and let the big one go to the committee. I was listening from down there and the BKK issue was very hot.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that particular statement is in the big report. You remember when the minister was making the statement, in a certain paragraph, on some annexure or appendix; he said this is on BKK. He then extracted an additional thing to explain what is already in the main report.

I do not think it would be futile to have the committee look at the whole thing and then come back because BKK is in the main report. It was only an extract for additional explanation just like the one for Kapchorwa which is also in the report. However, it was important that the minister makes an additional statement of explanation so that when they go to the committee, they know that these issues have to be dealt with in rather specific ways and then, we can come and have proper debate later. That is how I have guided. Can we proceed?

I was saying we lay the additional seven Bills that have been listed here and they go to committees.  Thereafter, we allow hon. Nambooze move her motion. Would that be proper? Clerk, let us deal with the Bills.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Ms Aida Nantaba): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a Bill entitled “The Uganda Communications Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2016”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, that particular Bill had already been referred to the responsible committee. Now, it is sent back to that committee. If there was already a report that was prepared by the previous committee, let the new committee look at it. If it is acceptable to them, they report back to the House and we go to the Second Reading of the Bill. That would apply to the rest of the Bills. That Bill is now forwarded to the committee for expeditious handling.

THE SALES OF GOODS AND SUPPLY OF SERVICES BILL, 2015

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CO-OPERATIVES (Mr Frederick Gume): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay “The Sales of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2015”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

THE ANTI-COUNTERFEITING GOODS BILL, 2015

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CO-OPERATIVES (Mr Frederick Gume): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the “Anti-counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2015”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and it is referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the “Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2016”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

THE MENTAL HEALTH BILL, 2014

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay the “Mental Health Bill, 2014”. This was saved from the last Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. Lay it on the Table, honourable minister.

MS OPENDI: I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The records have captured it and it has been referred to the appropriate committee.

THE INDIGENOUS AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINES BILL, 2015

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi) Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the “Indigenous and Complementary Medicines Bill, 2015”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it. It is referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling.

THE DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY BILL, 2015

5.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the “Data Protection and Privacy Bill, 2015”. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. Is that all? Thank you. 

Can we now accommodate hon. Nambooze? Can you call that item?

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE ALCOHOLIC DRINKS CONTROL ACT, 2016”

MR ODONGA-OTTO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I did not want to submit today but let me do so. I first of all thank you for your support when I lost my father, but I am back. 

I am rising on a procedural matter. The Bill which hon. Betty Nambooze is seeking leave for is a very important piece of legislation. In the previous Parliament, I made an attempt to bring a similar motion. However, I read through the motion by my good friend hon. Betty Nambooze; it has 102 clauses. It is a voluminous piece of legislation.

Mr Speaker, if you read through the proposed Bill, which is already public information; it has issues that relate to creating an alcohol regulatory authority in the country in all the districts, sub-counties, and all the villages of Uganda. It has issues that relate to the time of selling alcohol in the entire country.

If you read through the clauses -(Interjections)- I was raising a procedural matter. It even has issues of getting a specific license to import and export alcohol in this country.  It is so ubiquitous. I was raising a procedural matter –(Interjections)- maybe I first take that information - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are on procedure – this is a procedural point, hon. Oyet. You cannot give information. Let him finish the procedural point. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, given the nature of this important legislation that would even affect the entire gross Domestic Product (GDP) and tax base of this country - because according to Uganda Revenue Authority, the breweries industry is the third biggest taxpayer in the country, after MTN and UBA.

I am seeking procedural guidance, whether it would not be prudent - because this would virtually change everything in this country on how we transact our business. Would it be prudent that such a sensitive legislation, which would affect some of our religious beliefs - because for us Catholics, alcohol is not prohibited -(Interjections)- it is not, we even take it in church.

Would it not be prudent that Government of Uganda picks specific interest to this important legislation so that holistic consultations are made to make greater impact than what we may be seeing? I seek your guidance for this matter.

MR OYET: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I was privileged to go through the proposed motion and -(Interjections)- yes, the proposed motion. When you look at clauses 47, 48-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you rising in line with what hon. Odonga-Otto has raised? 

MR OYET: Yes, it is in line but with backup information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have done this before and let me first hear from hon. Magyezi before I rule.

MR MAGYEZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Odonga-Otto referred to substantive matters in the proposed Bill. I think it is what hon. Oyet is also trying to do. However, the motion of hon. Nambooze is seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill.

Mr Speaker, before we go into discussing whether this should be by Government, good or not, whether it affects our taxes or not, we first deal with the motion of the Member who wants us to grant her leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill then we can go into the details.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I need to declare my interest in advance before I bring my issues of procedure. I am not a drunkard and I do not drink. The procedural point I would like to bring out is our rule 24(1) which says “The Speaker shall determine the order of business of the house and shall give priority to Government business.”

Mr Speaker, that should be read together with rule 25(4) that says “The first two hours of sitting on every Thursday shall be allotted to the transaction of private Member’s business.”  Aware also of rule 24(4) which would provide for specific vote on determining the order of business on the Order Paper, but because you have unfettered powers, you can determine which business comes before the other.

The point of procedure I am rising on is that today is not a Thursday. Secondly, the hon. Betty Nambooze got up and suggested that she must be pushed forward on the Order Paper as if we do not have rules or procedures that guide how a matter on the Order Paper can be pushed forward or backward.

Therefore, are we proceeding right and in concern with what hon. Odonga-otto said; I am about to call him right honourable; you know, you never can tell. These days opposition Members are being appointed even by -(Laughter)- we appreciate the magnitude of this Bill and how it affects our economy and we are aware also that it is her right to move a motion seeking for leave to introduce a Bill, just like hon. Kafeero did and we allowed it. However, on the procedural technicality, would we be proceeding right if we allowed her to seek the leave now rather than waiting for tomorrow as if tomorrow is running away? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a little difficulty but let me say this to guide how we proceed with these matters. I said it the other day that the same issues that have been raised by hon. Odonga-Otto were preliminarily raised by the hon. Nambooze and many others against hon. Ssekitoleko’s motion.

I put the question here and said honourable members: “Do you even want to stop the Member from seeking leave”? My honourable colleagues from this side of the Opposition were of that opinion that the Member should not even be heard. (Laughter)

Now as fate would have it, the hon. Nambooze is doing exactly what she opposed with the last nerves on her body. (Laughter) But be as it may, our rules are our rules and our Constitution is our Constitution and nothing can alter that until we change them. Article 94(4) is clear; a private member has a right to move a Private Member’s Bill- that is a constitutional right.

However, our rules say that for the Member to exercise that right, the Member must first seek the consent of his or her colleagues in the House to agree. This is what we call the motion seeking leave to be given the opportunity to present a Private Member’s Bill. 

The only constitutional limitation against a Member raising a Private Members’ Bill or motion is if it has financial implications and the Member moving it does not have consent of the Government to do it. This is under Article 93. For me, that is the only limitation. 

In case it should offend Article 93, then a Member of this House cannot move it. That is the only qualification that is in the Constitution. However, as of now, we have not reached there. 

My advice to the Member seeking leave is that let the Member seek the leave and then you will bring those same arguments to stop the Member from being given leave. 

Would that not be proper procedure? That would be the proper procedure and that is how I allowed hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko to read the motion when all the Members, including the Members facing me right now were standing up to try and stop the Member from even reading the motion. 

We are now here in the same situation and I maintain the same statement that I made that day - let the Member move the motion and only stop the Member if it violates the Constitution and has implications that violate what is provided for in the Constitution or for whatever reason from proceeding with it. But the Member’s right to ask the House should never be stopped. Are we okay?

Let hon. Nambooze present her motion and if the House wants to debate it, it will debate it and if it wants to defer the debate then we will defer. If it wants to throw the motion out, it is your prerogative. If it was to pass it, that is also your prerogative. But let the Member move the motion and then you can debate it.

MR KAFUUZI: I seek for further guidance from you, Mr Speaker and the House. You have guided that the only fetter to our colleague’s motion is that if it has financial implications or offends the Constitution. 

My thinking and understanding of her intended motion is to limit observational enjoyment of certain rights. Like my colleague stated, I would like to declare my interests – I do not consume alcohol – and would like you to look at Article 29(b) on freedom of thought and conscience. Freedom of conscience means that you have a right to determine what to drink, eat and when and how to do so, unless you present to us a medical and scientific explanation that this is dangerous and so should be prohibited. In the early 1960s and 1970s, we had the Enguli Act –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, what is your procedural point?

MR KAFUUZI: I am getting there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please get there as that is all you need to do.

MR KAFUUZI: Is it not procedurally wrong to allow a Member of Parliament to seek to limit her rights granted in this Constitution that she swore to protect? Should we even allow her to seek leave for such a matter? (Laughter) I need guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ruled on that point. It is not proper to stop a Member from seeking leave. I maintain that ruling and so the honourable member will move her motion. 

In case there are objections, be it constitutional or otherwise, then you will deny the Member. So can the Member move the motion?

5.48
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I move under Article 79 and Article 94 of the Republic of Uganda Constitution and Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on matters of peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted in its Rules of Procedure, pursuant to Article 94 (1) of the Constitution and clause 4 (b) of Article 94 and Rule 110 to empower a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Objective 10 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy sets out the State duty to ensure that all necessary steps are taken to involve the people in formulation and implementation of development plans and programmes which affect them;

FURTHER AWARE that the current legislation regulating the manufacture, sale and consumption of alcohol drinks such as the Enguli Act and the Liquor Act, CAP 93 are out dated and no longer fit for the purpose;

CONCERNED THAT the Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health        of 2014 ranked Uganda among the top alcohol per capita consuming countries in Africa and has in the recent past been ranked the leading per capita consumer of alcohol in the world;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health of 2004 indicated that 89 per cent of alcohol in Uganda is unclassified, unlicensed, unregulated, adulterated, home brewed and illegally sold;

NOTING THAT the unregulated sale and consumption of alcohol makes it easy for the same to be accessed by younger people and adults in an unregulated manner resulting into alcohol abuse amongst the majority of the people of Uganda;

FURTHER NOTING that scientific research published in the Addiction Journal 2011, reports Uganda to suffer worst alcohol related consequences globally where misuse has wide ranging and sometimes irreversible physical, mental and social effects on the consumer usually resulting into his or her death or blindness; and 

COGNISANT of the fact that the adolescents’ regular heavy alcohol and bad smoking behaviours are associated with a whole range of problems including anti-social behaviour, violence, accidents and physical and mental health problems and poor school performance.

Now, therefore, be it resolved by Members of this Parliament that:

This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Alcoholic Drinks Control Act, 2016”, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order that the publication of the same be made for its first reading.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? Seconded by Member for Luuka North, Member for Adjumani, Member for Buliisa – I do not have a copy of the Bill, is it attached? A copy of the Bill has to be attached; when did you lay it?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, on moving a note for the presentation of this motion, I submitted a copy of this Bill to your office and the office of the Clerk, and they returned it and printed the motion. For purposes of reference to this House, I beg to lay a copy of the proposed Bill on the Table. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is because of the nature of the Bill that is why it could not easily be put here. However, we need to look at it as you prepare to give leave or not to give leave. The motion is now presented; would you like to speak to your motion?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I want to start by informing this House that a number of local governments using delegated powers, after noting the problem of unregulated consumption of alcohol, are coming up with ordinances to this effect. 

Unfortunately, these ordinances are not uniform and they do not cover the whole country. The most recent district to enact an ordinance to regulate the consumption of alcohol is Gulu District, which has been reported in today’s Daily Monitor on page 13. 

Mr Speaker, this is a reminder from the local governments that they need an updated law regulating the manufacture, the sale, supply, advertisement and consumption of alcohol. 

Mr Speaker, we stand at a very big test as Parliament; there is a need to come up with laws that protect the society. Some people might say that our voters do not want to be regulated. Definitely, nobody would like to be regulated. However, it is incumbent upon this House to make laws that will assist Ugandans to enjoy their full potential and life. We should never be shy to lead because we are leaders. 

It is upon this background that I call upon honourable members to mark that it was not a mistake for our predecessors in 1964 to enact the Enguli Act and the Liquor Act. However, those good laws have expired. New things have come into this world. 

When you move around in our villages, Mr Speaker, you will see that our country is dying, not because of the consumption of alcohol, and which I am not calling upon you to ban, but the abuse and excessive consumption of alcohol.

It is only in Uganda, where alcohol is available and affordable. It is only in Uganda where water is more expensive than alcohol. It is only in Uganda that you can go at any shop, at any hour of the day at any age and purchase beer in whatever quantities you want. 

Mr Speaker, you have exposed this Parliament by constantly sending us out to trips to benchmark other countries and we have done so. We have gone to different countries, Sir, and I have noted that everywhere, alcohol is regulated. This is not a matter of curtailing the people’s rights; it is a matter of guiding the population, well knowing that Uganda is the second youngest nation in the world – we need to protect our children and the youth. 

Mr Speaker, alcohol is culturally accepted in Uganda, alcohol is widely produced by both formal and informal sectors, making it available by a cross section of people. According to the 2014 nationwide NCD report, 25.9 of our men and 14.3 of the women do take alcohol and most of them are between the ages of 18 and 59. 

The problem is that 89 percent of the alcohol consumed in Uganda is the unregulated type. Every day, people come up with makeshift laboratories to manufacture Waragi, baptised it very nice names and named it in ways that attract our young ones: we have brands called “Tyson, Mandela -”, next time we might have a brand called –(Interjections)– God forbid. 

Mr Speaker, when our children read the names of these alcohol brands, they believe that it is good to consume alcohol in whatever quantities. The advertisers always use the best sportsmen, singers and other successful people to advertise alcohol indiscriminately - in schools and at functions when children are around. 

When colleagues get to see the details of this proposed Bill, it has nothing like stopping people from consuming alcohol, but as a Government and as a nation, we need to regulate this consumption. 

We do not have proper data about consumption of alcohol in this country, but there have been various organisations that have tried to capture that data for us. One of such I want to quote indicates that it is estimated that currently, about 50 per cent of the alcohol consumed in Uganda is produced in the informal sector and is often associated with adulteration which is equal to poisoning in some cases such as those which occurred in 2007 and 2009 in Mubende and other parts of the country.

Mr Speaker, studies conducted earlier had indicated a high prevalence of alcohol use among secondary school students and those in tertiary institutions, ranging between 60 percent and 70 percent. In a related study at Butabika National Referral Hospital, it was found that 84 percent of the 127 patients who had substance-abuse disorders had co-existent and psychiatrist disorders – most of them had abused alcohol at a level of 42 per cent.

The National Drug Unit located in Butabika Referral Hospital has these figures and they can be accessed by anybody who wants them. That clinic opened in June 2006 and by 2013 had in-patient enrolment of 465 patients of which 446 were male and 20 were female. Clients reported wide use of a wide range of drugs that included alcohol. The majority of the clients’ age was between 21 and 35 years followed by 36 to 45 years and less than 20 years in decreasing order. 

The same tallies also revealed that the majority of the students had their first contact with alcohol between the age of 14 and 17 years. And that there were generally more males (60 percent) drinking than females.

About 20 per cent of admissions at Butabika National Referral Hospital were due to alcohol or other drugs with alcohol contributing 40 per cent.

Mr Speaker, there is a growing problem of alcohol abuse by young people, especially in educational institutions in this country. Other groups vulnerable to alcohol abuse are orphans, street children, refugees or those living in camps for the internally displaced. However, a more worrying trend has been observed in schools. Alcohol drinking among young people is a critical issue of public health and I am moving this Bill as a law on public health, Mr Speaker.

Not all young people drink but those who drink in this country are drinking for others like my honourable colleagues here who do not sip any alcohol. Statistics show that in Uganda, on average, each one of us, including you people who do not drink – consumes 24 litres. That is a full jerrycan plus a quarter of waragi per year. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I am not a medical doctor and I call upon my colleagues who are medical experts in this House – who have studied medicine, to tell this House that a big number of patients that we have in Mulago Cancer Institute, a certain kind of cancer, that I will allow a doctor, seated right before me, the Minister of Housing to expound on – it is a fact that some cases of cancer are caused by alcohol.

The country has been wondering why there is an increase in cancer cases –(Interjections)– cancer of the liver, yes. Today, when we walk in our villages, there is a feeling that everybody can own a bar in his pocket; people buy packets of Waragi and stock them in their pockets. Everywhere they go, young men and women are sipping on Waragi. (Laughter)

It will be argued that we are earning a lot of money out of alcohol, as a country, and I do agree. But if we are to sit down and make a study on how much money we are losing, as a country, due to excessive consumption of alcohol, the problems of alcohol will outweigh the benefits. (Applause) And I repeat this for emphasis: That I am not here to say that people should stop taking alcohol. This proposed Bill gives exemptions; that if you are brewing Malwa for Imbalu festival, this law does not affect you. If you are attending a cultural function – like us in Buganda, there is kwanjula – the introduction parties; the weddings; the state functions and all other functions which are organised under our cultural beliefs – (Interruption)

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: I want to inform the honourable member that I have not seen a state function where alcohol is served since the NRM came to power. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I am privileged to have received that information and it is good for leaders to lead by example. If we were looking for examples of what a sober person can do for a country, I think we have nowhere else to look other than His Excellency himself, who is on record on several occasions to have publicly stated that he does not take alcohol. So I do not believe that a President who is sober would wish to lead people who spend most of their time in the bar.

Mr Speaker, alcohol has been cited as one of the causes of the road accidents; it has been cited as one of the causes of domestic violence; as one of the reasons why parents have failed to take their children to school. Excessive alcohol consumption causes poverty and as much as we argue that people get jobs out of selling alcohol, many people have lost jobs because of taking alcohol. So it is a cause of unemployment, in a way. This is a very obvious matter because we are sent here to lead our people.

Article 79 even puts the primary duty of this House as making laws. And Mr Speaker, I appeal to honourable colleagues to let this law see the light of day. 

At the committee stage, Members will be given opportunity to improve, amend and enrich this Bill. But we cannot run away from responsibility. Mr Speaker, I am not introducing anything new; we already have laws regulating consumption of alcohol in the country. What I am saying is that they need to be codified into one law. Secondly, they need to be updated. So I am not introducing anything new; I am just calling upon the country to codify the existing laws on alcohol, update them and re-awaken the country on the need to regulate the consumption, the sale, the advertisement and the manufacturing of alcohol. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable members, the motion has to be seconded? Hon. John Bagoole is the seconder of the motion.

6.14
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County North, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I stand to second the introduction of a Private Member’s Bill entitled: “The Alcoholic Drinks Control Bill, 2016”. Mr Speaker and members –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you are seconding is the motion for leave, there is no Bill.

MR BAGOOLE: Mr Speaker, I would like to second the motion for leave for the introduction of a Private Member’s Bill entitled: “The Alcoholic Drinks Control Act, 2016.”

Honourable members, when I chose to second this motion, I did not know or evaluate the magnitude it could hold in the House, concerning the way I saw some of the honourable members speculate on it even before it was tabled. The motion is straight and the key word in it is “control” and not “stopping”; we would not like to stop our voters from drinking or whoever wants to drink. However, the word controlling can mean regulating and by so saying, I would like to say that Parliament is the one to regulate the production of alcoholic drinks and how alcohol takers can consume it.

Therefore, I would like to draw your attention to an issue and I am not saying this with any emotional motive, but I would like to put it clear that, two of my young brothers are addicted to alcohol. Colleagues, it has not affected you in one way or the other, but it is very expensive for the Government and family which is affected by this arrangement. It is expensive to treat an addict and an addict cannot do anything for himself –(Interruption)         

MR OTIENO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the debate on the “Ssekitoleko” motion, it was ruled in this House that a Member who has conflict of interest should never second a motion. (Applause) 

The honourable colleague has just told this House that he is seconding this motion because his two young brothers are addicts. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker that shows clearly that the honourable colleague has conflict of interest. The procedural issue I am raising is that, now that he himself has confessed that he has conflict of interest, is it procedurally right for the honourable member to continue seconding the motion? Thank you.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Statistics show that Waragi killed more people when it was outlawed during Amin’s regime because people would drink to beat the time limit. (Laughter) They would drink the most they could within the shortest time possible. What is brought according to the mover and seconder is –(Interjections)– are we proceeding well, given that past experience of Ugandans who died, to continue regulating alcohol? Are we proceeding well when we are well aware that what we are doing has killed Ugandans before? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter raised by hon. Kasibante is a debate of the motion and it does not raise any procedural matter. However, the matter raised by hon. Otieno - I need to verify. If there was such a ruling, I will need to look at it and come back to the House to rule on that particular matter. 

6.19
MR ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County South, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Both hon. Nambooze and Kafeero Ssekitoleko have failed to convince me as to why they need leave. The main argument is why -(Interjections)- hon. Bagoole. Why do you need leave of this House to bring a Private Member’s Bill? You seemingly concentrated more on the dangers of alcohol, which we all know. I do not have any hearing impairment; I have not heard any single reason why this House should grant them leave.

However, even if I have not heard any reason, let me give reasons why we should not grant you leave. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you already debating? You rose on a procedural matter; I have not put the question for debate yet. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I am not sure now –(Laughter)– but let me first raise it. Mr Speaker, the procedural matter which I would kindly bring to your attention is that, in February this year, the President of Uganda released the list of 100 biggest tax payers in this country. The first is MTN paying Shs 458 billion, according to the President’s release. The second is Nile Breweries paying Shs 197 billion, the third is Airtel paying Shs 155 billion, and the fourth is Uganda Breweries Limited paying Shs 131 billion. 

Therefore, the procedural issue I was raising is, for instance, these are the three biggest tax payers in this country, and we are bringing legislations to alter their operations. Wouldn’t it be advisable that Government picks interest in this particular matter? I am not against the Bill, but I am looking at the greater implications.

Therefore, I am seeking your guidance whether we should not seek the indulgence of the Government Chief Whip because we may be biting the very hand that feeds us. I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there is a procedural point, I will take it, but if there is none, I need to interrogate the matter raised by hon. Otieno and then give my ruling on how to proceed with it, because I need to establish whether it was conflict of interest and advise myself on that. Thereafter, I will come back and make that ruling tomorrow. 

Since the motion has not yet been seconded, I will not put the question. I will make my ruling on the procedural point raised after looking at what transpired previously then I will guide the House on how to proceed.  The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.22 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 October 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

