

Thursday, 6 October 2016

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today when we end this sitting, this Parliament will go on recess. I will make proper announcements at that time. 

Honourable members, today we also have a problem as a House; we will not be able to sit for more than two hours. The circumstances of the support systems in Parliament will not sustain us beyond two hours. That is what I have been informed by the Sergeant-at-Arms. Therefore, we should do what we can within that timeframe and see how to proceed. Whatever we are doing, we need to do it quickly so that we can handle the business that is on the Order Paper. 

Honourable members, as you recall, on 16th August, the Minister of State for Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations presented a statement to Parliament on the externalisation of labour. However, after debate, the House agreed that the committee responsible for this sector should carry out some investigations. We also agreed that some terms of reference needed to be drafted and approved by this House in order for the committee to proceed with its work. 

I now propose to you, for your approval, the following terms of reference for the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to carry out its investigation:

1. 	Investigate and report on the scope and nature of the licensing regime for companies involved in labour export.

2. 	Ascertain the companies and circumstances under which the companies continued to export labour from the date Parliament resolved to place a moratorium on the exportation of labour.

3. 	Investigate allegations of abuse of Ugandans by the companies involved in the exportation of labour and any other individuals involved.

4. 	Scrutinise the various agreements between the companies involved in the exportation of labour and the Ugandans exported to the Middle East.

5. 	Inquire into the role of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and any other officer or officers in regard to the exportation of labour.

6. 	Investigate and report on any matter incidental to the above stated.

Honourable members, those are the terms that I propose for your approval. I put the question to approve these terms of reference.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have very little time to finish the business on the Order Paper; I beg for your indulgence.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have read the terms of reference for the responsible committee to handle the work. However, you remember on 27 September 2016, an urgent motion was passed; to investigate the shoddy work on Karuma and Isimba dams. I am aware that today, we will go on recess without having such in place. 

Mr Speaker, I thought you would guide on how we should proceed since the matter is so urgent, and it was expected that within this week, such a select committee would be named. I am worried that any further delay would defeat the purpose and intention of the motion and how it was adopted. I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, for purposes of today, it was not ready. Probably, it could still come and we see how to handle it. However, it had not come by the time I came to the House. Let us proceed; it might be coming soon.

2.16
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since Tuesday this week, we have been scheduled on the Order Paper as the Kasese team and yesterday, Mr Speaker, you did say clearly that we would present our matter today. I would like to beg for your indulgence; I pray that you give us time in order for us to raise our matter as a district leadership. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the matter? Is it an urgent matter?

MR NZOGHU: Yes, it is an urgent matter and it is in respect to what the Leader of the Opposition contacted you about, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am worried about what I have just explained to you and I cannot go into details. However, if you can, summarise in two or three minutes.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Kasese District and Rwenzori in general, there has been unnecessary deployment of the army in a majority of the subcounties, especially in Kasese -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am interested in the matter that hon. Nzoghu is raising. However, on the frontbench, I only see the ministers in charge of housing, public service and regional cooperation; who will give us the right answers about this matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just stated that we have only two hours. Please, let us use the two hours.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kasese District has witnessed unprecedented deployment of the army. It has also faced unprecedented threats concerning the life of His Majesty the King of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu, Charles Wesley Mumbere Iremangoma. Furthermore, there have also been threats on the lives of the six Members of Parliament for Bukonzo West, Bukonzo East, Busongora South, Kasese Municipality, Busongora North and the Woman MP, including the LCV Chairperson. These death threats emanate from Government. 

In 2014/2015, there was a challenge in the region. Due to that challenge, there were uncoordinated movements in the area. Following the aftermath of the 2016 elections, there was violence. From that time, we have had unprecedented and uncoordinated activities in the area. 

As I speak, the institution of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu is organising its 50th coronation anniversary and there are rumours that the deployments in the region, especially in Kasese, are targeted towards destabilising the district. As leaders, we wonder why Government is not interested in the peace and tranquillity of the people of Kasese. Why are they threatening our lives instead of making sure that the people of Kasese and their leaders have peace? (Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We all know that this Parliament does not debate on the basis of rumours and hearsay. We are also aware that Government has provided efficient and effective security in this country. 

Is it in order, therefore, for a senior honourable Member of Parliament to debate on the basis of a rumour? He has clearly told the House that he heard rumours about what Government plans to do. Is it in order for us to sit here and listen to someone debating on the basis of rumours, which he probably heard from a boda boda stage or some other place?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a House of records; its records will be here for posterity and it cannot be a House where we propagate, promote and circulate rumours. Therefore, if the honourable member is indulging in what looks like or sounds like rumours, he can desist from them but deal with the factual matters quickly. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the honourable colleague should remember that in 2016, it was basically the police and the army that killed people in Kasese after the general elections. It began as a rumour, in the same way that this matter has also started - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, deal with the factual matters, please. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I just want to bring it to the attention of this House that we have seen attacks on the palace or institution of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu. Two, we have also seen threats not just by speculation but in reality. I would like to beg the indulgence of this House and my honourable colleagues because there is again a critical challenge looming in the Rwenzori region and –(Ms Nambooze rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you from Kasese? Please leave the matter. Let the Member raise the matter. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, we share the same sentiments and I personally want to bring the plight of the people of Kasese to light. In 1985 and 1986, the people of Kasese suffered - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please let us do it this way: I think we have heard issues from Kasese a few times now and there was even a committee tasked to go down to Kasese and come back here with a report. There was a time when a Member from this side raised an issue and then you, from the opposite side, disagreed on the matter and there was no concurrence on it. We then referred a committee to Kasese to find out what was going on and come back to Parliament. I do not know how that went. 

There are issues that are also coming up again.  However, can that issue be raised in the way it is being raised and be exhaustively handled? That is my concern. 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I vividly recall that the Member who raised the matter from that side was from Kabarole. The matter was from Bunyangabu in Kabarole District and not Kasese. It was a totally different matter, and it was hon. Sylvia Rwabwogo who raised that matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, resume your seat. Please, conclude in that light. Thereafter, we shall hear from the Government and then see how to conclude. 

MR NZOGHU: I would like to present the following prayers, Mr Speaker: 

One, that the deployments in Kasese be for the promotion of peace and security and not destabilisation of peace in the area. 

Secondly, let the lives of the people of Kasese, especially the leaders, including the politicians and the cultural leaders, be guaranteed and secured. This is because there are quite a number of death threats on their lives, as I mentioned.

Three, let Government tell us what the problem in Kasese is. This is because Government has not come out to inform us what the problem is and yet the people of Kasese think that it is the Government killing us. (Interjection)– I do not want your clarification because you are the people killing us –(Interruption)

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for my honourable friend and colleague, hon. William Nzoghu, to continue making allegations that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) is the one killing the people of Kasese, when actually it is the UPDF protecting the people of Kasese? Even the Omusinga himself is protected by a unit from the UPDF, which has not killed him. Is he in order to continue making that allegation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said this is a House of records; what we say here and the words we use should be able to maintain the dignity of this House. There are also rules against imputing bad motives. There is also a rule on courtesy to other Members of the House. It does not matter how sensitive or emotional the matter is, at least accord respect, if not to anybody else at least to all Members of this House. 

Therefore, the statement made by the honourable member in the course of his submission was not proper. Please, if you would like to continue making that statement, I would like you to calm down and make it properly like you are addressing a national Parliament. Address it with the dignity and calmness that is required for the benefit of this House. Please, let us respect each other.

On the matter raised by the honourable minister, I think it is also not proper to bring allegations that are not substantiated, especially when they are for the record. We can say the same things differently. Let us use our words properly, Members. 

Have you finished, honourable member? We are not going to debate this matter, Members. I would like to get a response from the Government because the issues he has raised are urgent. Let the minister respond and then we move to the issues on the Order Paper. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I would like to end with two other prayers. One, that the people of Kasese should be put in the know – (Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. You have ruled wisely in relation to the use of language here. A Member has already made serious allegations, including accusations of killings, and these words have been captured by the Hansard. Under normal circumstances, once the Speaker has ruled on a matter, the honourable member holding the Floor must withdraw so that the record is clear. Mr Speaker, is he in order to continue with his presentation before he withdraws the statements regarding the killings? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said that some of the statements that came from the Member for Busongora North were unfortunate, referring to another Member as “the people killing them”. That was not proper. I think in the spirit of the House, and also to move in harmony, hon. Nzoghu, you need to do something about that so that we move forward properly -

MR NZOGHU: You sit. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me warn you; do you know what his name means? It means a big elephant. (Laughter) So be careful with what you say in the House when the Member is holding the Floor.

MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and I would like us to refer to Rule 70 of our Rules of Procedure: “Motion that a Member be no longer heard 

If a Member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetitions or uses…” –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is not a procedural point. If you wanted to do that, you would have done it differently.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I would like to request that Government expedites the process of bringing the committee report, which was supposed to be tabled here in the Ninth Parliament, so that the people of Kasese can know the truth. We have lost relatives and we continue to receive death threats and it is not comfortable for us; we are in pain.

I would also like to seek your indulgence as Speaker; following the new events that are unfolding, in addition to the previous committee work that was done in the Ninth Parliament, it would be fair, and in the interest of the people of Uganda and the people of Kasese to have an update of the situation. Parliament should send a committee of the Tenth Parliament to Kasese, so that they get to the bottom of this problem. The people feel that they have been put on “firing squad”, Mr Speaker. I rest my case.

3.33
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nzoghu for raising the concerns of the people of Kasese. These are very serious concerns. I would, in the first instance, provide some advice that these concerns are indeed in the ambit of the police; so he is quite welcome to bring these concerns to the police so that investigations can be done and appropriate action be taken.

Secondly, I promise to convey these concerns to the relevant security agencies so that action can be taken and they can be looked into. Definitely, considering what the findings are, if there is any threat at all to any member of Parliament, or even to the leaders of Kasese or even the cultural leader, then the appropriate steps will be taken to make sure that their lives are not in any way destroyed.

Certainly, I would like to give re-assurance that the police or even the army cannot in any way harm the leaders or even the people of Kasese. In any case, that would contravene the constitutional mandate of these security agencies.

Mr Speaker, it would be appropriate for the report of the committee of the last Parliament - hopefully it was saved - to be brought here so that we know what is going on. I would also like to say that yes, it is true that Government should know what exactly is happening in Kasese, but also Government can find out what is happening in Kasese with the help of the people of Kasese. I would like to say that under no circumstances will the army and the police harm the people of Kasese. On the contrary, the army and the police will provide peace and security to the people of Kasese. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us handle it another way. Honourable members, indeed I was in the Chair when the committee then was directed to carry out investigations and actually, they went there for a few days. This was following also another statement that had come from the minister and there were contradictions. The report never came back.

Can I request and direct the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to pick this up, even in the course of this recess. Parliament will make the necessary arrangements -(Applause)– to support the committee to - Please, let me finish what I am saying. The committee needs to go and compile what is there.

Some steps should be taken by the Government; information that is readily implementable should be given to the necessary arms of Government to deal with immediately. They should not wait for Parliament to come back and then we start discussing these matters. However, a comprehensive report of the committee should be brought as soon as Parliament comes back.

Honourable members, let me also inform you about what I had not communicated in my earlier communication. On Saturday morning, we shall have the National Prayer Breakfast and the President will be there. It is hosted by Parliament and the Speaker is in charge of hosting it. Dignitaries are coming from all around the world to participate in the National Prayer Breakfast; therefore, you are all invited to come to Hotel Africana. It starts at 7.00 a.m. so you should be there before that time. That is the information I was requested to pass on to you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We sent out notices to all Members of Parliament that the National Prayer Breakfast would be taking place, and we required confirmation from them. Therefore, all who confirmed have received invitation cards. We are only informing and welcoming those who have invitation cards to turn up on Saturday at 7 o’clock at Hotel Africana.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is not a matter for debate. It is another side thing that this Parliament does. It is not a core business of this Parliament. You cannot start raising order when she is giving information.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, you have just ruled on a very important matter to do with the issues of Kasese. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if the same committee would also, along with the report of Kasese, look into the matter and bring another report about the tensions that have started building up in Kayunga between the Banyala and the Baganda?

We shall recall, Mr Speaker, that in 2009, we had riots in Buganda which started in a similar way like those that have started happening in Kayunga. We have a group that has moved in and occupied the headquarters of another group and because of that, tension is building up and one group is being protected by the police.

Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence; please, let the same committee look into the matter between the Baganda and Banyala in Kayunga because tension has started building in that area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason I am directing this on Kasese is because it was an ongoing matter and there was supposed to be a report that was ready. If it could be expedited, that would help. Now, there is a new matter which hon. Nambooze has raised. The committee should pick it up and see what can be brought to the House.

Honourable members, due to the circumstances that I had explained earlier, we are going to take out some items on the Order Paper. From the ministers’ statements, I think we will only deal with (a) and (b). I do not know whether there is a statement on (d), about Teachers’ Day?

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, the day was commemorated but the Minister of State for Primary Education is coming with the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay; when they come with the statement, we shall see how to handle it. There is also a statement on the Global Hand Washing Day. Let us go to the Order Paper with some exceptions.

PETITION BY DOTT SERVICES LIMITED ON ACCUSATIONS BY THE UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY (UNRA)

2.42
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

This is a humble petition presented by Dott Services, a Ugandan registered company with considerable capacity, with respect to both men and machinery. The petitioner states and shows that:

The petitioner is one of the most resourced companies in East Africa and a leading local construction company, which has helped in implementation of the development of infrastructure through road construction.

The petitioner has established stone quarries and crushing plants at various places in the country, namely Semuto, Kachumbala, Masindi, Ishaka and in Arua and established asphalt production plants with the capacity of 120 tonnes per hour at Semuto, Kachumbala and Ishaka.

With all these establishments, the petitioner has created employment to the local population, provided access to clean drinking water, power and good roads have been brought near the local communities, in addition to paying taxes.

The petitioner has built a demonstrable local capacity to handle at least 500 kilometres of bitumen roads simultaneously or three to four major infrastructure projects in the country, and the petitioner has been successfully providing services to UNRA since its inception and has so far completed a total of nine projects.

That despite the capacity built over the years and the good work accomplished, there is unprecedented hostility vested on the petitioner by the top management of UNRA. 

This hostility arises from the works the petitioner has been undertaking on the Tororo-Mbale and Mbale-Soroti Road project, Kagamba-Ishaka Road project and the Tirinyi-Mbale Road project. 

The petitioner entered into the Tororo-Mbale and Mbale-Soroti Road contract at a time when there was pressure on Government from the people in the east to construct these roads. This was towards the general elections of 2011 and there was an urgent need to calm down the situation.

Given the above, the petitioner urgently mobilised resources and equipment before the structural designs were completed and carried out construction of the road without Government funding at the time. Despite several requests made by the petitioner to UNRA and its consultant, it took the petitioner 15 months to receive the complete structural designs from UNRA.

There was further abuse of the road with excess loads by, among others, Tororo cement trucks carrying materials from Karamoja, diversion of transit cargo trucks with excess load when the Malaba–Kampala Bridge developed a crack, which made UNRA to suspend its usage until when -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the Ninth Parliament, I served as Shadow Minister for Works and I am also a Ugandan. The honourable colleagues who are seated here are Ugandans as well. Dott Services is not a new company to the people of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, even as a shadow minister, I advised Government that Dott Services was not working on roads but simply dotting them and that if it is within the wisdom of Government, it would be fair for Dott Services to be blacklisted.  Mr Speaker, we are talking about taxpayers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of procedure.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, you guided very well that today we shall have only two hours of sitting, and that the time of Parliament is, therefore, going to be considered very critical in this sitting. Given that the background information has been given by the honourable member, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for him to focus on the prayers, so that we know what Dott Services is complaining about, I even do not see merit in his petition. I would like to seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, go to the prayers.

MR NAGWOMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With the above points, the petitioner, therefore, prays that this august House causes an inquiry into the matter, and clears the petitioner of the accusations against them. I beg to lay a copy of the petition on the Table. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The petition is duly received and the records have captured the copy of the petition that has been laid on the Table. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling and report back to the House. There is an appropriate committee of Parliament and they should handle this expeditiously. This is one of those unique petitions we are receiving at this moment. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.51
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a statement on World Habitat Day, 2016. In the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development we are technology savvy; may I request the technical person to flash the presentation.

Mr Speaker, every first Monday of October is marked by the UN as the World Habitat Day. By habitat, we are looking at the conditions of housing and generally, our urban areas. We would have presented this statement last week but the House had been adjourned to this week. However, we marked this day on 3rd October and I would like to appreciate the honourable Members of Parliament who were able to make it, like hon. Kulaigye and others. 

Basically, we were discussing the issue of adequate housing for all, which was the theme for World Habitat Day for this year. Last year, the theme was, “Public space for all” while in 2014, the theme was “Voices from slums.” I would like to acknowledge the presence of the director for housing in our ministry, Ambassador Agnes Kalibbala.

Mr Speaker, in light of your guidance that we have little time today, I will quickly make comments on the issue of housing for Members to note. I request Members to follow the PowerPoint presentation on the screen; I do not know whether the lights should be deemed for belter visibility.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay.

DR BARYOMUNSI: We have also uploaded the presentation on your iPads. 

Mr Speaker, the population of Uganda continues to grow and as it grows, it comes with challenges of housing. From the housing census which we did a few years ago, we have a housing stock of 7.3 million households in Uganda. However, most importantly, we have a housing deficit of 2.1 million housing units, which we need to put in place. Given the rapid population growth rate, we project this to even get worse in the coming years unless we invest substantially in the area of housing. 

Mr Speaker, the majority of urban residents, for instance, here in Kampala and other urban areas, are low income earners and live in unplanned slum neighbourhoods that consist mostly of informal rental housing. Part of the settlements in urban areas are slums and are associated with all sorts of challenges, for example, a slum area called Kasokoso. I am sure most of our colleagues who represent urban areas have those kinds of settlements in their constituencies. That is one of the challenges that we have in Uganda.

The development of housing has largely been left to the market forces and has been led by the private sector, with little participation by the Government. Mr Speaker, I would like to say that on World Habitat Day, Government launched the National Housing Policy, which clearly raises the responsibilities of Government and all the partners. We did have commitment on behalf of Government that we shall provide adequate housing for all as we work together. 

Allow me to briefly give you some of the highlights of the Uganda National Housing Policy, and I have provided copies to all Members of Parliament. The hard copies were delivered to your pigeonholes yesterday and I hope you will have time to read and internalise the content of this National Housing Policy.

The major objectives of this policy are: 

to increase the production of adequate housing for all income groups; 
to improve the quality of the existing housing stock; 
to increase access to affordable housing;
to improve security of land tenure; and  
to improve on mechanisms for development and management of the real estate industry in Uganda. 

This policy derives its mandate from the NRM Manifesto, Vision 2040, the National Development Plan and other national guiding frameworks and instruments.

Some of the issues to be addressed in this policy include: 

provision of adequate housing for all; 
harmonisation of laws, regulations and policies for housing development;
establishment of a framework for effective house delivery; 
planned and serviced housing development; 
housing finance; and 
infrastructural services.

This new policy seeks to promote progressive realisation of adequate housing for all and is premised on the principle of partnership between Government, the private sector, land owners, financial institutions, cooperatives as well as individuals. The policy clearly outlines the role of Government, the promotion of partnerships and also the priority areas, which are going to be tackled as we operationalise this policy.

Mr Speaker, one of the areas we are going to address as Government is prioritising provision of institutional houses for some public servants, particularly the army, police, health workers, teachers and the other armed forces such as prisons and intelligence services. I am sure honourable members are aware we have that challenge of housing for our public servants such as the teachers and health workers. 

Lack of adequate housing is contributing to poor delivery of services. When you visit some of the places where members of our armed forces live, you will see the kind of houses they live in. I have provided some pictures of the structures to show the kind of housing we have for our police personnel and army men. The houses you see on the screen are barracks in northern Uganda. You can see the houses accommodating the armed forces in some of the barracks. We would want to change the face of these housing conditions so that our public servants can be able to stay in decent houses. 

The UPDF urgently needs about 30,000 houses. We have carried out a needs assessment together with the UPDF. The police need about up to 40,000 houses. We are also carrying out assessments for the health workers and teachers to see the housing needs they have so that Government can be able to address them.

One other area we are tackling as a ministry is that we are in the process of establishing a revolving fund in Housing Finance Bank. We are going to start with Shs 30 billion accrued from the sale of pool houses, so that public servants can be able to acquire loans at cheap interest rates in order for them to put up homes and personal houses. 

Mr Speaker, the challenge we have is that interest rates are very high. If you borrow from commercial banks at 20 per cent or 25 per cent, it becomes very difficult to put up personal homes or houses as a form of investment. Like I will be saying later, one of the challenges we have in the housing sector is lack of long-term credit, which is affordable and sustainable.

The area we would want to propose to the honourable members is land banking for urban housing. In this regard, I would like to make an appeal to honourable members who represent municipalities; we would want the municipalities to allocate land so that we can develop housing units which can be accessed cheaply, especially by our public servants. 

We are happy that some municipalities such as Kabale have actually given land to Government for purposes of housing. There are some municipalities such as Soroti – I do not know whether the Member of Parliament for Soroti Municipality is around – which are saying they have land but it must be bought. If it is Government to Government, we would like to urge our local leaders to provide land so that we can be able to put up apartments and housing units, especially for our public servants to be able to access housing.

In the policy, we are also looking at the promotion of public–private partnerships. We shall be engaging with private partners or investors in order to put up some of these housing investments.

Mr Speaker, in 1964, the then Government established the National Housing and Construction Company Limited, which was fully Government owned. Today, it is 51 per cent owned by the Government of Uganda and 49 per cent by the Government of Libya. We have taken a decision that Government is going to acquire 100 per cent shares in this company. Secondly, with your support as Parliament, we would like to capitalise this company and turn it into a viable national housing and construction company for Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, one of the challenges that we have is that Government has prioritised infrastructural development in this country but most of the firms which do these works are actually foreign. As Parliament, we need to address the issue of local content by supporting our own local firms to be able to do this kind of work. 

From our ministry, we would like to empower the National Housing and Construction Company Limited so that it is able to put up low-cost houses for Ugandans and it should also be able to do part of these works such as construction of roads, dams and railways. There is no reason why our local engineers and firms cannot do most of these works that we do in Uganda. 

Those are just samples of some of the apartments, which have been constructed by the National Housing and Construction Company Limited in areas like Namungoona, Naalya and Bugolobi. We have put high-rise buildings and we encourage Members of Parliament to stay in decent houses like those ones. 

Those slides show some of the proposed sites where we are going to put additional houses. This October, we shall be launching a project to construct 3,000 housing units in Bukerere. We are also going to start another phase in Lubowa to put up many housing units and work is ongoing.

As I move towards the end of my presentation, Mr Speaker, I just want to highlight some of the areas where we shall need support if we are going to take housing to another level. We shall be bringing a number of proposals to this House. 

The challenge that we have is that we have investors such as the National Housing and Construction Company Limited putting up houses in Kampala and also urban areas but the houses remain expensive, to the extent that even we, ministers and Members of Parliament, cannot afford the decent houses on the market. When you go to some of those flats I showed you, you will find a three-bedroomed house costing Shs 300 million or more, which is much higher than what a Member of Parliament can afford, for instance. 

The thrust of this policy is that we would want to bring the cost of housing down so that Ugandans can afford decent houses. The experts have told me that one of the reasons why the houses are expensive is because when these investors like national housing are putting up the flats or real estates or housing units, they usually have to incur costs such as extending electricity, water and sewerage services as well as tarmacking the roads to these sites. That contributes up to 30 per cent of the cost of the house. 

We have agreed that the Government should be able to come in; if we have investors who are putting up low-cost houses, we should be able to meet the expenditure in terms of extending power, water, roads and some of those utility services in order to bring down the cost of houses. I have been assured that this will bring down the cost of a house by 30 per cent. Therefore, we would like you to support Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and the ministry in charge of energy when they budget for some of those areas to bring down the cost of housing.

The other challenge, Mr Speaker, is that people who invest in housing borrow money from commercial banks. In many other markets outside, there are usually funds allocated for putting up housing facilities, which are cheaper. However, when you borrow at an interest rate of 25 per cent for business, it will not be sustainable. That is why some of the investors in real estate – the big names you have heard about – usually start well but after three, four or five years they get out of the market. This is because they borrow money expensively and it does not make business sense. 

Therefore, we need to create a mortgage financing facility in this country so that those who would want to invest in housing, either for personal homes or investment, should be able to access cheap money. They need to get it at a low interest rate, payable over a long period of time for it to make business sense.

Mr Speaker, our ministry is carrying out an assessment with a view of establishing a fund in one of our banks, notably the Housing Finance Bank. We want to have dedicated money as a mortgage facility, which Ugandans can easily access for purposes of putting up homes and housing investments. It will be borrowed at a cheaper interest rate than what is prevailing on the market. 

We shall also be making proposals to Government and Parliament to see whether we can look at the taxation regime with respect to companies and investors who manufacture housing materials like iron sheets, tiles, cement. We want to see whether we can remove some taxes on some of these materials in order to bring the cost of houses down so that they become affordable by Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, we are also going to introduce low-cost technologies for housing. Currently, we are just stuck on bricks and cement as the main model of putting up houses. For the few months I have been in this sector, I have interfaced with many investors and experts who have shown me different technologies which can produce durable houses. These technologies are much cheaper and easier to use in constructing a house in a short period. I met some people who were able to put up four or five bedroomed houses within seven days and they could demonstrate that these houses are even stronger than the ones of brick and cement. 

The point I am making is that there are other alternative technologies. I am sure most of you have travelled and you have seen different technologies used for putting up houses. As a ministry, we are going to introduce different technologies so that we have a choice in terms of materials to use for putting up houses. Some of these technologies are much cheaper than what we use today.

Mr Speaker, in operationalising this policy, we shall also be introducing a number of Bills in this House. Very soon when the House resumes, we shall be tabling the Landlord-Tenant Bill, which defines the relationship between the landlord and the tenant and also addresses one of the issues that has been in the public domain - the issue of charging rent in dollars and other foreign currencies. The other Bill which we shall be introducing is the Real Estate Bill as well as the National Housing Bill, among others.

My last comment is on the issue of earthquakes and disasters. Uganda is one of the countries that is prone to a number of disasters including earthquakes. You do recall that a few days ago, we had an earthquake in the areas of Rakai but the epicentre was in Tanzania. 

From expert information, in Uganda we have three fault lines – areas which are highly susceptible to earthquakes. The first one is the Western Uganda Rift Valley axis. I am sure you recall from our history that we have had two major earthquakes in 1966 and in 1994, which were quite destructive. The other axis is the Katonga River axis and the recent earthquake occurred along that axis. The Aswa River axis in northern Uganda is also prone to earthquakes. This is expert information which, Members need to know.

We intend, as a ministry and Government, to soon issue guidelines on housing standards and particularly, we shall be specific on the kind of standards required in those areas which are prone to earthquakes. When the recent earthquake hit parts of Uganda, the census we have carried out in Rakai shows that up to 900 houses got destroyed in about three or four subcounties in Rakai. 

As you heard in the media, the people would want Government to come in and help them with housing material and Government is going to see how to help them with housing materials. However, in the long run, the solution would be for us to guide people who are settled in those areas on how they can put up earthquake resistant houses. 

More so, as a ministry, we are also going to assess the existing buildings in those areas and also in other urban areas like Kampala, to see whether if another earthquake hits the country, they would be able to withstand the situation. We shall also be guiding the owners of the buildings on the kind of engineering modifications they need to do in order to strengthen our buildings in Uganda. That picture shows some of the structures which collapsed in Rakai District – You are saying steady progress but an earthquake is a natural calamity and it can occur anywhere. 

Lastly, I would like to mobilise you, Members of Parliament, so that we take the issue of housing extremely important. As we move to our constituencies, let us all go with one message, that Ugandans should live in better and decent houses. Also, when we move to start projects especially in slum areas, we would want to call for support from Members of Parliament because previous experiences have shown that some Members of Parliament resist efforts to upgrade slums, like it happened in Kasokoso and other areas. 

Therefore, the call I would like to make is that we work together so that we improve the conditions of the houses our people are living in, such that everybody can have access to adequate and decent housing in order for us to witness the socioeconomic transformation which we are all working for. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, and thank you, honourable members, for taking this information from the minister. That is the highlight of the World Habitat Day and that is the statement from the minister. 

Can we have a short debate on this, Members? Remember, I am concerned about the limited time we have. We have some pressure on the support systems. Can I have the shadow minister from the Opposition? Did the shadow minister speak on this subject?

3.17
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gutomoi Abacanon): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation. Indeed, this World Habitat Day is very important and we need to address this issue seriously.

Mr Speaker, I have a number of alternative policies that I would like to present to address some of these issues. When we talk about a national housing policy, we should not only look at the urban centres. I am aware that a majority of civil servants in this country come from our rural communities. At the last minute when they are leaving this world, suddenly it takes them unaware and they have not even developed their ancestral homes where their bodies will be rested. 

I think some money should be released to help these people build. As they work, they should have at least a place so that when we go there, we find a home. On many occasions, we have visited some of these places when going for burial and we are forced to bury some people under mango trees where their grandfathers’ houses were. That is not fair. This is why we need to plan and give this opportunity to them too. 

The second challenge we would like to address is that when we plan reasonable houses for civil servants, it is in order to put in place the plans and costs of the houses. The costs of materials vary but the costs of these buildings should be known so that people are able to know if they can buy the houses in the areas of their choice. I know some of these urban centres have high costs of construction.

Speaking of the earthquake, one thing we have failed to address is the fact that very soon, all roads in Kampala will become rivers when it rains because many people are building in an unplanned manner. For those people who travel to Nairobi by air, you will see how that city is well planned. We should hail the late hon. Dr Okullo Epak, who I think was the first African to get that paper in planning. 

For Uganda, it is left to “to whom it may concern”; everybody plans how to position his house even when the doors are facing different directions. There are also no access roads to some of these places. I do not know how much we are going to do to address this. The planning of houses in Kampala needs a second thought. 

The areas we should not forget are the war torn areas. When we had wars in northern Uganda, some areas were completely destroyed. When you go to Barlonyo in Erute County North, where the massacre took place, all the buildings in the IDP camp were destroyed. We submitted a proposal to help the community of Barlonyo; to date, no attention has been paid to these people and they are living in makeshift accommodation. I invite you, honourable minister, to visit this place one day so that you assess in reality what we are talking about.

Even if we are able to reconstruct some of these buildings, some of the civil servants may not afford to buy them at once. One challenge we have found is getting pension after retirement has become a very difficult task in this country. One may not be able to buy a house at once but maybe it would be necessary for you to plan for monthly deductions so that he can take the house when he receives his pension. Whatever is then left of his pension is for him to enjoy for the rest of his life.

You gave us the plan for houses which have been constructed and they are really very nice. However, some of the people who build these houses have been defrauding us. At one time, we contributed to one called Mimi and the man disappeared with our money. We are still chasing him up to date. We have somebody in the House here chasing him and I do not know if we have recovered the money we lost through this kind of attraction - what they say is very attractive but when you now enter the house, you find a different thing. 

It is prudent, therefore, that before you allow this construction to take place, your team should go and inspect the sites and then the contractors be given certificates to start construction. It is because in some of these areas, there are conflicts with the landlords. Recently, we were in Mbarara and there was a big problem there. I do not know how we are going to help some of our communities. If that is what is happening -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there are students who are leaving. They are from St Johns College in Kagoma Parish, Buwenge Subcounty, Jinja District. They are here to observe the proceedings. They are represented by hon. Loy Katali and hon. Moses Balyeku. I think they are the ones who have left. Let us also recognise them. (Applause) Thank you.

Sorry about that, honourable member, but please conclude.

MR ABACANON: While in Mbarara, we realised that some people occupying land which belongs to the Government have been given land and an opportunity to construct there. However, we were surprised to learn that the deeds and the land titles are being processed by the Government. I do not know under what arrangement that has been done, but we are going to investigate that. However, an opportunity for houses to be built there is coming up and we learnt this from the Chairman LCV and the CAO of Mbarara. 

This arrangement, which gives opportunity to one part of the country and ignores the others, is not desirable. How are we going to develop this country? This is a very sensitive matter, which needs to be investigated, and the committee is going to do that and come up with resolutions.

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate this presentation and pledge to this House an alternative policy statement to back up what should be done best. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there anybody from the Independents side?

5.26
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I need to thank, in a special way, the minister for coming up with a very comprehensive policy on adequate housing. This has been a very good change in attitude by Government. 

When you talk about adequate housing, it is both for the poor and the civil servants, so that they may not use Government money in a corrupt way. In the wisdom of the former Government, we had senior quarters where senior civil servants lived -(Interjections)– Hon. Alum is pushing me to say the UPC Government but I am not going to say that. (Laughter) We also had the labour quarters. However, Mr Speaker, not only were these quarters sold to private individuals but even the land. 

In the wisdom of the former Government, we had places like Naguru and Nakawa quarters gazetted for low-income earners so that they may provide their labour or services at subsidised costs. The other day, I went for training down at the Philip Omondi Stadium - the one of KCCA - where the parliamentary team is training and I saw the place just sealed off. There is construction taking place there. I then wondered who was going to occupy that place.

Mr Speaker, the minister talked about slum areas. In any city, you cannot avoid slums because they reduce the cost of production. The labourers stay close to the city centres and travel at a low cost and sometimes just walk to where they work. Now, evicting people from slums may not be the solution but developing the slums could be the solution, like the Soweto slum in South Africa was developed. Mandela built all the flats in Soweto. However, he constructed small modernised houses that look like slum houses to keep alive the history of apartheid in South Africa. Therefore, eviction may not be the solution. 

Mr Speaker, the presentation on the policy at a certain point looked like lamentation. If you are saying the cost of housing is higher by 30 per cent because of extension of services like electricity and water, you are actually saying Government policy is falling short of addressing the issue. 

Power belongs to us; electricity and national water are ours. Your policy should then be able to say, if these services are being extended to an adequate housing project by Government for the poor, then it must be at zero tariff or completely free. I thought that is what the minister should be addressing. However, he is still lamenting and saying these things are expensive and yet we have the power to do it. 

Another point was when you talked about the 25 per cent interest rate. Mr Speaker, when you came back from Germany sometime back, you decried the high level of lending rates in Uganda and I almost shed a tear. Now, if a person is borrowing to construct houses, if the Government policy said that they are going to subsidize the lending interest rate for this person, we would clap here.

Therefore, your policy is addressing urban housing issues and not addressing issues of rural areas. Where I come from, almost 90 per cent of the people sleep in huts. It is not any different from Busoga, Lango, and Acholi subregions. In this policy –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, at that very point, Government can do whatever he is suggesting, but there is also the issue of the cost of materials like cement because not everybody will be getting houses from Government. Secondly, if you went for a mortgage in Uganda now, you will end up hanging yourself. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, when the minister was presenting all this, I realised that our local people who live in huts were not catered for. I did not see the percentage of the people living in huts here. 

He showed us a condominium – the flats of National Housing and Construction Company Ltd. They build them like that and then you buy a level, which they call condominium rights, at Shs 480 million. You can correct me if I am lying. Now, this is what we call adequate housing. 

When you go to Housing Finance Bank for a mortgage, before they give you the mortgage, you are supposed to deposit Shs 60 million on the account and then they will say they have given you Shs 300 million. In essence, they have given Shs 240 million; so, when you begin paying the mortgage for five years, you will be paying almost over Shs 600 million. That is adequate housing in our own country.

Mr Speaker, that said, I know the minister, Dr Baryomunsi, is very intelligent. If he can be intelligent in medicine, he can also be intelligent in housing. (Laughter) Please consider the plight of the poor in the policy. However, we support you and I am so happy with what you have brought. Thank you very much, on behalf of the Independents. God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any one from the UPDF? If there is none, we are going to pause this here. Honourable members, the substance of this particular presentation should go to the committee and then we see how to handle this matter. I have informed you that we have pressure on time because of some circumstances.

3.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament, I rise to join the entire world to celebrate the World Habitat Day. I would like to thank the minister for coming up with this statement. It is very important that all Ugandans have access to better houses irrespective of wherever they come from, whether in cities, urban areas, villages; we all have a right to decent accommodation.

Mr Speaker, sometimes Government brings policies and we fail to understand whether we are serious about these policies. I vividly remember, and I made this statement here on the Floor of the House, that Government came up with a plan of resettling the people of Naguru. The issue was that you were going to put up decent houses for the poor people in Naguru. This is kind of a slum as well.

It is out of some of these experiences that the people of Kasokoso were not comfortable with Government taking it up because they have learnt from past experiences. As we think of rolling out and possibly providing shelter for every Ugandan, can we first look at the Naguru area which is becoming a death trap and an area for robbers. Even the plan that was unfolded before last year is nowhere to be seen. What we now know is that the area has again been parcelled out to individuals to put up personal structures.

As the minister says they are going to seek for land, and we would be even more than ready to ask our municipalities to provide space, but we are scared. How are the local governments going to benefit from this? We are aware that it will be individuals who will occupy these shelters; at what cost and who benefits from the cost? 

Taking up from where hon. Anywarach ended, when we sold the houses that previously were owned by Government, what did we have in mind? We would now be developing our policy from these spaces that we already had as Government and then we would say, “Previously, we had bad structures and we are now improving on them to provide better facilities for the citizens of Uganda.”

Therefore, somehow, the plans appear better and nice but implementation is a problem to us as a country -(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving me the opportunity to give this information. Mr Speaker, this Parliament passed a very good law called the Public Private Partnerships (PPP) Act in the Ninth Parliament. This PPP law would assist on the policy that the minister is suggesting now, for instance, where the minister lamented about the space for accommodation of the police and the UPDF. Our police in this country sleep like rats; five police officers share one uniport. 

Therefore, this PPP law together with the policy that the minister is suggesting would be a combination of authority that could uplift us out of this situation. Thank you very much.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, colleague, for the information. We have grown up knowing that police officers and possibly, the military, sleep in shelters called mama yingiya pole. That is what we are used to. They say mama yingiya pole because they know when you enter in a rush, the thing can collapse on you. We would like to see a police that is properly sheltered, an army and Ugandans that are proudly sheltered, including our teachers and health workers. 

When you go to our village schools that are owned by Government, you shudder. Majority of them are grass-thatched houses. I can tell you that even some children are not able to attend lessons because they come from very long distances and cannot make it to their school. Can Government begin with those institutions that have enough land? If we want to put up better shelter for Ugandans, let us start with the teachers, for example, because they have land. Let us put up affordable shelters for the teachers and go to hospitals. We have land - (Interruption)

MR DENIS OBUA: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition. The additional information that I would like to give is that, instead of this day being celebrated in one of the villages in any district in Uganda or any of our schools, primary or secondary, our national celebrations of the World Habitat Day, according to this statement, will be held at Imperial Royale Hotel in Kampala – (Interruption)

MS KIIZA: So, honourable colleagues, we can see the challenges that we have. We need to be a little bit more careful on some of these issues. When we are having celebrations that are people centred, let us take them to the beneficiaries who are the people. 

However, when we begin having national celebrations in hotels, it kind of loses meaning and focus. But never the less, Ugandans still believe that there is a lot that can be done. Ugandans believe that a government that is pro-people should target the people that they need to serve.

A statement will be required from the ministry at an appropriate time, on how far we have gone with the National Housing and Construction Company, because some of us have feelings about this company. It is our own – like you said that 51 per cent is owned by Uganda – but what we reap from this company as a country, Ugandans do not know it; how far have we gone with it - Ugandans still do not know. 

Therefore, we will need a serious and elaborate statement to enable us to authorise the capitalisation of this company. The company is making money from the houses that they are constructing as you have heard from hon. Anywarach. 

The company is making a lot of money and we should not be calling for capitalisation because this company is making a lot of money. We should actually be getting money from it to construct more houses. So, capitalisation at this point would not be an issue.

Mr Speaker, like I stated, we join the rest of the world to celebrate the World Habitat Day. However, we think that something better should be done and that in the future, never hold such celebrations in hotels for heaven’s sake. Let us take the celebrations to the people and make them understand. We should go to the slums like Kasokoso. 

I understand that the celebrations last year were in the village but it was not enough. Taking it to one village today does not mean the other village has understood. Taking it to a hotel does not mean that you have opened it up to the world. The issue is that we take the celebrations to the people for purposes of even making them understand what is happening because not all Ugandans have access to televisions or will be able to listen to radio.

Mr Speaker, it is upon us to popularise the day. The day will not be popularised in hotels but by taking it to the people. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and also you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, a short response.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for raising the comments and questions and we do take them positively, at least for this first time that I have a debate on housing.

I would like to assure the honourable members that we want to take housing to another level. Support our programmes and proposals and you will see a paradigm shift in the way housing is in the country.

On the issue of the hotel vis-a-vis the village, it depends on what the theme for the day is. Our focus this time was to invite major stakeholders in housing and launch a policy. There are also people in urban areas. Therefore, it is not correct to say that people are only in the villages. 

There are many events that have been marked in rural areas and when we have a national celebration, we expect the local governments to also arrange local celebrations in the various districts. I do take the point that we need to reach out to the local population.

I would like to encourage honourable members to read the policy statement because most of the answers to the questions that you are raising are actually captured in the statement. I am sure that after reading it, you will be able to get answers to the issues that you are raising.

There was a question on whether the policy was focussing on urban areas only. To this, I say, no. There was another on whether we are catering for people living in huts and low cost houses in the villages, to which I answer, no.

When I said that our effort is to reduce the cost of housing - when we say that we bring proposals to see whether we can, for instance, remove taxes on iron sheets and cement, this means that we are making these materials affordable so that our people can move from grass thatching to modern materials.

The policy actually addresses all categories of Ugandans whether they are the middle class or lower level –(Interjections)- there is a limitation of time and I do not know whether to give way with the permission of the Speaker.   

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification that I would to seek from the state minister for housing on this National Housing Policy is on the guidelines to which the ministry is about to issue pertaining housing standards in earthquake prone areas.

The minister will appreciate that besides these natural calamity like earthquakes, we have places where the frequency and magnitude is much higher than others; in some places, an earthquake comes once in a blue moon. 

I would like to know when the ministry is going to consider issuing guidelines for housing standards for landslide and flood prone areas like Bududa. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. That is a very serious issue, but because of time, I am rushing through the slides and I could not give comprehensive information. 

We shall issue guidelines on housing standards generally and those also focused to areas that are prone to various disasters. I only gave the earthquake as an example but there are also areas like Bududa and surrounding areas that are prone to some of those landslides. We shall be giving guidance on human settlement in some of those areas. 

There are other comprehensive guidelines that we shall give on settlement. We have a challenge that is very costly for Government; that is to extend services like water and electricity because of the way that people are settled. You may find one person staying on a hill and this person wants you to connect electricity to his or her house but the cost is too huge.

In case we organised our people the way that they settle, that would make service provision even more affordable. We shall be giving guidance in areas like northern and eastern Uganda where we can still mobilise people to settle in a more organised way so that we free land for production and development. When I look at the way people are settled in Kigezi - where I come from, it is difficult to displace people. 

We shall be coming back with some of those plans on how to reorganise human settlement with a view of improving delivery of services but also commercialisation of agriculture in other areas. 

There was a question on whether we are pushing people out of slums. My answer is, no. The concept is slum upgrading – that we improve the structures where our people are living in the slums instead of pushing them away. We improve them so that they can live in better houses.

The challenge on slums has been that our people do not sufficiently invest in engaging the leaders and the communities to understand some of these projects. They just come and want to start developing before people are on board. To answer hon. Anywarach, it is not pushing people but –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, honourable minister, for allowing me to raise this point of clarification. Under sections 35, 36 and 37 of the Local Government Act, districts and urban authorities are planning areas. I am wondering how much you involve them when drawing these plans.

Secondly, the Kampala Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority is yet to be constituted and I have seen you here rolling out various very interesting programmes. However, how can you continue to plan from the Ministry of Lands without involving the local authorities? When it comes to Kampala and the Metropolitan Authority, which organ are you working with? 

And lastly, in all my alternative policy statements as the Shadow Minister for Local Government, I have always advocated for you as the state minister to be moved to the Ministry of Local Government, because that is where your partners are. What do you think about that?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Nambooze wants to make herself the appointing authority for ministers. My presentation was focusing on housing and I did not touch much on the physical and urban planning. 

If I relate it with the point raised by hon. Charles Gutumoi, in 2010, this Parliament passed the National Physical Planning Act and we have since developed guidelines and other instruments to operationalise this law. Definitely, whatever we do is done in partnership and in consultation with the local governments in accordance with the provisions of the law as you read them. 

I also want to say that the law involves the whole country as a planning area and we are now strengthening the National Physical Planning Committee, which has not been very active. We are also going to strengthen the planning functions at the districts and lower government levels, so that we have planned settlements and most importantly, the rate at which we are urbanising is very high. So we want to ensure that we have organised settlements in these urban areas. There are a number of proposals, I do not have time to go through them, which we shall be announcing to the country. We would want all the buildings to be according to plan – (Interruption)

MS MUHANGA: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. I would like clarification on two things. One, I have been following National Housing Corporation as one of the beneficiaries of National Housing. I have not seen them do low cost housing. Normally the houses are between four bedrooms and three bedrooms. 

Now, you are talking about moving to slums and making better housing for the slum dwellers. You have mentioned that these are low income earners. How do you expect the low income earners to buy houses of four bedrooms that National Housing normally has been building; they cost between Shs 300 to Shs 400 million. 

Would you tell us in your policy guidelines how you are going to make low cost houses, at least one bedroomed houses, for low income earners? You are talking of building skyscrapers, meaning there is little space and these will be large flats which are very expensive to construct and yet the expenses that come with it is very high. Can you clarify for us how you are going to build houses for the local Ugandans?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will engage with the Committee on Infrastructure and be able to interface with the Members much more deeply on these issues. However, in my presentation, I raised the issue that houses are expensive and the major intention of Government is to see how to bring the cost of housing down. I gave a number of strategies, which we shall be pushing in order to bring the cost down. 

National Housing is just one example of the organisations which put up houses, but there are very many other private developers in housing –(Interjections)– please; we shall engage literary. 

So, in addition to the high rise structure which I showed on the slides, there will be other interventions for the low income earners like a one bedroomed house and two bedrooms. It is not true that only high-rise buildings will be put up in the country. The point I was making is that there are houses for Government public servants. The other part is that we shall provide for a conducive atmosphere and environment to make houses much more affordable; even those being put up by the private sector. For national housing, we shall give you information on what they are doing, and they are doing a lot of work. I am sure the Speaker will give me another opportunity in future to come and engage with you on this issue of housing. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister and thank you honourable members for the interest you have demonstrated in this matter. 

On the 11 October 2016, we shall have a children’s mock debate in the parliamentary chambers and their topic of discussion will be: “Girl child education should be a priority of Government”. 

And this afternoon, we have these children present in the public gallery to observe and learn parliamentary practices. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

The Clerk to Parliament sanctioned the Institute of Parliamentary Studies and the Department of Research Services to conduct a training needs assessment for Members of the Tenth Parliament, with a view of ascertaining the training needs for the Members at individual and committee levels. The research team will be approaching you to obtain relevant information for this exercise, please accord them the necessary support. Thank you. 

Honourable members, we expected a short statement of update from the Minister of Finance or Minister of Health. How far have we gone on this matter? Is the money on the account of the Ministry of Health? Just “Yes” or “No”. 

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not in Cabinet.

MS OPENDI: My apology, I have been in a long meeting with the Prime Minister. My apology Rt Hon. Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister –(Laughter)– Rt Hon. Speaker, I was just gauging to see if the Members were listening. 

Mr Speaker, our task was to write to the Ministry of Finance and that very evening, we did write to the Ministry of Finance on Tuesday and a copy was sent to you. So, I think I am not in position to say anything about the money. I think we should wait for the Minister of Finance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the money on your account?

MS OPENDI: No, not yet, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Government Chief Whip call the Minister of Finance to answer this question as we proceed? Government Chief Whip, please alert the Minister of Finance to give us a response on this matter.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON INTERNATIONAL TEACHERS’ DAY

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, 5 October, 2016 was the World Teachers’ Day and teachers celebrated it at the Cricket Oval, Lugogo. Among the prayers they have presented since last year is the need to gazette 5th October of every year as a public holiday to allow all teachers have ample time off their duty stations to be valued by the world and to reflect on their role in the growth and development of every citizen.

They also presented other concerns, which the ministry is reviewing for consideration. Among them is the need to recover the teachers’ SACCO funds amounting to Shs 9 billion that had already been disbursed to the Uganda Microfinance Support Centre Limited (UMSCL) for onward transmission to teachers. The ministry has engaged the Uganda Microfinance Support Centre several times and we hope to conclude the matter soon with the guidance from the Solicitor-General since UMSCL had entered into a contract with the Ministry Of Education.

Mr Speaker, Government is also committed to reviewing the policy of head teachers of primary schools being holders of bachelor’s degrees. We shall engage Ministry of Public Service to reconsider the status quo as it was before inception of the policy.

Mr Speaker, Members should note that Government intended to present this statement on the Floor of Parliament last week as a pre-celebration event. However, due to the short break that the Speaker announced for this House, the ministers reallocated this opportunity to participating in the teachers’ dialogue organised by UNATU and, therefore, we were unable to meet our plan.

Dear friends, in conclusion, we congratulate all Ugandans for having successfully celebrated the World Teachers’ Day and extend our heartfelt appreciation to the teaching fraternity. We hope they will succeed in fulfilling their personal lives and vocation. As is said in the Government White Paper on Education, “No education system can be better than the quality of its teachers.” Investing in the quality and welfare of teachers is, therefore, our priority.

Mr Speaker, we want to pledge that every World Teachers’ Day, we shall take the opportunity to present our statement before that day. It was the challenge of that short break that hindered us from presenting the statement. Thank you for your indulgence. Thank you very much.

4.02
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Betty Bakireke): Mr Speaker, I stand here on behalf of my colleague, hon. Mathias Mpuuga, who is not with us. He is preparing a retreat for Members of Parliament from Buganda sub-region.

Mr Speaker, when we raised this matter yesterday, we were concerned that such an important day was passing without this honourable House being informed so that we could have a moment to talk about the plight of our teachers.

Mr Speaker, the role of teachers cannot be underestimated because they help us to educate the nation more so the national leaders; and for that matter they are also national leaders. We need to thank the teachers for doing this job amidst a number of challenges.

Mr Speaker, we do not know what happened in Kololo yesterday; whether it was really a celebration or a funeral. For example, my teachers in Mukono Municipality marked the day before getting their monthly payment; and most times they have been missing out on their salaries. Others have been deleted from the payroll – and the President made a promise that it is not necessary for primary school head teachers to have a university degree. However, we must put into consideration the fact that these teachers have an in-service system where they go and upgrade. What the teachers are asking for is that once a teacher goes and upgrades to a certain level, let their salary also be enhanced. It is not that they do not want to possess university degrees; it is that when they achieve some higher academic qualification, it should be rewarded.

According to UNESCO, in a report that was recently released, 85 percent of teachers in Uganda would wish to quit the profession. It was reported that only 16 percent of them would like to remain in the profession. Probably there are some challenges and problems which are chasing the teachers away from this profession. We have heard reports of teachers abandoning class to go and ride boda bodas because there they earn better income. We have heard reports of teachers reporting to class with torn trousers and shirts because they cannot afford to dress appropriately. Mr Speaker, as we mark the World Teachers’ Day, we should emphasise the issue of remunerating our teachers in a better way than what they earn now. 

We should encourage upgrading of teachers; that when a teacher upgrades to a higher level, that teacher should be rewarded with an increase in their pay.

Teachers have been complaining that they are not being promoted. They give quotas to each district one opportunity for each district to promote about three teachers to a senior level. And you see, very many teachers are missing out and they are complaining.

Whenever they tried to raise their issues, they have been intimidated by RDCs and other people. It is very unfair to make the teacher unable to make a complaint openly. The teaching profession has been characterised by strikes for whatever –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I also thank the minister for making this statement. But as I give this information, let it go on record that teachers fought their way to have their celebration yesterday without teaching. The ministers wanted them to celebrate while in class.

But the information I want to give is on the issue of scheme of service; not every teacher will become a head teacher. When we had Commissioner Maloba, most of the teachers were educated under government – mostly grade III teachers. But when they were going for diploma and degree courses, they expected to have their salaries raised.

Now as the President stated yesterday, that he does not know anything about the degree requirement for primary school head teachers, it is teachers who educated themselves to the degree level. What do you expect to pay a teacher who has a degree at this level?

Therefore, I would like to say that as Members of Parliament, we need to work on the teachers’ scheme of service. 

MR MAJEGERE: I would like the Minister for Education to specifically give us the housing policy for the teachers as they celebrate their day?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, there are so many Members who would like to talk on behalf of the teachers. But as I wind up, my presentation, on behalf of the Opposition, I would like to say that in any education system, teachers play a central role; being at the frontline and in the transmission of knowledge. This explains why we should put much emphasis on their academic and professional qualifications. 

It is sad that as we celebrate this day, an embarrassing report was released on our teachers to the effect that they were found wanting in some areas. This is unfortunate and we must work on it to rebuild the image of the teachers and the teaching profession.

Secondly, to work on their inadequacies, if any; central to this, is to effectively equip and pay them on time, treasure, pamper and make them feel that they are great. Thank you.

4.11
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representatives): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Minister of State for Primary Education for bringing up this very important issue. True teachers have challenges, but yesterday they joined the rest of the world to celebrate 50 years since the ILO and UNESCO came up with the recommendations about the status of teachers.

Therefore, this was meant to encourage peace-talks on what had been achieved so far and what is lacking. Among the many things that have been raised, we also have the issue of the teachers who are pensioners and for the last seven months, they have not received their pension. 

In addition, remember that about four years ago, this was the money that was squandered by some people in Public Service. As we talk, they are not receiving their money and yet these are citizens who served diligently for many years and they accepted to go through all the harsh conditions, but they are not getting their pension. 

Therefore, something should be done so that we recognise and make the profession interesting to the rest of the public who would like to join it. At the same time, there is information, but when we talk about the scheme of service for the Members of Parliament, we are talking about the promotion ladder. 

Teaching is the only profession where we do not have professional ladders, we only get it if one becomes a head teacher, if he or she is lucky or a deputy head teacher. For the rest, 90 per cent of the teachers retire after 20 or 30 years as classroom teachers.

I would, therefore, ask the Government to do something to ensure that we make the teaching profession more attractive for other people to join and serve diligently. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and dear colleagues for raising those concerns. I would like to start with the question on the issue of pensioners who have not received their money for the last seven months. Dear colleagues, I would like to put it to your attention that the validation exercise is being undertaken to ascertain the actual eligible pensioners.

Honourable members, you know the problem that existed before and the ministry is working on it. However, I would like to inform you that there is another challenge and this is at the local level –(Interjections)- dear colleagues, the officers do not provide the necessary information to be captured in the system to enable the pensioners get their money.

I would like to assure you –(Interjections)– of course, we are calling upon the local leadership to ensure that they do the needful and solve this problem because –(Interruption)     

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. I think we should be serious on this matter. What is happening in Public Service is that when professional teachers reach 60 years, the computer senses them very fast. However, when it comes to paying their pension, the computer fails.

Secondly, yesterday we informed you about this very statement, – the President hit on the issue of the Shs 25 billion, you remember we raised it even before you become a minister - this matter was serious. Teachers met the President and he gave them Shs 25 billion as UNATU. However, yesterday, we had a symposium with you at Hotel Africa and this matter came up and the President again said that the teachers must get their money.
 
However, you are now sending us to the Solicitor-General; this was an offer, give UNATU their money, they have their SACCOs and we will see how they will handle their money.

Finally, what are you going to do to those private schools which harass teachers to the extent of stopping them from celebrating their International Teachers’ Day, and among them there are big shots? We need answers to that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, like I pointed out on the issue of the pensioners, I believe the Ministry of Public Service can also throw some light. However, I would like to assure you that as a ministry we are doing all it takes to ensure that local governments take their responsibility to give our people their money.

Therefore, on the issue –(Interruption)      

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, we have Members who raised very important issues in this House concerning teachers. All of us here passed through teachers’ hands, and the most important thing I wanted and thought I would hear from the minister was to declare 5th of October, the International Teachers’ Day, a public holiday in Uganda. Can we do that now to ensure that it becomes a public holiday in Uganda? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there are procedures for doing that – it is more than declaring it here.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I think we are all aware that there is procedure for announcing a day a public holiday. As a minister, I cannot declare this a public holiday, but we will ensure we pass through the right channels to achieve that.  

Concerning the issue of housing, I would like to assure Members that we are working with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and when we bring our budget, colleagues, we request that you support it because we would like to ensure that every school gets a teachers’ house. Allow me to wind up, Mr, speaker 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I told you to wind up, honourable minister. 

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, allow me to wind up. I am also a teacher, dear friends, and I know we are all passionate about teachers’ issues. I want to remind you that, we hold the teachers in high regard because they are the implementers of our mandate. I want to assure you that we are going to do all that is –(Interruption) 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, the honourable Woman Member of Parliament for Wakiso District and the minister is my good friend and I would not love to put her to order. She made a statement that they hold teachers in high regard; but in actual sense, teachers are only useful to Government while they are still alive. 

I attended the burial of a teacher in my district; she was a young teacher aged 27 years who survived with three months’ old twins. I got the shock of my life when I discovered that the policy of Government is that as soon as a teacher passes on, he or she is immediately deleted from the pay roll. 

I was a licenced primary school teacher myself and I know it takes three years to attain gratuity. During that time, while I was sacrificing my services for the country, we were all receiving - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR ANYWARACH: Is the minister in order to say that this Government holds teachers in high regard, and yet they are only useful when they are alive, as soon as they pass on, they are deleted from the pay roll? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the minister had said that they do not hold the teachers in high regard, I would have quickly ruled her out of order. However, she said they hold them in high regard so I cannot rule her out of order on that. Please wind up. 

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would not like to say something about that, but I know that when I die, I will be deleted from the payroll of Parliament – (Interjections)- yes, that it true. 

On the issue of enhancement of the teachers’ pay, when they upgrade - hon. Betty Nambooze raised this issue and I want to inform you, dear colleagues, that Government adopted this already -(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had kept quiet but the honourable minister is comparing the terms and conditions of a Member of Parliament to those of a teacher, who is supposed to be permanent and pensionable. 

Is the honourable minister in order to compare a contract of five years for a Member of Parliament with that of a teacher, whose contract expires when he or she clocks 60? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question that was at hand was whether you can continue paying salary to a dead employee; that was the issue. Does the dead employee’s name continue to be on the payroll and you pay him or her as a serving person or not? Please wind up. 

MS SENINDE: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I want to assure colleagues that there are other benefits like gratuity, when a public servant passes on. 

However, I want to use this opportunity to thank you so much and I believe we shall continue supporting the teachers. I want to confirm that as a ministry, we are trying our best to look at where probably we need to fill the gaps and ensure that we have quality education with our teachers doing their job. 

STATEMENT ON THE HAND-WASHING DAY TO BE CELEBRATED ON 15 OCTOBER 2016

4.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FORUM ON WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE (Ms Jacqueline Amongin): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a statement on the Hand Washing Day. It is celebrated globally annually on 15 October 2016 but in Uganda, it will be celebrated on 14 October 2016 in Kamuli District. 

I move under Article 45 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The Hand Washing Day is an annual global advocacy day dedicated to increasing awareness and understanding the importance of hand washing with soap as an easy, effective and affordable way to prevent diseases and save lives. 

Celebrated annually on 15th October, the Global Hand Washing Day was founded by the Global Public-Private Partnership for Hand Washing and gives an opportunity for the community to design, test and replicate creative ways to encourage people to wash their hands with soap at critical times to avoid diseases. 

Global Hand Washing Day is designed to - 

foster and support a global and local culture of hand washing with soap;
shine a spotlight on the state of hand washing around the world; and
raise awareness about the benefits of hand washing with soap

The first Global Hand Washing Day was held in 2008, when over 120 million children around the world washed their hands with soap in more than 70 countries. Since 2008, community and national leaders have used Global Hand Washing Day to spread the word about hand washing, build sinks and demonstrate the simplicity and value of clean hands. 

Each year, over 200 million people are involved in its celebrations in over 100 countries around the world. The Global Hand Washing Day is endorsed by a wide array of governments, international institutions, civil society organisations and the UN.  

The 2016 Global Hand Washing Day theme is, “Make Hand washing a Habit!” For hand washing to be effective, it must be practised consistently at key times such as after using the toilet or before contact with food. While habits must be developed over time, this theme emphasises the importance of hand washing as a ritual behaviour for long-term sustainability of our health. 

Mr Speaker, hand washing with soap is one of the cheapest, most effective vaccines against viral diseases from seasonal flu to common cold. The simple act of washing hands with soap has the potential of saving millions of lives in Africa, yet hand washing remains one of the most neglected lifesaving practises. 

These communicable diseases are caused by transmission of micro-organisms, bacteria virus from one person to another either by direct contact or through contaminated air, food or water.  Many of the deaths could be avoided by curtailing transmissions through improved hygiene. In fact, 75 per cent of illness in homes can be prevented through adoption of good hygiene practises. 

Mr Speaker, the above notwithstanding, one of the most urgent developmental challenges of the 21st Century is the global sanitation crisis. According to the United Nations Report of 2013, there are 2.5 billion people, over one third of the world population living without safe, adequate sanitation and hygiene. Lack of access to these essential services holds back social and economic developments through its negative impacts on health, education and livelihood. Health wise, Mr Speaker, inadequate sanitation is the principle cause of diarrhoea, the second killer disease of children worldwide. 

Mr Speaker, as the Chairperson of the Forum on Water, Sanitation and Hygiene, I want to call upon honourable members in this House to promote good hygiene and sanitation within their communities, by among others things, encouraging communities to wash hands with soap. This will ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages, translating into good sanitation and hygiene.

Today in Uganda, many schools are lacking in terms of accessibility to water points, and these face challenges when it comes to hand washing. There is also a challenge when it comes to menstrual hygiene management and sanitation in our school environment, which is on a gender point of view.

Mr Speaker, the Parliamentarian Forum on Water Sanitation and Hygiene has pledged to pursue fellow parliamentarians to join the movement for hand washing with soap. It is going to be celebrated this year in Kamuli. The forum has also urged for the translation of reading materials to various languages for wider use, and pledges to work with national hand washing advocacy. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, that is the statement from a private member and usually, it does not attract debate; it is for information in commemoration of this day coming up. As Members, we should broadcast this message to our constituents and we remain consistent on this mission, of clean hands, clean food and clean everything. Thank you. 

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. The other day, when you were instructing the Ministry of Health to go and write to finance requesting for the money for Hepatitis B, the issue was that, we may not even go for recess if we do not get a confirmation from the Ministry of Finance on whether this money has been put on the account of the Ministry of Health.

The Minister of Health is here now. Would it not be procedurally correct, before we go to the next item, to first get confirmation from the Minister of Finance whether they have – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay member. Let us not take time on this, the minister is here. Honourable minister, please take this turn.  I do not know how that skipped my attention.

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true we received a requisition from the Ministry of Health. This is a process which we cannot avoid. When you receive a requisition, we raise a cash limit for the vote, which we are doing today. After that, we get a warrant and then the money is released within 30 hours.

We can confirm now that the Ministry of Health can go ahead and start the procurement process for the Shs 5.4 billion. It will come as soon as that process is concluded. This process cannot be avoid. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it Shs 5.4 billion? I thought that it was six billion?

MR BAHATI: The budget is Shs 10 billion and we had released about Shs 4.6 billion, so the balance is Shs 5.4 billion and we are going to release that. We, therefore, encourage the Ministry of Health to start the procurement process immediately, because even on the account, we can see that the four billion which we have released is still on the account. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.33
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County North, Luuka): Report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda at the 42nd session of the ACP parliamentary assembly and the 31st session of the ACP- EU joint parliamentary assembly from 8th to 16th June 2016 in Windhoek, Namibia. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Like other reports of delegations, time will be found to have these matters discussed.

4.34
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in accordance with Rule 32, of the Rules of Procedure, to lay a report of the delegation of the Committee of Human Rights. However, I beg your indulgence to make a correction on the title. The title should read, “Report of the delegation of the Committee on Human Rights on the 32nd Triennial Conference of Graduate Women International, on Gender, Education and Human Rights, from the 21-26 August, 2016.” I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the records capture that. Time will be found when these matters will be discussed.
 
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER RULE 47 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO URGENTLY ADDRESS FOOD SHORTAGE AND FOOD INSECURITY IN THE COUNTRY

4.35
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I stand to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to urgently address food shortage and insecurity in the country, moved under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS the regions of Acholi, Lango, greater Masaka, Teso, Karamoja, Bugisu, Bukedi and some parts of western Uganda, West Nile and some districts of Kween, Namutumba among others, as per the annexure A, as attached -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you present the motion as it is?

MS AMONGIN: “WHEREAS in the past, Uganda’s weather was predictable with the wet and dry season, the rainy season was from March till May and October till November. Light rain season would fall in November and December and the dry seasons were from December to February and June to August;

AND WHEREAS there have been changes in the weather pattern caused by among others global warming and deforestation, causing prolonged drought and famine;

AND WHEREAS the prolonged drought has not allowed the farmers to plant their crops within the right time, while the farmers who had already planted their crops have hardly harvested any yield, which has resulted into lack of harvest, illnesses and in extreme cases, deaths have occurred;

NOTING that this prolonged drought has resulted into unbearable famine, which has become a threat to the lives of both humans and animals in most parts of the country, and yet these regions entirely depend on agriculture for both food and income;

FURTHER NOTING that this prolonged famine has also resulted into heightened level of food insecurity, as the people lack proper post-harvest handling technologies;

COGNISANT of the fact that the Government of Uganda is a signatory to the United Nations agenda on Sustainable Development Goals, 2030;

RECOGNISING that the agenda and its 17 sustainable development goals provide a framework for country level action, aimed at placing hunger eradication, food insecurity and malnutrition at the centre of the political agenda, while supporting people-centred rural development and protecting the environment;

FURTHER recognising that, with the prevailing famine and drought, Uganda as a country may not be in position to achieve the desired middle income status and Vision 2040;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this Parliament urges Government to:

Immediately distribute food to the most affected areas in need of urgent assistance.
Urgently supply quick maturing crops to address food insecurity in affected areas.
Address the depletion of forest coverage by promotion of agro-forestry.
Promote post-harvest handling technology through extension service delivery, for example, encouraging silos and granaries.
Promote timely sharing of meteorological information on weather pattern by key stakeholders in the agricultural sectors, for example, extension staff, farmers and government policies so as to enable farmers to know when to expect the rains.
Come up with a time frame for irrigation and water harvesting so that agriculture is a continuous activity in the country.
Benchmark and strengthen extension service delivery to address the changing new technology advancement in agriculture.
Provide agricultural loans with low interest rates to boost production.
Put in place affirmative action plan to address the root causes of famine in the frequently affected areas.
Develop a national plan on irrigation infrastructure in order to abate drought.
Promote proper accountability and transparency of the use of contingency funds that caters for disasters in the country.
Develop a policy on food security and nutritional services.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Member for Pader District, Member for Abweri County, and Member for Toroma County. The motion is properly seconded. Would you like to briefly speak to your motion?

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and honourable members for seconding the motion. You realise that in most of these affected areas that have been mentioned here, including Teso where I come from, the source of income is agriculture. Without decline in agriculture, the enrolment in schools has also gone down because parents cannot take their children to school, since agriculture is their source of food and income.

The food situation in the country pauses a gender threat in that there has been increase in theft of food. I was in Teso and cases have been reported by police on theft of food because it is the women who must provide food in a homestead; children cry more to the woman than to the man, therefore, it has a gender imperative.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the situation today, it affects more the mothers especially the breast feeding mothers who must continue breast feeding to bring up a good child. An expectant mother cannot stay without eating but this is happening in most parts of those affected areas.

It is very important to note that today as we speak, some Ugandans, especially those from the affected areas, are on ARVs. One cannot swallow ARVs without food. Hence, this is a threat to their lives.

Uganda as a country is dominantly agricultural because 70 per cent of Ugandans practice agriculture and majority of these are women because they cannot go and ride boda bodas. They have to go to the garden even when their sons go and ride boda bodas.

Therefore, when we have issues of drought in the country and people cannot practice agriculture, it definitely affects the women more than all of us who eat the food and do not dig.

Mr Speaker, you are also aware that Uganda has a comparative advantage in terms of being a food basket in East Africa because if Uganda gets food, South Sudan gets food from here, and other countries within the region. If we, therefore, improve the agricultural sector, it would boost our economy financially.

Aware that our heads of state during the Malabo Declaration endorsed what they called the Comprehensive Agricultural Development Programme for Africa (CADPA) which they also ratified; some of the nitty-gritty in this Malabo Declaration is to ensure that appropriate technologies are adopted so that agriculture is given a priority.

Today, we are talking about irrigation year in and out, but we have seen dry countries like Israel and Germany where agriculture is continuously practiced because there is appropriate technology in terms of irrigation, and also water harvesting during floods so that the water can be used during the dry seasons. I think this can be adopted in Uganda.

The fact is that we have domesticated and ratified so many instruments in regards to adopting appropriate technologies in terms of moving the agricultural sector forward.

Mr Speaker, this motion is not only trying to address the short terms but the long term as well so that Uganda will not be seen as in need of food anymore because we are able and Ugandans are hard working.

Uganda came up with a country’s guiding document of Vision 2040 which considers that Ugandans should achieve middle-income status - when you look at the State of the Nation Address that was presented this year, the President said that the Ninth Parliament almost moved Uganda to the middle-income status. Mr Speaker, this is therefore the Parliament that should move Uganda to the middle-income status.

However, if we are to move Uganda to the middle-income status, we must ensure that all areas in Uganda are well catered for especially those ones affected by this challenge. Some people sleep hungry for two days and survive on a cup of porridge a day. How can Ugandans achieve a middle-income status when others are still sleeping hungry?

Mr Speaker, countries worldwide came up with a very key document; a principle in terms of modus operandi on how they should run their countries and government and which Uganda signed: that is the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) with 17 priorities and among the priorities were the millennium development goals No. 1 and 2.

It talks about ending hunger and poverty and also to be specific, the SDG 2 talks about ending hunger; it is an ambitious target which looks at 2025. 

If we must achieve our target by 2025, we must explore and adopt new technologies so that these areas that are continuously flooding, since the time I was born, stop wasting water during the rainy season.  

If we utilise this water during the flood seasons, we would be joining the rest of the countries that have almost made it to zero hunger like the Caribbean and the Pacific countries. 

In Africa, there are also countries that are almost there too and Uganda cannot stay behind. I want to state this today, because if I do not, I might not have another time to say this: let us stand for this cause; I believe we can. Thank you, Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

4.49
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity and I thank hon. Jacqueline Amongin for moving this motion. 

Mr Speaker, just before this motion came to the Floor of Parliament, the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries had got concerned. Before this motion came here, the committee was in Karamoja assessing the food security situation; and many parts of the country are affected.

Even if this motion had not come to the Floor of Parliament the Committee of Agriculture was going to come up with a report and recommendations to this House.

As I have said, many parts are affected and at different levels. There are households that are affected at a minimal stage meaning they can still cope, and there are households that are already stressed and need intervention. 

There are those that are in a crisis or emergency state and need immediate intervention. There are households that are at the state of famine - people are dying!

Mr Speaker, we are talking about people who are dying and those who have already died. There is imminent death because there is no food. 

Mr Speaker, there are people who are also dying indirectly because they do not have enough to eat and this causes poor immunity. Even mild sicknesses that would otherwise not kill somebody are killing people in our areas.

Mr Speaker, in Pader District, it is on record, we have lost about 12 people and most of them are from a sub-county called Pader. Most of those who have died are mainly the elderly, and this sub-county has a history of being affected more seriously by drought and when rains come, they come with floods.

Mr Speaker, some of these people are now locked up in a cycle that they cannot get out of this without support, because without food you cannot be productive -(Interruption)- because you cannot go and dig after spending a night without food. 

There is need of intervening in two ways, just like the mover of the motion said. As a committee of agriculture, we are more concerned about the long-term sustainable solutions to these problems.

Mr Speaker, one of the agricultural sector objectives that should guide medium-term output and resource allocation is to ensure food and nutrition security. 

Also one of the strategic objectives under the sector development strategy and investment plans is to design strategies that will ensure food and nutrition security.

We should ask ourselves, are these strategies in place? If they are in place, are they failing? Mr Speaker, we need to get answers to some of these issues. We need to look at critical areas. 

The area of agricultural extension - the weather patterns have changed and become very unpredictable. The farmers are out there without anybody trying to give them any information and they are stuck to the old ways of doing things.

There are many farmers out there saying that they plant maize during a given month, plant millet during another month and yet the weather patterns changed. 

I appreciate the effort the Government put in, especially the Ministry of Agriculture which is recruiting extension workers. I hope they will not take after the corrupt civil service system where one walks for a week or two and will not find a single civil servant working for the people –(Interruption)– 

MR OYET: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and hon. C.D Lowila for giving way. This is a very serious bipartisan motion that needs to be supported. 

This year, around May, the chairman NRM, Ogom sub-county in Pader fell off a mango tree -(Laughter)- due to famine. He ended up in Mulago Hospital Intensive Care Unit (ICU). By the grace of God, he survived and is now back home. Thank you.

MS LOWILA: Thank you for that information. To add on that he is back home but almost permanently incapacitated. He cannot walk well, he cannot even talk well, he has been disabled.

Mr Speaker, we need to have a policy on irrigation in place and we needed it yesterday. Recently, a number of Bills related to the sector of agriculture were proposed. If you look at what we have before us for this session, I do not see any single Bill related to the agricultural sector among the Bills that will be coming before this House during this session.

They have talked of the National Extension Bill, National Copy Bill, NAADS (Amendment) Bill and the Fisheries (Amendment) Bill - Mr Speaker, we need to see light on the Floor of this House. 

We also need to see the implementation of the seed policy, because we have urged the Government to distribute quick maturing seed crops to little avail; we have so many issues concerning the quality of seeds that are given to our farmers in this country. 

Mr Speaker, when we talk of seeds that can mature within a short period of time, we cannot go without mentioning labour saving technologies. 

Now that the rain comes for a very short period of time, we need to help farmers have labour saving technologies that can help them do the farming activities within a short period of time. 

Mr Speaker, we have only one centre in the whole country trying to generate and promote the use of labour saving technologies; that is the centre at Namalere. 

We would like to see that such centres are established possibly in all regions so that we help our farmers acquire implements that they can use within a short period of time and catch-up with the short rains. 

Mr Speaker, as I said before, we are talking about people who are dying and those who have died. I decided to put on black because I knew I would second this motion today. Therefore, I think it would be prudent – if you would allow – for us to stand up and observe a moment of silence in honour of those who have died because they did not have food. I beg for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we normally do that on specific identifiable events. However, now that you have requested and also to be sensitive to this issue, maybe we could rise. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you very much for this opportunity, Mr Speaker.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I second the motion -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?

MS ALUM: Mr Speaker, we are dealing with a very serious problem in the country. It is an issue which concerns life and death. As we met in our committee yesterday, I had a question which I wanted to direct to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries because I did not find the answers in the committee. I am very saddened to see that we do not have a minister who can help us –(Mr Kibazanga rose_) - Oh! Thank you very much. You are a junior minister, but I would be very happy if you attempt to answer my question. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are informed that the same matter is before a committee. This motion is one of those avenues that will help us come to the details of this matter. I do not know how much of what is covered in the motion is being handled by the committee so that we could be guided. Can I hear from the honourable chairperson or vice-chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture?

5.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (Ms Lowila Oketayot): Mr Speaker, as I indicated, we had visited only one sub-region – Karamoja – and we were only in two districts. Very many parts of the country are affected. For a sustainable solution to this problem, the committee will continue to do assessments in other parts. However, the issue of emergency cannot wait and that is why it was decided that this motion be brought to the Floor of Parliament. We cannot wait as we move to all parts of the country to do the assessments and come up with a comprehensive report while people are dying. Thank you.

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am up again on a point of procedure. I sat here and looked at the frontbench. When we talked about issues of drought and famine, the ministers in charge of disaster are very important. I do not see them here. Are we proceeding rightly on this matter without the ministers in charge of disaster preparedness being around, yet they have a lot to do with this? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the broad policy issues in this sector are being examined by the committee. This motion is about the emergency. If you look at the details of the proposed resolutions they focus broadly on those areas. We have had discussions on this subject of emergencies and remember there was a time we tasked the minister in charge of finance to explain why there was no money in the contingencies fund to be used to respond to the disasters, top of which is now being caused by drought and all these other things. You remember that the response from the minister was that there was no money. 

Honourable members, you remember I ordered from the Chair that the Minister in charge of Finance should go and hold discussions with the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and come back to us and advise us on how much money they are going to allocate in terms of emergency response to those areas where famine is beginning to take away our population, which is the subject of this motion. 

Are we going to start talking about the same things we have discussed or are we are going to focus on the proposed resolutions? I remember the Member for Kumi and several other Members kept raising this for almost three weeks. Are we going to start the debate all over again or going to see whether the proposed recommendations are what we should adopt as a House and the Government can be guided on how to handle this matter? How are we going to proceed? I suggest that we see the proposed resolutions if they can deal with the situation.

5.05
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable colleague who moved the motion. I would say it is well intentioned and I support it. I would say that we actually have to encourage and urge Government to adopt the proposals. I would also wish to add to the proposals as put by the honourable colleague in her motion.

Mr Speaker, Members are all aware that food insecurity is highly attributed to natural disasters, particularly drought and excessive rains as the majority of us have been reporting about how the rains have destroyed our crops in the villages and how the drought is now the cause of this food insecurity in most of our areas.

One of the other proposals that I would like to add to the proposals that the honourable colleague gave is the proposal which the framers of the Constitution of Uganda envisaged in 1995 about a planning unit that will be in charge of disaster preparedness and management. They commanded us as Ugandans to come up with a unit called the “Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission”. 

It is a commission that was supposed to plan how to handle and possibly prepare for disasters. I would pray that among the proposals, we fast-track Article 249 of the Constitution and ensure that we establish this commission that would help us to also assess and possibly plan for disasters. Let us concentrate on the prayers that the Member has put across. 

However, I would pray that the issue of food insecurity and shortages in the country is handled as a nationwide issue. I would also continue to pray that as we concentrate on agriculture, which is the backbone of our economy as a country, we also look at empowering the extension workers. We are killing agriculture by putting it in the hands of soldiers who have little knowledge in agriculture. 

Our people are not advised on the best farming methods. Our people are not told about which crops can be cultivated for short-term and long-term food needs. As a result, many people are now waiting to receive handouts from Government. That is what we are even about to do. Let us encourage the Government to sort out this issue. 

The message we are sending out is for people to sit back and wait for Government handouts; let us prepare our people to work. Our people are hardworking and we have very good soil. 

Mr Speaker, time and again, we have encouraged Government to embark on high-level water storage for production so that our people can produce food at all times. Ugandans are hardworking; we are blessed by nature indeed; our soils are very fertile. The only problem is poor planning. Can we plan better? Put irrigation in place like what my colleague suggested. Provide financing for agriculture so that our people can work on their own and support themselves. Ugandans are tired of begging. Ugandans are tired of being reduced to paupers; we can do better as a country. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that we adopt the proposals that the honourable member put in place. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not proposed the question but the debate has already been started by the Leader of the Opposition. I made a proposal that if possible, we process the recommendations and adopt them as the solutions.  Can I propose the questions first?

Honourable members, I now propose the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to urgently address food shortage and food insecurity in the country. That is the motion for our debate and debate should start now. However, based on the spirit that has been brought by the Leader of the Opposition, we may not have a general debate but need to just process the recommendations and adopt them as resolutions proposed in the motion by the mover of the motion. The Leader of the Opposition is already proposing an amendment. So, can I put the question and then we start the process of adopting the resolutions?  

Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to urgently address food shortage and food insecurity in the country be adopted in the terms proposed in the motion:

“Now therefore, be it resolved that this Parliament urges Government to: Immediately distribute food to the most affected areas.”  Is that the amendment? Then, I have a different motion. It is not in this one. Can I have the text that was used? The one I have did not have some of the things that the Member was reading. Can I have the copy that was uploaded, Members?

MS KIIZA: Can I make a proposal to amend that clause?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me first have the actual text because what I have does not have those words – not for now, but they are forever. I see it is different from the motion that I have.

“Immediately distribute food to the most affected areas in need of urgent assistance.” Is that what you are proposing? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question to this?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Urgently supply quick maturing seed crops to address food insecurity in the affected areas. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Address the depletion of forest coverage by promotion of agro-forestry. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Promote post handling technologies through extension service delivery, for example, silos and granaries. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Promote timely sharing of meteorological information on weather patterns by key stakeholders in the agriculture sector like extension staff, farmers and Government policymakers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us participate.

Come up with a time frame for irrigation and water harvesting so that agriculture is a continuous activity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Benchmark and strengthen extension service delivery to address the changing new technology advancement in agriculture. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put the question that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Provide agricultural loans with low interest rates to boost production.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put to the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Put in place affirmative action plans to address the root causes of famine in the frequently affected areas. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Develop a national plan on irrigation infrastructure in order to avert drought. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Promote proper accountability and transparency of the use of contingencies fund. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Develop a policy on food security and nutritional services. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a proposal for an amendment from the Leader of the Opposition. Can you now propose it properly, so that it can be captured?

5.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that Government fast-tracks the operationalisation of Article 249 by establishing the disaster preparedness and management commission. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fulfilment of what is provided for in the Constitution.

5.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know that this is a constitutional provision but the amendment used the word “fast-tracking”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The operating word is “resolved” that this Parliament urges Government to: - and then it runs through all of them. That is the running word for all the recommendations. So, she is urging Government to operationalise that article which relates to that commission.

MS NANKABIRWA: I support them. I was uncomfortable with the word: “Fast-tracking”.

 5.16
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On resolution number 3, I would like to add that Government prohibits the use of charcoal for melting steel. 

Mr Speaker, these factories in Jinja – some time back, charcoal suppliers from the north were rioting. The steel we are buying from town they are using charcoal to melt them because they say electricity is so expensive. I was thinking of bringing a provision that Government prohibits the use of charcoal for melting this steel. We are going to run this country dry. I do not know how it can be accommodated under resolution 3.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The theme is a bit different; No.3 says: “Address the depletion of forest coverage by promotion of agroforestry”.

MR ODONGA OTTO: And prohibition of charcoal for melting steel products.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we deal with the amendment as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition and then we come to the one for the Member for Aruu? Can I put the question to the amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition in terms of urging Government to immediately implement the provisions of the Constitution relating to the commission on disaster preparedness? I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us now deal with the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Aruu. Are we adopting it honourable members? Can I put the question to the amendment? We are still dealing with the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Aruu.

5.18
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to that, I would like to also urge Government to investigate –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are still dealing with the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Aruu.

MS ADONG LILLY: Yes, I am amending it. He proposed that Government prohibits use of charcoal in steel rolling mills. I am adding to that: “And also exportation of charcoal”. 

Mr Speaker, we have information that charcoal is being exported to Rwanda and other neighbouring countries.

5.19
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi West County, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The proposal by the hon. Odonga Otto would be okay if we had power spread throughout the country but many parts of the country do not access power. Therefore, I would beg that one be handled smartly because it can be abused and affect those industries in areas where there is no power.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to request hon. Odonga-Otto to look at this again because the theme of this motion is “Resolution of Parliament Urging Government to Urgently Address Food Shortage and Food Insecurity in the Country.” Would we not be exceeding the ambit of the motion, if we introduced those subjects?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I will substantially introduce another motion, mentioning all the companies using charcoal for melting steel so that we even give them a ban and stop buying their products. I will bring another motion at some time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that might be better. Therefore, we have adopted the amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition. Is there any other amendment?

MR ISAAC MULINDWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In resolution No.2, I propose that instead of “crops” we say, “seeds.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, your proposal is that it should read “…to urgently supply quick maturing seeds.” Is that okay?

5.21
MR MIGADDE: Mr Speaker, let us leave it as “crops” because when you supply cassava cuttings, are those seeds? Let us leave it as “crops” or we can even say, “planting materials”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even bananas, we do not plant seeds. If we said, “planting materials” would that cover the whole range of seeds? Please, let us not make this a tense matter. It is a straightforward matter.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, if we used the phrases, “planting materials and breeding stock” it would cater for everything because we have to look at the animals’ side too. We are concentrating on crops, forgetting we also need improved animals breeds; it has to be “planting and breeding stock.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the improvement from the Member of Lugazi Municipality.

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Just on the amendment, Madam Chief Whip, that was a good one. But scientifically, science would get it wrong. What is required there are varieties. So, it should be amended to “plants and stocking varieties” not materials. That is the plant, soil and crop science.  So, Mr Speaker, when you talk about materials, you are just - for this amendment “varieties” would work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the final proposal for crops? What is the amendment now? (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: I am saying this as a scientist. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but what is the final proposal?

MR KATUSABE: My submission, Mr Speaker, is that we need to use “crop varieties - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now use the word “varieties” instead of materials?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, then it would read, “…urgently supply quick maturing planting and breeding varieties.” 

MS LOWILA: Mr Speaker, when we talk of varieties, it refers to crops. For animals, we refer to them as breeds. So, varieties cannot refer to both crops and animals, technically.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, what happens to fish? Fish is also about breeds? Okay, it will now be “plant varieties and breeding stocks?” Can somebody phrase it properly for the records?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Okay, it will be read: “…urgently supply quick maturing planting varieties and breeding stock.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And then the rest continues?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put a question to that amendment? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I now put the question to the whole motion? Any other amendments?

5.25
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to make an amendment on the resolutions by adding one more resolution. I like the way the Government Chief Whip brought it out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, propose the amendment first.

MR AGABA: I would like to propose that we add another resolution to read thus: “Urge Government to urgently address the issue of illegal fishing and catching of immature fish” because that has drained our lakes and water bodies of fish.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that would be out of the scope of this motion.

5.27
MR ABACANON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Mr Speaker, when we talked about water harvesting, I realised that we have so many dams, which were constructed but are now damaged. They need rehabilitation because some of them have burst. In many areas, animals are dying because of lack of water. This one should be addressed.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, almost before the dry season, food security is affected because cassava and potato leaves are destroyed by wandering animals. Actually, people tend to leave their animals in November up to March or April to move around without taking care of them. Some of them get stolen, raising a lot of commotion in the community. These wandering animals are left free without care and have destroyed a lot of cassava stems in eastern and Northern Uganda. 

I have been to the west and noticed that they keep their animals throughout the year. What is wrong with northern and Eastern Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a scope to this motion. Now, isn’t the issue of irrigation captured under 10 - dams and water sources? Aren’t those captured under that because we cannot go to everything in detail of what should be in the motion? We just need to provide the broad framework for Government to feed in all the other aspects. Can I put the question, honourable members?

MR GUTAMOI: But these water sources/dams require rehabilitating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I am saying it is covered under irrigation. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Before you put the question, Mr Speaker - I am not going to propose any other amendment but I thought that this information can be good for the Members of Parliament to go with as we break off for recess. 

First of all, I would like to thank honourable - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it about the motion? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: It is about the motion, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then why are you thanking Members. Please proceed. We do not have time.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I would like to inform this august House that much as Government has accepted all the 12 recommendations, there is work on every recommendation. 

I also would like to inform this House that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is going to bring us information about how far we have gone. 

However, on recommendation one, which requires the immediate distribution of food, Cabinet sat yesterday and decided - whether it requires cutting money from projects, let us do so, so that we can distribute food. (Applause)

As we pass this motion, I would like colleagues to know that we are supporting these recommendations. We will come back here and inform you on how far we have gone with creating that budget, which will save the lives of people. No life should be lost in this Pearl of Africa. I thought I should inform you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question for the adoption of the “Motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to urgently address food shortage and food insecurity in the country” in the terms that have been adopted in the detailed resolutions. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER RULE 47 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE URGING GOVERNMENT TO MAKE A POLICY THAT RESTRICTS THE CHARGING OF RENT IN FOREIGN CURRENCY BY LANDLORDS OF BUSINESS PREMISES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sergeant, can you advise me on how we are on the other matter?

MR KAMUSIIME: Point of procedure, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, point of procedure.

MR KAMUSIIME: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. I am sorry to take you back but I thought it would be procedurally right for the Government Chief Whip to tell us, in terms of time, when we are likely to get the report that she is talking about, so that we can see whether we are handling an emergency or we are rehabilitating. As a practicing nutritionist, I feel that the issue of hunger is an emergency that requires immediate attention.

So, wouldn’t it be right that the Government Chief Whip puts the time limit when we should expect that report from the minister, as she said?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip said, as you go for recess, there are already interventions going to take place as decided by the Cabinet yesterday. 

The issue of the minister coming to update us on what has happened can only happen when Parliament resumes. We cannot say next Tuesday, because we will not be there. Hon. Kyinyamatama, do you think this motion can be handled sufficiently now?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance as to whether it is proper for this House to accept motions that are contrary to existing legislation. 

This nation is operating on –(Interjection)– yes, on free and liberalised economy, where if I have anything to sell, I will sell on my terms and others are free to or not buy according to their wishes. We also know that in this liberalised economy, anybody can buy dollars to any tune as they want. 

Therefore, I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker - maybe the other issues would come if the motion was tabled and we are to debate because people do come into this country, they operate businesses, buy dollars and take them out. So, would it be proper to accept a motion that limits Ugandans from charging dollars on their property? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the motion was accepted and the Member has the right to present it. If it is not acceptable then you can throw the motion out at some point. That would be the proper way of handling it rather than stopping the Member altogether from presenting it. So, let us allow her to present the motion before the House can decide to either take it or not. 
Honourable members, I am informed we can still do some more time. Let us press on a bit. Honourable member, would you like to - 

5.35
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to make a policy that restricts charging rent in foreign currency by landlords of business premises. The motion is moved under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.
  
The motion reads: “WHEREAS objective XI(iii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution provides that, ‘In furtherance of social justice, the state may regulate the acquisition, ownership, use and disposition of land and other property in accordance with the Constitution’;

NOTING that the relationship between landlord –“

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we have copies of the motion? Do you have it on the iPads? Okay, can we receive it - probably we may not be able to debate it - can we just receive the text?

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion continues thus: “…NOTING THAT the relationship between the landlord and the tenant is governed by Restriction Act Cap 231 of the Laws of Uganda, which was commenced in January 1949, with the main objective of consolidating the law relating to the control of rent, dwelling houses and business premises;

REALISING THAT the Rent Restriction Act has become obsolete with a number of glaring gaps, which calls for a complete overhaul of the Act;

REALISING THAT section 17 of the Bank of Uganda Act states that all monetary obligation and transactions shall be expressed, recorded and settled in the shilling unless otherwise provided under any enactment;

RECALLING THAT the current reforms of the 1990s introduced restrictions on Government involvement in controlling the exchange rate, leaving it to be determined by market forces;

AWARE THAT majority of tenants who operate business from the shopping malls in Kampala transact and earn their money in shillings but are charged rent fees in the US dollars;

FURTHER AWARE that the Uganda shilling has, for the last two years, been depreciating against the dollar, which has resulted into increased rental charges as the traders have to keep incurring an extra cost, using the shilling to purchase the dollar so that they fulfill their tenancy obligations of paying rent fees;

REALIZING THAT there is need to have an enabling environment for transacting business and that if Government does not come out to protect them, they will  be driven out of business and at the end contribute to creating unemployment in the country;

COGNISANT OF the fact that Tanzania’s Deputy Minister for Finance and Economic Affairs, Mr Mwigulu Nchemba issues a directive that all commercial transactions should be contracted in the local currency arguing that the dollarisation of the local economy has contributed heavily to the steady weakening of the Tanzanian shilling;

Now be it resolved thus:

Parliament argues Government to come up with a policy that bans transacting in local business using foreign currency.
Parliament argues Government to amend the Rent Restriction Act, CAP 231 so that the relationship between a landlord and the tenant is clearly regulated. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? I see it is seconded by Members from Mukono Municipality, Gulu District, Ngora County, Kanungu District, Kilak County North and Kassanda County South. The motion is properly moved and seconded. Honourable member, would you want to speak to your motion briefly? 

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Mr Speaker, we have a very big problem in this country - because of the high pressure on the shilling by the dollar - if we do not come up as leaders and legislators of this country, we shall have done no good to the economy of this country. I also do not think we shall make it to our 2040 anticipated status.

For the following reasons, I beg for your support: one, that the shopping malls around Kampala charge rental space in US dollars and so are many other business entities like hotels, schools and land owners.

The corruption cases also surface in dollar terms because, understandably, those who offer bribes use the dollar.

Whereas this is not illegal due to Uganda’s capital account being fully liberalised, this practice is immoral and not justified in any way. 

Government has successfully tamed inflation. There is no major risk associated with the transactions denominated in Uganda shillings. So transactions undertaken in US Dollars are entirely done to speculate against the trend of the dollar.

Property owners speculate that the dollar will generally depreciate and this happens as it has been the case. The earnings in Uganda shillings will increase if we stop the speculation.

The second reason is: people will never ask to be paid in US dollars if the shilling starts to appreciate persistently because this would imply that the property owners will not be incurring any loss. 

If an exchange rate depreciates, it means the tenants have to use more units of the shilling to buy the same units of the dollar over time. Considering an example of the tenant who had to pay rent of Shs 500,000 per month in December 2013, when the exchange rate was Shs 2,500 for a dollar, this tenant required Shs 1,250,000 to purchase the rent dollar of Shs 500,000. 

By 2015 when the exchange rate was around Shs 3,600, this same tenant required Shs 1.8 million even when the rent remains at US$500. This means the tenants, who are our traders and retail business people are the net losers.

That is the reason I move to beg, Mr Speaker, honourable members - these voters really need our help. We should credit the reason as to why they thought that we were the best out of all those we left behind. I thank you, Mr Speaker and I beg to submit.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Who is the seconder of the motion?

5.43
MR MPAKA MWINE (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Mr Speaker, I stand to second the motion.

According to Alan Simmonds’ Book, “The Raising Ranchman,” the origins of the Rent Act, 1957 is from the Conservative Government of the United Kingdom. 

That Rent Act was passed against the political turmoil and international tension resulting from the Great War of 1950s. The purpose of which was to remove restrictions and cure the problem of shortages of accommodation by giving private landlords leverage to charge rent that was adequate to maintain property, make returns and investment on property. 

In Africa, countries like Nigeria and Tanzania have publicly decried the continuing challenges resulting from the use of foreign currencies to conduct domestic transactions.

The problem of the “dollarisation” of local economies is increasing among countries like Uganda where trade, tourism and remittances are high. The challenge with this is that it creates instability in local currencies, undermines the economy because the exchange rate differences and gaps are not captured and may or may not be reflected in the Balance of Payments.

In Uganda, the laws governing rent include, among others, the contract and land laws. The only legal tender permitted by law within Uganda for use to transact business is the Uganda Shilling, Section 23 (10 and (2) of the Bank of Uganda Act, CAP 51.

The reason why people continue charging rent in dollars is because they lack  clarity on how to regulate tenancy and occupancy.

First, the current law that addresses the issue of domesticated foreign currency transactions is not so explicit on how individuals who are in agreement can transact. 

According to the Bank of Uganda Act, people are free to enter into and out of contractual rental agreements using Uganda legal tender and this makes it difficult to track those who use the dollars. 

This is made worse because of lack of a centralised database on who owns property and what use the property is for, because location and use also determine the kind of contract entered into and the terms of payment. 

According to the Chairman Uganda Forex Bureau and Money Remittance Association, traders from South Africa, Congo and Rwanda instead of directing clients to exchange money, they accept the dollar equivalent of goods and services provided at self-determined rates.

Whereas the law currently acknowledges the Uganda Shilling as the only legal tender, it is not explicit about the boundary of use and gives room for negotiation between parties - “unless otherwise provided under any enactment or is lawfully agreed to between the parties to agreement under any lawful obligation.” This section of the law may need another law to repeal it or an amendment as stated by the mover of the motion.

This business of carrying out transactions in foreign currency is also affecting our local traders. According to Knight Frank, a residential and commercial property manager in the country, tenants in many shopping malls are requested to pay rent in US dollars yet they derive most of their income in Uganda Shillings. This is unfair because it eats into their profits and it has forced them to shift locations several times.

It has also affected the profits of forex bureau owners. According to forex bureau owners, not only does failure to regulate transactions carried out in dollars hurt forex businesses, it is also creating a black market, which will encourage money laundering since details of those transacting beyond US$5,000 cannot be captured as required by law.
 
Business owners reported that they are losing out on businesses yet they pay licenses. They cite that if this trend is left to blossom, it will encourage traders to go away from the true business channels and as well affect the forex businesses as their profits go down. They state, “We are being hurt by those trading in dollars.” They do not pay overhead costs such as licence to Bank of Uganda, neither do they pay taxes to the Uganda Revenue Authority. 

They incur nothing especially when it comes to dealing with forex, according to Mr Lameck Kiiza the Chairman of the Uganda Forex Bureau and Money Remittance Association. In fact Bank of Uganda is not able to track movement of these funds which is their core function. 

Therefore, if the number of transactions carried out in foreign currencies increase, it will be difficult for the central bank to carry out a monetary policy. However, in the worst-case scenario, it will also cause inflation as well as another situation I would like to term as dollarisation of the economy. Most of our transactions in the near future will be done in foreign currencies. 

We should also make it clear to other investors that this will not affect other aspects of the capital account and that we still encourage them to come and invest in our economy. They just need to know that we are trying to protect a certain section of our population from exploitation and the business environment will become much better for us and the foreign investors. 

We also want to request the Government – if any law is to be passed in regard to this motion, it should not affect the already existing contract until the date of their expiry because it may have undesirable consequences to both parties. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is: “A motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to make a policy that restricts the charging of rent in foreign currency by the landlords of business premises.” That is the motion moved and which I now propose for your debate. 

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Woman MP for Rakai for moving this motion and also the seconders of the motion.  

As Government, we welcome the position being raised in the motion. When I was appointed Minister for Housing & Urban Development it is one of the issues which I found in the ministry. The ministry has been working on a Bill entitled: “The Landlord-Tenants Bill” to streamline and define the relationship between landlords and tenants. 

In the consultations, this is a matter which was raised by a number of stakeholders, especially KACITA and it has been captured in this Bill. 

As the seconder of the motion clearly put it, the position of the law is captured in the Bank of Uganda Act and it states as follows: “All monetary obligations or transactions shall be expressed, recorded and settled in the shilling unless otherwise provided under any enactment or is lawfully agreed to between the parties to an agreement under any lawful obligation.”

Basically, what this means is that it is unlawful for the landlords to force payment in dollars unless the two parties have agreed. However, for purposes of clarity, we have put provisions in this new Bill saying that payment should be in Uganda Shillings to make it clearer and to help our traders. 

So, the pledge I want to make is that we have completed processing the Bill at the ministry level. This October, we should be able to present it in Cabinet and with Cabinet clearance, in November we should be ready for the first reading here. The prayers being raised by the movers will be sufficiently captured in the Bill before Parliament will process it. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in those circumstances, do we stay the debate? Just in case the minister delays, then we can bring back our motion. Is that okay? 
 
HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable members, in the spirit of moving this matter in a more comprehensive way as proposed by the minister and also in view of the circumstances that I cannot explain properly on record –(Laughter)– you see me consulting the Sergeant-at-arms - can I propose that we defer debate on this matter and when the minister brings the Bill then we will see if these matters are captured. If the Bill delays, we shall put the motion on the Order Paper for debate. With that, honourable members, let us defer this debate. Thank you very much. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE ALCOHOLIC DRINKS CONTROL ACT, 2016”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that when this matter came yesterday, an issue of procedure was raised by the Member of West Budama North, and I said that the matter required me to look at the records and make myself understand where we stand, as Parliament, on what the Member stated. 

At the 28th Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on the 6 October 2016, hon. Othieno Okoth, Member for West Budama North raised the issue of conflict of interest when hon. Bagoole John Ngobi, Member of Parliament for Luuka North, rose to second the motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled: “The Alcoholic Drinks Control Act, 2016.” 

It was stated by hon. Othieno Okoth that the Speaker had ruled on the 14 September 2016 thus: “A Member having conflict of interest should not second a motion on the Floor of the House.” 

I promised you, honourable members, that I would deliver a ruling today having carried out some research and the background to this and all the other matters, so that I can be in line with what the Speaker ruled. 

The Speaker said, and I quote from the Hansard: “Honourable Members, although we are all Members of Parliament, I think that there is a situation where, if you have conflict of interest, you declare it before you second a motion…” and there was an applause: “Can you find another seconder who has no petition?” 

Honourable members, the Speaker did not mean that a Member having a conflict of interest cannot second a motion. This means that a Member who has conflict of interest in a matter before the House or committee should declare it before participating in the debate. 

I have also looked at our Rules of Procedure, Rule 85(1) and it states: ”A Member shall not in or before the House or any committee, take part in the discussion of any matter in which he or she has direct pecuniary interest unless he or she has declared the nature of that interest to the House or committee.” 

Honourable members, the subject we are dealing with has to do with the interests and is variously defined or referred to by the rules. There is the phrase, “conflict of interest.” There is the phrase, “personal interests” and there is the phrase, which is also used in the rules: “pecuniary interests.” But the overall purpose is to handle the question of conflict of interest. 

Honourable members, all of us have interests. There is no person in this world without interests. But in this particular case, we are referring to whether that interest that you have conflicts with other interests that is in the public interest and that is the question I should be determining.

So, what is conflict of interest in law? It is a situation in which a person is in a position to derive personal benefit from actions or decisions made in their official capacity. It is a situation in which a person or organisation is involved in multiples interests – financial or otherwise, one of which could possibly corrupt the motivation or decision-making of the individual or organisation.

It is also a situation that has the potential to undermine the impartiality of a person because of the possibility of a clash between the person’s self-interests and professional interests or public interest. Those are the various definitions of what we refer to as “conflict of interest.”

The spirit we should give to the interpretation of this matter must be permissive rather than operating to restrict the right of Members of this House. 

The constitutional and other legal restrictions are already there and they are many. So, on each case basis that we consider, we should not lose sight of the fact that this is a House of representatives, who should be facilitated rather than restricted in the performance of their cardinal role of representation and legislation. That is why this House has immunity; this House and its Members have immunity. That is also why this House has privileges because without immunity and without privileges, whatever you would say in this House, you would face it rough in the courts of law.

But for purposes of facilitating your activities in this House, you are given those immunities; just for that purpose. 

Honourable members, there is need for us to clarify on the rules because the rules, as they are - if you look at sub-rule (2), you realise it says: “A Member having any interest in any matter before the House shall declare the nature of his or her interest in the matter and shall not vote on any question relating to that matter.”

However, in (1) it is says, “The Member shall not in or before the House or any committee, take part in the discussion of any matter in which he or she has direct pecuniary interests….”  So there are some problems that we need to clarify in our rules.

So I have carefully considered the facts of this case, together with the ruling of the Speaker and our own Rules of Procedure and I have come to the following conclusions:

Seconding a motion amounts to taking part in a discussion. And the rules are clear that if you have those interests, you declare them when you are going to take part in the discussion because the rules say so. And having two alcoholic brothers does not amount to having a direct pecuniary interest as by our rules because our rules are simply saying that you must have direct pecuniary interest. And that is why I am saying that there is a problem that we need to deal with when we review our Rules of Procedure. 

So, I am not able to cover all the parameters of this subject given the limited scope presented by the facts given in this particular case. I, therefore, request the Rules Committee to take a good look at the subject of the conflict of interest and reflect on it by looking at the constitutional provisions and other laws enacted by this Parliament so that this subject is properly dealt with.

For example, if you look at Section 15 of the Leadership Code Act, you realise that it has its own definition of what amounts to conflict of interest and it says thus: “A leader shall not participate in deliberations of a public body of which he or she is a member at any meeting at which any matter in which he or she has a personal interest is to be discussed unless, he or she discloses to that body or any committee of that body designated for that purpose, the nature of his or her interest in the matter and submits sufficient particulars of that interest.” And it goes on defining in detail what amounts to that.

So my view is that this matter needs to be clarified better. But for the purposes of what is before us in the instant case, as I have already stated, having two brothers who are alcoholics cannot, by the widest interpretation, be construed to being pecuniary interest in this matter. (Applause)

So, in the event, I find that the honourable member can second the motion.

6.06
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Mr Speaker, I have said it before, that I have suffered in this world. (Laughter) But in the interest of time, I thank you, in a special way, for your wise ruling; a very well-researched ruling. (Applause) Thank you very much.

Mr Speaker, Uganda has the youngest population with over 75 per cent of its population being under the age of 30 years. As alcohol is easily accessible and socially accepted in society, the youth are particularly susceptible to alcohol abuse.

Recent developments have indicated that there is an increasing trend in alcohol consumption among the youth. Alcohol is the most commonly used drug and after the youth taking alcohol, it is another gateway to some other abused drugs in the country.

Uganda’s 30 per cent prevalence of episodic drinkers is amongst the heaviest in the world. And I do not think we should take pride in this as a small country. 

The production in the formal sector breweries is estimated at 37 per cent while the domestically-produced spirit accounts for 63 per cent, which is largely unregulated and unrecorded. The locally-brewed alcohol constitutes 80 per cent of the alcohol consumed in the entire country.

Mr Speaker, the locally-produced alcohol beverages include: beers with an alcoholic content, which ranges from 10-20 volume in percentages; spirits, whose alcoholic content ranges from 30-70 volume in percentages; and adulterated alcohol containing other toxic impurities –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, point of procedure. The Members are wondering whether you have conflict of interest – (Laughter)-

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, I do not have peculiar conflict of interest. The Member holding the Floor is seconding the motion to seek leave of Parliament to introduce a motion, which is provided for under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure. 

However, Mr Speaker, the presentations of the seconder is about the alcoholic issues, but not the request to seek the leave of Parliament. He has not given the justification as to why Parliament should grant them leave to move that motion. Is he procedurally moving right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that is before the House is about seeking leave of this Parliament for the Member to present a Private Member’s Bill that has been proposed. A copy of the Bill is attached.

The question is: Why would you want this Parliament to grant you leave? Articulate that to this House so that it can take a decision on whether to or not to grant that leave. So, please justify why you need leave to present this motion.

MR BAGOOLE: Mr Speaker, that is what I was doing in my submission, justifying the need. I may be taking the long route, but it is not all that long and I believe we shall get there.

Mr Speaker, the alcohol factories pack their products in sackets, and at times very small sackets of either in 20, 50, 70 or 100 millilitres. These are mostly sold in suburbs and in lockup shops –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, you have just guided that the movers of the motion should tell the House why they need leave. When we grant them leave, then they will report back to tell us why alcohol is bad. 

Is the honourable member in order to continue being recalcitrant to the Speaker’s ruling and to lecture us about alcohol which has nothing to do with the leave he is seeking? Is he in order to continue being irrelevant?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, at this stage, I do not think that we should debate the substance of the Bill because we would like to get leave - why should Parliament give you leave? That is the question. What is your justification for – tell this Parliament, why you need leave. (Laughter) This question seems to be important because the whole House agrees that alcoholism and the sale of alcohol is a problem, but why do you need leave for you to do it? 

MR BAGOOLE: Mr Speaker, I thought it would be very important for me to define the problems first, but according to your ruling, the reasons we seek leave of Parliament is to go and consult with the stakeholders. Amongst the stakeholders, we intend to consult the addicts, some Members of Parliament, the brewers and bar owners and many other stakeholders. 

However, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)             

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this matter is emotional, but at the same time it is serious to deal with, as leaders. Indeed by listening to a few Members and reading the subject matter of leave, it definitely shows that the issue of alcohol consumption is a very sensitive matter for politicians to handle.

However, I would like to give information to the movers of the motion that we need not to labour to tell Parliament the harm of consuming alcohol. All we need to say is that as responsible leaders, we have noticed how much alcohol is imparting negatively on the productive capacity of our voters; how alcohol is interfering with the time of even some of the people who are supposed to be public servants in their offices spend most of their time drinking –(Interruption) 

MR OYET: Mr Speaker, it is very uncultured to put an elder to order but we are dealing with a serious matter that borders on constitutionalism and protection of Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, you have just given us a precise guidance and ruling that the seconder of the motion should give justification why they should be granted leave. However, in the process of attempting to give the justifications the honourable member of Parliament for Dokolo District, the backbench commissioner and my boss, stood on the point of information and in the process, she began debating the intended motion. 

Is she, therefore, in order to defy your ruling on the critical issues that concern the Rules of Procedure, which you have just ruled on?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the questions that are being asked are not different from the ones that were asked previously. I have looked at the records of proceedings of 14 Wednesday 2016, where a similar situation arose when the motion by hon. Ssekitoleko was before this House. 

The Speaker on page 38 of the proceedings of that same day asked the same question, “Honourable member, hon. Abdu Katuntu is right. Tell us why you want the leave of this House. That is what you should explain.” Those are the same questions that are being asked by the Members. That means there is a gap and disconnect. You are not justifying why Parliament should give you leave; instead you are telling the House that alcohol is very bad, which they already know because they have said so. They are now asking you why you want the leave. I think that is where the issue is. What is your justification? 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I was – (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, when you read Article 93 of the Constitution - and I can read it verbatim, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government….” This means the motion the Member wants to introduce has financial implications. 

Government has already passed the Finance Act, whereby they are going to collect revenue from the brewers and everybody involved in that sector. The leave and motion you are seeking tend to have an impact on the Government income, if not introduced by Government.

So, are we, therefore, procedurally right to continue debating when we know that the motion being introduced is against the Constitution? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that the proposed Bill creates expenditure on Government? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: It creates a reduction on the Government income. That is what Article 93 and the authority states.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise, honourable member? Okay, but is it part of – because the Member rose on a point of order and I need to understand properly whether the proposed Bill, which I have not had the opportunity to look at, imposes a charge or a reduction on Government expenditure. And whether, if it is true, this would be a sustainable matter under the Constitution. That is what I am asking because that is what I need to rule on. I need more elaboration before I can rule. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, the issue before us is a request for leave to introduce the motion for that Bill. If leave is granted, that is when the Member will be required to provide a Certificate of Financial Implication. So, we cannot even begin asking for the certificate of financial implication before leave is granted. 

My thought, therefore, is that we either grant the Member leave or not. When the Member comes to present the Bill at first reading, is when the Member would be required to produce that Certificate of Financial Implication; he will have to prove that that certificate has been availed. He does not have to come with a certificate before leave is granted. That is the rule. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is not the substance of the procedure. I remember the same issue of financial implication was raised when I was chairing here. It was raised by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba to try and stop the hon. Robert Sekitoleko from moving - and I ruled - because they had raised the issue of the certificate of financial implication – and I said no, at this stage, you do not need a certificate of financial implication. 

What we are interrogating, arising from what the Member has raised, is the motion because the reason why one has to attach a copy of the Bill is to justify, so that people can look at it and establish its constitutionality.

The right of a Member of Parliament to present a Private Member’s Bill is a constitutional right. It is in Article 94(4) of the Constitution. The only prohibition to that right, which is also a constitutional prohibition, is if it violates Article 93 and does not have the consent of the Government. That is where the problem would be. 

We would be reaching it at this stage because that is what the motion is seeking to do. Is the motion seeking to do what the Constitution prohibits? I need somebody to help me understand whether in the Bill, there is actually a provision that is introducing either a tax or doing something that would require the Government consent. I myself I proceeded with a Private Member’s Bill, the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Bill. I processed it. There were objections here and I could not be given leave, until I got consent from the Government. The minister agreed to my motion and hence let me move a Private Member’s Bill. Later my motion was adopted and then I went and prepared the Bill, but there had been objections. 

The same thing happened to hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi’s motion. There were objections until the Government consent was obtained. That is where we are. If it is true, then I will have to ask Government before I rule. I need a clear statement. Is it true that it is increasing expenditure on behalf of Government? I need you to tell me that properly before we seek more information. I am still trying to process the ruling because there is a procedural point. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, the Constitution is clear. It prohibits Parliament to proceed with any motion, which alters taxation or makes a charge on revenue collected. If it is expenditure - I have looked at the Bill, it has both. It reduces but also alters the rate of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By doing what? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: By reduction. I can read the Constitution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Bill. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: The Bill says that the bars should close at 6 o’clock without permission. If I produce Waragi and it is not taken, you are reducing the time of my production -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have a point of order from the hon. Betty Nambooze.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I handed in an electronic and hard copy to the Clerk, when I moved the notice of this motion. I think that these are now documents of Parliament. 

However, when a Member comes to the Floor and starts misquoting the content of the proposed Bill - is it in order for a Member to come here, without reading through the proposed Bill and misquotes it? For example, he has just told a lie that the law proposes 6 o’clock, whereas the proposed Bill puts the time between 5.00 p.m. and 1.00 a.m. which is in the next day. Is he in order to start quoting something he has not even read through?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the honourable member for Dokolo is still on the Floor, but there is a procedural point that I have not processed. That is why I am seeking some time to look at the - for example, if you look at the outline, the proposed clause 4(ii) about institutional arrangement and it reads: “establishment of the national alcohol licensing and control committee.” 

If it is establishing that, would that impose a charge? If it is does by creating any form of expenditure, then there has to be some form of consent. The Government has to agree to it, then the Member can proceed. But that is if it does. If it does not consent, then the Member does not have to seek consent. Has the Government looked through this proposal to tell me whether it is imposing a charge or not?

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As Government, we do appreciate hon. Betty Nambooze for making an effort to come up with this proposed Alcohol Control Bill. 

When we were debating the Tobacco Control Bill, which is now an Act, we informed the country that we were also working on the alcohol policy.

It is important for Parliament to always legislate when there is a policy, so that we base our legislation on that policy. (Applause) We know the negative effects of alcohol, which have been raised. We appreciate the breweries and all those involved in that industry. They contribute greatly to our economy and of course provide employment for our people. However, we must be aware of the other fact that Government has also to pay heavily in treating those who abuse alcohol. 

Mr Speaker, we all agree that we must regulate alcohol consumption in this country. So, we have talked to hon. Betty Nambooze. My technical staff have been in contact with her and what we are proposing is that we need to have the policy passed by Government. And our policy is ready and just waiting for space on the order of Cabinet business. If it is granted, this month we shall have the policy presented. (Applause) Thereafter, we can have the proposed Alcohol Control Bill presented to this House. (Applause) 

As a way forward, I would like to propose that we work closely with the hon. Betty Nambooze on this matter.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the “Enguli” Act and the alcohol pieces of legislation have been in our statute books for years; and we passed the Tobacco Control Bill in the last Parliament. I have never ever heard the ministry come in to tell us that the policy on alcohol control was in the making. It is now, after somebody has taken initiative to bring the law – they have never been ready to bring this policy, if at all it is in the making - that you are coming to us and saying that there is a policy.

Now that the minister has been recorded on the Floor of Parliament that there is a policy, which has already been made, and actually any time when there is space on the Order Paper she will be able to bring it, can we, therefore, agree that on the first day of Parliament, when we re-open, the minister comes with that policy, so that it does not interfere with our desire to bring the piece of law to control alcohol consumption?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you rise on order? (Laughter)  Honourable member, you rose on the point of order.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, that is why I was ignoring the interruption because I had not raised my point of order. (Laughter) Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister to be diversionary and send this document to the archives by saying that the policy is ready for submission to Parliament? Is she in order? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: To the Cabinet. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Cabinet has no relevancy for us; ours is Parliament. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I presented my motion for leave in the Seventh Parliament, a similar objection was made. So, the motion could not be processed and we had to go back. The objection was that what I was proposing was creating authorities and creation of authorities would incur expenses and so, I needed the consent of Government before I could move such a motion, because it would violet Article 93; and I speak this from experience. 

The same situation arose when hon. Dr Baryomunsi proposed the Tobacco Control Bill and it was sent back on the argument that Government had to agree to it. When they came and agreed, then they okayed granting the Member leave. But that was after there was an agreement from Government that it would not violet the Constitution. 

If this law - and I am looking at just one part - talks about the creation of the National Alcohol Licensing and Control Committee, and that is construed as creating an expense, even if it is a small expense – then it may require that the Government agrees with the Member before she can proceed with the motion. Okay? That is what it would mean. 

We are not stopping the Member, but we are saying that it is better to first do that so that you are in line with the Constitution. 

You need to work together, get the consent of Government and then we process the motion to grant you leave before you proceed with it because that is the essence of this procedural point that has just been raised. That is how I would understand it and that is how I would guide.
 
If it is creating an authority, it means that is an expense because that committee will require some funds for it to sit to determine certain things; there will be a charge and the Constitution says that, if such is going to happen, one needs Government consent. This Parliament cannot act in vain. We cannot discuss something, which we know is against the Constitution. Unless that consent is obtained, we will not proceed normally as usual.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate your guidance and I would like to thank the minister for accepting to work with the Member, for purposes of ensuring that this proposed Bill does not die and that Ugandans must get a law to protect them from excessive consumption and abuse of alcohol.

To lessen the cost of medical care for the country, I would request that my colleague, the hon. Betty Nambooze, concedes to compare notes with the minister so that we can get this Bill, debate it and have a law for the nation.

Mr Speaker, when people were debating, you saw that each of us was passionate about this matter. We are all leaders. We have gone to school. Parents have talked to us and asked what we are doing to control the consumption of alcohol by the young children? Some of them have said their children are turning into thieves to the extent that when they send them to buy things in the market, they buy less to save some little money for alcohol, no matter how little it would be.
 
So, it would be very important, Mr Speaker, that this House pronounces itself on a law that regulates the consumption and abuse of alcohol -(Applause)- and so, it is for that reason that I request the hon. Betty Nambooze to concede to the idea.

On the other hand, Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate -(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, honourable member. The clarification I am seeking is: in most cases when Members bring these motions and combine with Government, sometimes they tend to delay. I would like to seek clarification on whether it would be possible for us to set a timeframe, because our people outside there are already very happy that their children in schools are going to be forced to stop drinking alcohol?  I get worried that this law might delay like others, when we combine the two.

Therefore, can we get some specific time when hon. Sarah Opendi, will bring this law? It should come very fast because we want it. Thank you very much.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you my sister and I think this will tell us how serious Government is, in ensuring that it protects Ugandans. The urgency with which they will treat this law will tell the world how serious we are, as leaders, to protect our population. I know the minister will be committed to it.

Mr Speaker, I was saying that it is unfortunate that the minister was kind of begging for space to present the policy yet our rules are very clear - Government business will always be given priority. But also, Mr Speaker, every last day of the week of our sitting, the Prime Minister is supposed to come here - under Rule 27 - and present issues that he thinks are very important for this country and that must be awaited for discussion in the next debate.

I would have expected the Prime Minister to bring the minister’s proposed policy here in the House for debate because for long, the Prime Minister has not submitted these proposals to the House because we have not registered anything from Cabinet. So, may I ask that this policy comes as fast as possible and we support it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem is that we do not want the Speaker to give a direct ruling, that the motion is not constitutionally sustainable. You do not want him to go that far because it will not help the cause of what we are doing. That is why the proposal that you liaise with Government and agree is a better option for you, honourable member.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the last Parliament, I moved a motion on maternal health and you were in the Chair. The issues to do with the certificate of financial implication were again raised until finally you guided - we combined efforts with the Ministry of Health and the Committee on Health, which effort later saw us present and adopt that motion. What this means is that this is not new to me.

A wake up call has been made and the need to have an updated law on alcohol manufacturing, sell and consumption in the country seems to be appreciated by all of us.

Mr Speaker, as I make this conceding statement to appreciate your guidance, I want the House to take note of the fact that, local governments have moved ahead of us and legislated on this matter. I have done research and established that Wakiso Local Government is in the final process of getting this by-law passed, Mpigi, Masaka – with Kabale theirs became effective in May 2013, Pallisa on 29 June 2009, Luweero and recently -(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to be listening to the mover of the motion and pleading with her to move hand in hand with the Government, yet there is a caucus against anti-alcohol Control Bill making noise in the background? Is it procedurally okay for the caucus to be having their deliberations when the main House is also debating a very important matter? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when this Parliament is in session, it is not a caucus. Even when a parliamentary committee is sitting, it is not a caucus. Caucusing is for political parties and related groupings. This House cannot be referred to as a caucus. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, you have overstepped - but honourable members, there is something I have overstretched by the way and I do not want us to do it any longer; there is a situation that is surrounding us that can cause us problems right now.

Therefore, with that guidance - because we do not want to go the way I would have gone if there was insistence that we rule substantially on the question that is raised on the procedural matter on Article 93.

Honourable members, what hon. Nambooze has just cited about what happened in the previous Parliament shows you the consistence of the presiding officer. He does not change rules and doesn’t cut corners; he is consistent. Whether you like him or not -(Applause)- he is consistent in what he does. So, that goes to confirm that I did it. I could not even remember but she has reminded me that where there is an issue on Article 93 being raised, one risks having the whole thing being thrown out because it would not be constitutionally sustainable, and that is the guidance. 

Now that you have agreed, I think you should go and consult. If the Government says proceed, you will come here and we give you leave to go –(Ms Nambooze rose_) - please, honourable member. I am in charge of this House and I know what is going on around me. You have agreed. Let us leave it like that. 

Honourable members, the Members of the Parliamentary Tourism and Conservation Forum are hereby invited for an orientation training on Tuesday, 11 October 2016 at the Members’ Lounge, starting from 9.00am to 10.00 a.m. Please keep time and come with a friend as matters of conservation concern us all.

Honourable members, I now give the final details of what is going to happen on Saturday, as a reminder to all Members of Parliament. 

The 18th National Prayer Breakfast organised by Parliament, will take place on the 8 October 2016. The venue is Hotel Africana, Nile Hall and the time is at 7.30 a.m. to 10.00 a.m. The guest of honour will be His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. The host is the Rt Hon. Rebbeca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament.

Keynote Speaker will be hon. Jonathan Atkins, former Minister of Defence of Great Britain. The theme is: “We shall know them by their fruits.” 

Please take note that it is only for Members of Parliament who have confirmed attendance, have received invitation cards and their seats have been reserved. The implication is that if you did not confirm and did not receive a card, you might have a problem of where to sit. But that is for the organisers to handle, not the Speaker; I am only conveying the message.

Honourable members, the recess has come but there is work for the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs in regard to Kasese, and the new matter that was introduced by the Member for Mukono Municipality and several other matters that are affecting the citizens of this country that fall under that docket.

So, there might be committees that will be required to do their work, but for you to proceed to do work that is urgent during recess, you need authorisation from the Speaker.

House is now adjourned for recess, until 14 November 2016. 

(The House rose at 6.51 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 14 November 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 