Wednesday, 14 October 2015

Parliament met at 12.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, hon. Leader of the Opposition and honourable members of Parliament, I welcome you to this sitting. We have invited you to consider the Public Finance Management Amendment Bill, 2015.

However, I would like to use this same opportunity to remind the Attorney-General that Article 78 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, on the composition of Parliament and particularly clause 2 requires that: “Upon expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of the Constitution and thereafter every five years, Parliament shall give the representation under clause 1 (b)and (c) of this article for the purpose of retaining, increasing or abolishing any representation and any matter incidental to it”.

I therefore call upon the Attorney-General to move with speed because there is the general election coming and we do not have that resolution yet on retention or abolition or increase of the interest groups.

Secondly, honourable members, we are honoured as a country to have Pope Francis visiting us from 27th -29th November 2015. Many countries in Africa would like to have the Pope but it is Uganda where he chose to come. In line with the Pope’s visit, I received a request from Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the vice chairperson of the national organising committee requesting Members of Parliament and staff to contribute towards the preparation for the visit. 

I had wanted to call the leaders of both the Anglican and Catholic chaplaincy and the Imama but because of the disruptions that we have had, it has not been possible. I therefore would like to call upon them; the chaplaincies to meet so that we can coordinate our contribution and see how we can support the work of receiving Pope Francis. (Applause)  

This is a very important issue. Honourable members please, let us see what we can do along those lines; I would like to thank you in advance for your generosity despite what we are engaged in. Thank you very much.

That aside, although we called this meeting for particular purposes – is it you or him? The Opposition Chief Whip would like to say something; there is something bothering her that she would like to raise. Let us start with hon. Cecilia - both of you?  The Leader of the Opposition and the Chief Whip need to decide, if the Leader of the Opposition is taking the lead, then let him read the statement. You both cannot speak on the same issue. Take a decision on who is to speak.

12.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, there is no contradiction. The Chief Opposition Whip is talking as a woman and would like to talk about women issues whereas I would like to make a general statement about what happened last Saturday. There is therefore no contradiction.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we can have the Leader of the Opposition, proceed.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for giving us the opportunity to air out our views. Last Saturday, on the 10 October, 2015, to us, it was yet another “dark day” in our struggle for democracy and good governance in our country.

There was an attempt either to assassinate or to harm the FDC Presidential aspirant; Rtd Col Dr Kizza Besigye, together with other party leaders, including several MPs he was travelling with, through an engineered road accident.

Madam Speaker, I was part of the team. We were travelling to Rukungiri for an FDC party rally tailored for the identification of candidates and mobilising the population to participate in the FDC primary elections.

This is a period for primary elections just like our honourable members from the NRM are doing. The Opposition primaries end on 7 November, 2015. We drove in a convoy and I was in my car leading the convoy.

Madam Speaker, an ambush by the police was carried out in Kyoja swamp; about 20 kilometres away from Masaka on Mbarara High Way. The ambush was commanded by the Masaka RPC Maxwell Ogwal. He waited for LOP’s two vehicle and that of hon. Kevin Taaka who was following the Leader of the Opposition to pass. He then ordered his officers to quickly throw tyre cutter spikes across the high way.

This was right in front of the speeding car of hon. Patrick Amuriat who then braked suddenly and several vehicles behind him rammed into one another. There were some other vehicles like that of hon. Semujju Nganda which veered off the road and actually had a brush up with a police car, which was parked by the road side. The result was multiple crushes of literally all the vehicles in the convoy - over 10 vehicles.

The IGP, Kala Kayihura, said that he is the one who ordered that assumed roadblock at Kyoja Swamp. The police has gone ahead to lie to us Ugandans that there was a roadblock. Madam Speaker I would like to inform you that there was no roadblock at Kyoja Swamp.

This is the right information because I had just passed there. Fortunately, I had eight policemen in my company in the car; there was no roadblock. We had just passed and a few seconds later, we looked behind and saw that there was an accident involving multiple cars.

The police said that we were going to commit crimes in Rukungiri. If I may ask, where was the scene of crime that caused our arrest? Was it in Rukungiri or in Kyoja? Or was it Kanyalyeru where we found a roadblock and finally stopped? 

Madam Speaker, had it not been for the mercy of God and may be the expertise of our drivers, you would now be marking the darkest time in your history as Speaker of this House by having several Members of Parliament laying in state here at the sometime gruesomely murdered by our own police on orders of the IGP, Gen. Kale Kayihura.

What drives the mind of a police officer to suddenly throw a big metal and dangerous object on the road as a way of stopping speeding cars? What else could have been the intention of doing that if not wanting to kill us?

Away from Kyoja Swamp, in about more than 100 kilometers ahead at Kanyaleru, in Kiruhura District, we found a roadblock where we were held for close to six hours before they begun the arrest. Members of Parliament were roughly treated; held by their belts and bundled onto police pickups. Honourable Paul Mwiru particularly was slapped, pushed and literally thrown onto a pickup like a bag of charcoal.

One of our party secretaries - the secretary for environment who was elected recently at our delegates conference by about 800 people, Ms Fatuma Nayigaga Zaina, was arrested in the most brutal and dehumanizing manner. She was undressed, dragged on the tarmac, thrown on a pickup and tied on the pickup like a goat.

Madam Speaker, I feel so horrible that some Members of Parliament are actually laughing. Where is the respect for our mothers and sisters? Where is the respect for our human rights as citizens of this country?

The arrests were made without any pronouncement by the police of the law we had broken. The arrests were meant to stop us from reaching Rukungiri more than 200 kilometres away. They were meant to stop the FDC Presidential candidate, Dr Kizza Besigye. Rukungiri is where Dr Besigye was born; he has a village home there and his parents as well. They stopped him from going to his home, where is our secretary of mobilization.

We appeal to you, Members of Parliament, especially you the members of the ruling party - you may never know when and how this devil will reach your door. There was a priest in Germany called Martin Nimmo. He said that when Hitler was coming for the communists, that was okay, they were communists. Whatever group that Hitler was coming for, did not make any difference; as long as they were not coming to him; eventually when they came for him, there was nobody to fight for him.Let us open our eyes and be very careful. If some of us do not see anything wrong in these barbaric acts by our Police, then we are just hiding in the abyss of hopelessness. 

It is on record that since Gen. Kayihura was appointed to head our police, more than 100 people have been murdered by police. The statistics can be easily added up even by individual account of events yet you have not seen even one officer or man of Uganda Police charged and conclusively tried for any of these murders. 

Why do we tolerate and keep quiet about this impunity as leaders of this country? This will not go away. Time will come when Gen. Kayihura will have to answer for these crimes, because Ugandans have been killed. The good thing is that the records are there in the newspapers and in other media.

The recent constitutional court ruling came in very timely. We are going to start suing perpetrators of violence, molestation and all other crimes. We are going to sue them as individuals. Court has given us that green light. We are going to begin suing police officers, army officers and Government officials who violent our Constitution individually. Lies and murder propaganda will not protect these criminals in our police uniforms.

I know the House is about to finish its business, but we still would like to request this august House to set up a committee to investigate the conduct of the police. If there are Members of Parliament who can spare time, we can do it right now, but we should investigate the conduct of police. It is our police, we pay them, they are our children and their job is to protect life and property which they are not doing.

In the meantime, we wish to urge the Ministry of Internal Affairs or the acting Minister to cause a meeting between the political leaders of all parties and police leadership to iron out these major security threats by the supposed guarantors and protectors of our security. 

We are having an election ahead of us; everybody is looking at us: investors are looking at us and our friends are looking at us. Our destiny is in our hands and we as the leaders we should determine how we shall move this country forward.

We are asking Government not to push us against the wall because we shall fight back. The FDC is a legal party, doing legal party work and organizing for elections, however flawed they already are.

You cannot invoke the Public Order Management Act (POMA) to stop our party activities. Section 4 of POMA, exempts Government and registered parties doing their official work from seeking permission from the police or even seeking for police involvement. Very often this law has been abused especially by Gen. Kayihura; even when we told the police on the road in Mbarara, some of them did not know that actually political parties are exempted from this like Government - especially during the campaign. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Wafula. Let me invite hon. Cecilia Ogwal, before she comes-

Honourable members, I would like to inform you that our colleague hon. Okot Ogong has lost his father. Mr Neria Ogong will be taken to All Saints Church on Friday at 10:00 a.m.; burial will be in Ikwera Sub County on Sunday, in Dokolo District. Let us pray for hon. Okot and his family, they are going through a difficult time.

Honourable Muruli Mukasa also lost his son, he was buried yesterday; we are having a lot of challenges. But we would like to thank you for supporting hon. Khainza and for supporting Dr Mutende’s funeral. Thank you so much.

1.10
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. Maybe in addition, there are many of us in this House who know hon. Chris Rwakasisi; he lost his father as well.

Madam Speaker, before I make this statement of national importance, as a God fearing person and a Ugandan, I would like to appreciate you and the institution of Parliament for organising the prayer breakfast on the 8 October, this year.  Above all for some of you who missed that prayer breakfast, for the first time, you launched a women’s forum which will now be held every year after the prayer breakfast. 

For the women who did not attend on the 8 October this year, be prepared to attend next year because we will have the women’s forum following.

Madam Speaker, on Saturday 10 October 2015, this country witnessed yet another deplorable act by the men and women in police uniform, when the FDC leaders, some of whom are members of this House were brutally manhandled and assaulted, while on their way to attend a public meeting in Rukungiri organised by the FDC Party.

Among those leaders was the FDC National Secretary for Environment Ms Fatuma Zaina, who during her arrest was brutalised and stripped naked by Police officers. Both mainstream and social media is awash with graphic images of this lady being hauled and pulled on the tarmac by police while naked.

The police officers who were effecting the arrest chose to pull her clothes off her body, exposing her private parts in public. When I talk about private parts, women understand what I mean, not only the breasts, but there other parts which should never ever be exposed.

This was not only regrettable, but also unfortunate since it violates the Constitution and the laws governing Police. Article 33 of the –(Interjections)– it is an emotional matter. Article 33 of the 1995 Uganda Constitution provides for the rights of women and states that:

    1. Women shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the person with men”.

    2. The state shall provide the facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women, to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement. 

    3. The state shall protect women and their rights taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in the society.

    4. Women shall have the rights to equal treatment with men, and that right shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities”.

Madam Speaker, according to this constitutional provision, if the choice of the police was to strip the accused naked, both men and women should have been stripped naked; but why only women?

Madam Speaker, and members of this House, this was not an isolated incident. This House will recall the ugly incident where its member, hon. Nabila Naggayi Ssempala was brutalised and stripped naked by police during an arrest in Owino Market in a public place.

The video shows clearly how police officers lifted her clothes off her body as she struggled to hold her skirt. The honourable member was humiliated and had her image tarnished in public as a result of this deliberate act by the police.

Honourable members, you may also recall the ugly scene that surrounded the arrest of the FDC national secretary for mobilisation, Ms Ingrid Turinawe whom the police found seated in a car and squeezed her breasts.

Women who are here know as well as everyone else that squeezing of the breasts is very painful. There are a few such acts which have been recording in public. However, there are so many others which are done in the dark where there are no cameras or people watching.

Honourable members, this House is presided over by a woman, as a Speaker, the Secretary General of the ruling party of the NRM is a woman. The Government Chief Whip is a woman; the Opposition Chief Whip presenting this statement is a woman, and 33 per cent of this House is composed of women. It is for this reason that such deplorable acts by Uganda Police cannot go without strong condemnation from the honourable members of this House.

In condemning this shameful act by the police, this House will be joining other patriotic Ugandans who have also expressed their disappointment and frustration over police conduct. These include the Uganda Women’s Network, Uganda Law Society and in their statement of condemnation referred to this incident as: “Unacceptable, unfortunate, a backward assault on Ugandans by those who are  supposed to protect them. This conduct is not in tandem with the dictates of our Constitution or good conscience; it does not portend a future of peace and stability. It is unnecessary, outlandish, undemocratic and affront on the conscience of Ugandans.”

This is an excellent description of the scene which the police spokesperson, Enanga refers to as: “The self-stripping of a harlot”. These actions of the police undermine all the gains that the human and women’s rights movements have made over the decades. We only recently just celebrated 20 years of the Constitution, and 53 years of independence from the inhuman treatment of the colonialists.

The Constitution is unequivocal about the rights of women guaranteed under article 33 stated above. Such acts against this lady, who also happens to be the FDC National Secretary for Environment have not only dented the image of government in the international media, but has also scared off women from coming up into politics.

Madam Speaker, we were horrified as a country when we saw the old women in Amuru and Teso undress themselves. These women had a cause; they were allegedly undressing in defence of the land which they thought was being grabbed. The question Ugandans are asking is what is the interest of police in targeting women? Article 24 of the Constitution provides for respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment, it states, “No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” The police like all other institutions and individuals are expected to protect, respect and fulfil this constitutional right. 

Honourable members, this Parliament has increased funding to the police force on the understanding that they will improve their capacity in performing their constitutional duty of protecting lives and property of individuals. However, such actions by the same police undermine the credibility of the institution of the police and disappoint Parliament. The Ministry of Finance fully supported this Parliament when providing Uganda Shs 395.2 Billion for the Uganda Police Force for the financial year 2014/2015. Ugandans therefore expect the police force to act professionally.

Ugandans are concerned and therefore demand the following:
    1. A full and public apology from the Inspector General of Police be issued for this mistreatment of Ugandans at the hands of the Uganda Police Force in uniform.
    2. The IGP and the Ministry Of Internal Affairs ensure the police desist from humiliating those exercising the right to political participation. This is important in order to give a levelled playing ground to ensure peaceful 2016 elections. Therefore, so far the Uganda police have failed Ugandans by openly taking sides. The IGP should prevail over the errant police officers to restore true patriotism, discipline and professionalism as it is expected from Uganda Police under Article 212 of the Constitution.
    3. The IGP must ensure that the police officers who perpetrated this hideous crime are taken through a fair, transparent disciplinary process and punished accordingly. This despicable act by those entrusted to protect Ugandans should not go unpunished.
    4. That concrete steps be taken by the IGP to get redress and compensation for victims of such violence especially the lady who has been humiliated as well as private abuse of Ugandans peacefully exercising the right to civic participation in politics.
    5. Members of Parliament must revise laws like the Public Order Management Act that could be having loopholes that the police is exploiting to violate the rights of the people of Uganda.
    6. Uganda Human Rights Commission urgently investigates and prosecutes this human rights violation perpetrated by police and bring the case to a logical and fair conclusion.
    7. With elections coming up, it is especially important that Ugandans be assured that the police will conduct themselves professionally throughout this election period. 
    8. The Uganda police must treat every Ugandan, woman or man with dignity and respect. 

The general activities that took place on that day - I would not like to go into details because the Leader of the Opposition has covered it fairly well, but I would like to ask the following questions on behalf of Ugandans:
    1. Uganda is one of the countries applauded all over the world for having a gender friendly Constitution and laws. What is driving the police force to attack women and expose their bodies in public to take advantage of the special nature of women as a weapon against them?
    2. Ugandans are asking, how many incidences of police brutality against women have been recorded since 2000 and how many of these crimes have been punished?
    3. Who gives orders from above that the police keep quoting “Orders from above”, who is this above?
    4. Who is responsible for disciplining that person, who is “above”?
    5. As this country nears the 2016 general elections, how should we stop police interference in politics?

Madam Speaker, this country is aware of criminal activities of the Crime Preventers, Kalangala Action Plan, Kiboko Squad and other militias. May the soul of Gen Aronda rest in peace because he had promised Ugandans that these militias will never be allowed to involve themselves in politics? At last our son died before he implemented this. It is unfortunate that he died at this very time when we needed him most. However, who is responsible for the crimes that these people are committing all over the country and being reported in the media every other day?

Ugandans are asking who is responsible for compensating victims of police brutality. Do they expect this Parliament to appropriate funds to pay for the crimes that they commit? Ugandans are asking, could there be substance abuse in the police force or could there be persons within the police force promoting pornography; that is why the women’s legs are always being torn apart for the public to see?

THE SPEAKER: Please try to conclude. 

MS OGWAL: I am concluding; may we know what is motivating police to do all this against women? Ugandans have been subjected to tear gas, pepper spray, unlawful arrests, and detention without trial; who will take responsibility of this wrong being done by the police? Madam Speaker, concerned Ugandans demand answers to these questions. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery we have teachers and pupils of Achievers Pride Education Centre; they are represented by hon. Sseggona and hon. Seninde. They are from Wakiso District, you are welcome. (Applause) 

1.29
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga South Division Kampala): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of public importance about the planned visit of His Holiness the Pope to Uganda. I would like to thank you for the wise words of greetings you have already stated regarding the same function.

The leader of the Catholic Church who is also the head of the Vatican State, His Holiness the Pope Francis intends to visit Uganda at the end of November which is a highly celebrated blessing for the nation of Uganda. It goes without saying that where you talk about the pope, you are talking about peace and respect for freedom all over the world. You all know the wonders the Pope has already performed in regard to the coalition of reconciliation between the United States of American and Juba.

Aware of those facts, many of which exceed what I am able to say now, I would like to propose that the Government of Uganda persuades His Holiness the Pope to find time in respect of the tabulate history Uganda has gone through for the Pope to address the representatives of the people of Uganda; this Parliament; even if it means talking for 10 minutes. It will be a great honour for us under your Chair to host the Pope. If we were able to host her majesty Queen Elizabeth of England, why not to host the Pope when you are still in the Chair before we close the chapter of the Ninth Parliament?

I would like to think that Parliament would be honoured and the Ninth Parliament to host His Holiness the Pope and he blesses it aware of the many challenges we are going through from now onwards. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

1.31
DR JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Madam Speaker, mine is a matter of livelihood. However, before I put that, we who believe in God humbly do believe the body of any human being is a temple of God, regardless of whether it is a man or woman. Therefore, when that body is mishandled, it is the temple of God being mishandled. We really condemn it and see it as a work of the devil.

Madam Speaker, in my district and constituency we experienced strong hail storms followed by heavy precipitation of hail storms. These caused severe damages in my area of Otuke, especially in the sub counties of Adwari and Okwang. Houses were destroyed, food crops were damaged, peas, beans and sorghum among others. Also cash crops which the area depends upon include rice and cotton - they were also severely damaged and we in that area are living in fear of food shortage and we are going to experience famine.

With regards to cash crops, we are not going to have any good harvest and our fear is that most of the parents depend on these cash crops to pay school fees. Next year, we already foresee that many students in my area will not be able to go to school because parents will not afford school fees.

A number of families also lost lives stocks due to this calamity and our people are in distress. What is surprising is this disaster has never been reported in the press. Secondly, the local government is aware of it and no government assessment has been done in the area. Therefore, my prayer is as follows:
First, I call upon the Prime Minister and Minister of Disaster and Preparedness to send a team to assess the damage which has been caused in the area.

Secondly, we ask the same arm of Government to supply the area with emergency relief, food and other items.

Thirdly, we pray that my area be provided with seeds ahead of time so that my people can have seeds for next year’s farming.

Fourthly, a group of farmers had already borrowed money from Centenary Bank and they had done some farming, large expanses of rice farming and they have lost all the crops. Therefore, I ask the government to intervene and help my people if they can waive off these loans or they can have some financial assistance given to this group. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. A number of issues were raised by the Leader of the Opposition and the Whip; if the Prime Minister could say something so that we know how to move.

1.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A number of issues have been raised and I will make few comments on them. 

I will start with what the Leader of the Opposition and Opposition Chief Whip have raised about the unfortunate incident which many of us witnessed on television and print media on Masaka-Mbarara Road. 
It is unfortunate and the Minister of State for Internal Affairs will be shortly making a statement on that subject matter and outlining the measures that Government is putting in place. So I pass it to us that this is not one way traffic, we have had similar and unfortunate incidences where our compatriots have had sometimes their lives lost and among those who have lost their lives have been security officers.

I would like the same energy that has articulated these points to be similarly employed when we have an unfortunate situation where the security personnel on duty have similar situation.

Secondly, Government deeply values the lives of all Ugandans, be it civilians or men and women in uniform and really the drive of our country and this august House should be to ensure that the lives of all Ugandans is both respected and protected. Government is going to investigate this incident, its roots, what brought it up and how to prevent occurrence of such unfortunate situations in future.

Issues have been raised about the operationalization of the Public Order Management Act; I think this is a good point that we could look at and see if there is a difference between the interpretation or operationalisation of the law. 

A few other points have been raised Madam Speaker, Ndungu Ken-Lukyamuzi has raised an issue of the coming visit of His Holiness the Pope to our country. I share his view that this is a great honour for our country and really the fact that the Pope is going to visit Uganda for the third time in recent times, is historic and a great honour.

Arrangements are being made to receive His Holiness the Pope spearheaded and led by the church. The Pope is coming to Uganda primarily on a pastoral visit and his main pre-occupation will be talking to people and visiting the shrines at Munyonyo where some martyrs were murdered and also at Namugongo. His Holiness the Pope will also meet the youth at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds.

Ndugu Ken-Lukyamuzi is not extremely young but I think that he would qualify to be able to go to Kololo and other celebrated places of worship. The main point that I am making is that the Pope is coming on a pastoral visit and his programme is already in place and from the information that we have received from Rome, his programme is the final programme.

On the issue raised by Rev. Jacinto Ogwal – I am sorry about the hailstorm and the damage to property and crops. The government will send a fact finding mission with a view of coming to the aid of the Wanaichi. Some of the issues that you have raised may not be tenable but Government will be able to do what it can do.

In addition to providing some food, there will be special attention on agricultural inputs especially seeds and seedlings to the Wanaichi so that they can recover as quickly as possible from this hailstorm. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you honourable members. On the other statement, let us wait for the Minister for Internal Affairs to bring his statement so that we can debate them together. In the meantime, let us go to the other main business of the day.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have the pleasure to announce the return of our colleague, hon. Sam Kutesa whom I had given leave so that he could go and do work for Uganda as President of the UN General Assembly. We welcome you very warmly.

1.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by members of the Cabinet and one of the back benchers. So we want justification for your Bill. You need to tell us why you want to amend our law.

1.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to congratulate hon. Sam Kutesa who has done a good job in New York and completed his term of office. I congratulate you and Uganda for the work that we have done as a country through him.

We passed the Public Finance Management Act last year and I must say that this Act is one of the best pieces of legislation that we have done as the Ninth Parliament. 

We, through this Act, restored financial discipline in the operations of Government. While we were implementing this Act, we met some few challenges which we think that the amendment of this Act will address. The objective of this Bill is to provide for the preparation of the Budget Framework Paper by sectors.

We do handle the Budget Framework Paper by sectors but in the Act, we provided for the individual vote to prepare the Budget Framework Paper, which is actually not the practice on the ground.

We also want to repeal the provision on requirement to represent a certificate satisfying that the policy statements of the vote are gender and equity responsive. 

One of the reasons that we are advancing this is that we have over 130 votes as Government and we think that for the commission to satisfy each vote and be able to allow Government to present the budget in time is a little bit complicated –(Interjections)- and indeed cumbersome.

The Bill also provides the need to vary from one vote to another by a certain percentage through the practice that we have seen. The objective of the Bill is to provide for further financing by supplementary estimates and provide for guarantees and advances by the Bank of Uganda.

When we passed this law, Parliament assumed that on the first day of the financial year, we will have enough resources in our coffers to start spending. But on the 1st July this year as Government, we were actually stuck and could not get the resources to start the operations of Government. 

This amendment will allow us and the future budget implementation to have resources in time to start the implementation of the budget in time. Otherwise, the way we stand on the 1st of July, the current Act assumes that Government will have the money in the coffers to start implementing, when actually it is not the case.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the Bill was referred to the committee which has looked at it and made some recommendations. We had a great debate with the committee members and we built a common ground on a number of issues. I think that with your permission, the chairperson of the committee can come and present the report. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much. I have a procedural issue. When we were working on this Public Finance Act, we worked very hard together with hon. Bahati when he was still a back bencher. Hon. Bahati said that the law that we were going to make would help this country for many years to come.

Now the procedural issue that I am raising is that at the time we were making the law, hon. Bahati was not the minister in the finance ministry. Was he “tying” the hands of the people in the ministry at that time until he got there and they are released so that he can have the free will to grab public resources - because at that time, he wanted to block them and now that he is there, he wants them to be released?

So Madam Speaker, is hon. Bahati procedurally right to come and amend a law that he passed not more than eight months ago when he was a back bencher? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, I do not have the text or Hansard of your committee and therefore do not know who said what in your committee.  Let us have the chairman of the committee report. 

As the chairman comes, I want you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Iganga Municipality Primary School. Can you please stand up? There they are and they are represented by hon. Peter Mugema and hon. Olivia Kwagala. You are welcome.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have in my possession a letter from a law firm cautioning us that the Bill we are debating is a matter that is already in court. The hearing has started and Government has responded.

From past practices and your previous rulings, wouldn’t this matter be sub judice if we continue to debate it in this House?

Madam Speaker, this letter was addressed to you and it was delivered today. Most likely, you have not seen it yet and if that is the case, I am just informing the House that it exists. I wish to lay on the Table the two documents: the letter and the response from Government. The letter is dated 14 October 2015. I can read it if you want. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not received that letter but I also think that institutions should be allowed to work. If you had served me with an injunction, I would not even call this House but there is no injunction. Therefore, let us do our work and the court will also do its work. Chairman, please report.

1.52
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Ssebunya Kasule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This Bill was sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we expedited the work – [Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi: “Procedure, Madam Speaker”]

THE SPEAKER: Please take your seat, the chairman is reporting. Listen to the chairman first.

MR SSEBUNYA: This is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Public Finance (Amendment) Bill.

Madam Speaker, I lay on the Table the report and the minutes of the committee meetings.

Madam Speaker, as I said, we expedited this work as you ordered and within two days, we had finalised with the report. The report reads as follows: The Public Finance (Amendment) Bill was read for the first time on 30 September and in accordance with rules 118 and 147(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, it was referred to the committee.

The objects of the Bill have been read by the minister. We in the committee met the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Civil Society Coalition on the Budget, the Equal Opportunities Commission and I think their CEO is seated on the side bench. We also received letters from the IMF, World Bank and European Union.

Committee observations:

Clause 1: Amendment of section 9 of the Budget Framework Paper 

Clause 1 seeks to amend section 9 to make provisions for the sector-wide budget preparations by substituting for the requirement of each accounting officer to prepare a budget framework paper for each vote. The minister submitted that the sector-wide approach is the current practice. 

The committee observes that:
    1. Section 9(1) intends to identify the person responsible for effecting the provision. The proposed amendment does not create any person responsible. In any case, section 9 actually allows for the sector-wide approach. That is, each accounting officer shall, in consultation with the relevant stakeholder, prepare a budget framework paper for the vote.
    2. If sectors operationally work as a group, that fact should not relieve each accounting officer of his or her responsibility to be personally liable for the vote. 

Recommendation: Clause 1 should be deleted.

Clause 2: Amendment of section 13; annual budget and policy statement

Clause 2(a) seeks to emphasise the linkage between the Budget Framework Paper and the policy statement. The minister submitted that the Public Finance Management Act has no provision for the sector-wide to budget management and the linkage between the Budget Framework Papers and the policy statement.

The committee disagrees with that submission and notes that section 13(6) provides that the annual budget shall be consistent with the National Development Plan, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Framework Paper. 

Therefore, it goes without saying that the requirement covers the import of the proposed amendments, which ideally means that the policy statements must be aligned to the Budget Framework Paper and the National Development Plan, among others.

The committee proposes that 2(a) be deleted.

Clause 2(b) seeks to repeal the provision on the requirement for Certificate of Gender and Equity certifying that the policy statement is gender and equity responsive. The minister submitted that the requirement for the certificate of compliance with gender and equity responsiveness for every policy statement to over 300 entities is allegedly not practical and delays the submission of the policy statements to Parliament.

The Equal Opportunities Commission, which is the technical department of the government responsible for advising the minister on the issuance of the certificate and is mandated under the Constitution and the Act to ensure that issues of gender and equity are mainstreamed in the National Development Plan, national planning and budgeting submitted that:

    1. the proposal defeats the spirit of consistency. The policy statements are a combination of planning and budgeting and hence match the Budget Framework paper with the sectoral budgets. If gender and equity is subjected to only the Budget Framework Paper and the annual Budget but not the policy statements, which is the implementing tool, this will promote non-enforcement of the law;
    2. it further negates the spirit of affirmative action because inclusion in access to services will not be realised by marginalised groups;
    3. repealing the proposal will promote non-compliance with gender and equity concerns during planning, budgeting, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the development entities, programmes or projects within all government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments;
    4. the proposed amendments undermine Article 32(3) of the Constitution and sections 14 and 15 of EOC Act and several other laws;
    5. at the United Nations, world leaders adopted this as the agenda for the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals and all this goes to emphasise equity and inclusiveness. Rt hon. Sam Kuteesa is just back from that session.
    6. That the ministerial policy statements shall handle more than one vote. It is possible for any one of the votes to be gender and equity compliant and not others. In that case, does that ministerial policy statement pass for the Gender and Equity Compliance Certificate?

The proposed amendment has implications on weakening the law, the Equal Opportunities Commission mandate and the spirit of gender and equity inclusion in national development. It was extensively discussed and, therefore, clause 2(b) is recommended to be deleted by the committee.

THE SPEAKER: I think you should have read your conclusion as a committee as it is important for the record.

MR SSEBUNYA: The committee entirely agrees with the commission and finds no merit in the proposed amendment as well as the ministerial justifications. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Clause 3: Amendment of section 17; expiry of appropriation 

The proposed amendment is intended to amend section 17 to allow votes with unspent balances to repay the monies into the Consolidated Fund by 31st July, departing from the current practice where a vote that does not expend money that was appropriated to the vote for the financial year, “It shall, at the close of the financial year, repay the money to the Consolidated Fund.”

Furthermore, the provision seeks to mandate the Secretary to the Treasury to allow votes to retain unspent balances after the close of the financial year for an extra three months that is to 31 October.

The minister submitted that this is required to allow for orderly closure of the financial year by providing for some extension for settlement of outstanding payments and obligations.

The committee made the following observations:
    a) The extension of time will offend the spirit of section 17(1) which provides that every appropriation by Parliament expires and ceases to have any effect at the close of the financial year and encourages inefficiencies in planning. However, the committee agrees that the local governments still face absorption challenges. Therefore, the exception should only apply to local governments.
    b) Four months is too long but two months would be ideal. 

Recommendations: 

(a) Section 17 should be amended to allow only for local governments to retain monies up to 31st August; that is two months and with the approval by the Secretary to the Treasury. (b) That the minister should also report to Parliament after two months whenever the Secretary to the Treasury exercises such proposed powers.

Clause 4: Amendment to section 20; re-allocation of funds from one vote to another

Section 20 provides that, “Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the minister to re-allocate funds from a vote to another vote where functions of a vote are transferred to that other vote.” 

Clause 4 seeks to remove the requirement for approval of Parliament in cases where there is need for reallocation from a vote to another vote where the functions of a vote are transferred to another vote or where a vote is assigned addition functions. It is therefore proposed that this re-allocation would be funded through supplementary budget. 

The minister submitted that the proposal is intended to provide a consistent procedure for supplementary budgets where re-allocations are necessary between votes. 

The committee disagrees with the submission and observes that:
    1. Section 25(6) provides that Parliament can only approve a supplementary budget where the supplementary expenditure is unabsorbable, unavoidable and unforeseeable. It is therefore irregular for this type of re-allocation to be financed through the supplementary budget. The appropriation role of Parliament should not be usurped. The recommendation is that clause 4 be deleted.

Clause 5: Amendment of section 22 on the subject of virement 

The proposed amendment seeks to allow room for flexibility during the Budget execution by providing for virement up to 10 per cent of the vote rather than the 10 per cent of the budget item and further seeks to delete the minister’s powers to vire to the Secretary to the Treasury.

The minister submitted that: 
    1. The proposal is intended to delete the ministerial powers to the Secretary of Treasury because this is an operational activity that would bog down the minister.
    2. The limit for re-allocation within a vote to 10 per cent of each item or activity is cumbersome to administer and makes it difficult for accounting officers to reorganise their resources when faced with challenges during Budget execution. This gravely impacts on service delivery. 

The committee agrees with the minister’s proposal.

Recommendation: 

This clause be passed.

Clause 6: Amendment of section 25; supplementary expenditure 

Clause 6 seeks to allow Government to finance supplementary expenditure over and beyond the allocation in the contingencies fund by repealing section 25(2) which provides as follows: “(2) For the purposes of Article 156(2)(b) of the Constitution, the total sum of monies that may be expended by Government for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for a purpose for which no money was appropriated by the Appropriation Act shall not exceed the total of the money appropriated in the contingencies fund.”

The minister submitted that: 
    1. The Act has no clear mechanism of financing supplementary budgets in cases where the contingencies fund is depleted or unfunded.
    2. The proposal would provide alternative financing for supplementary budgets through budget adjustments where contingencies fund is underfunded by parliamentary appropriation.

The committee makes the following observations:

    1. It agrees with the proposed amendment for subsection (1) in as far as it mirrors the constitutional provisions in Article 152.
    2. However, the committee takes exception to proposed appeal of sub section (2). Sub section (2) provides a capping on the discretion given in sub section (1) on how much can be spent in excess of the Budget. Where money appropriated to the contingencies funds has been depleted, section 26(3) of the Act provides as follows: “(3)The contingencies fund shall form part of the annual budget and Parliament may, in addition to the amount under sub section (1), appropriate such other monies as it may deem necessary.”

Therefore, the committee recommends that clause 6 (b) and (c) be deleted. The committee only allows for the first amendment. 

Clause 7: Amendment of section 36, authority to raise loans

The proposal seeks to provide for temporary advance by Bank of Uganda to Government and local governments without parliamentary approval if the advance does not extend beyond the financial year.

The minister submitted that: 
    1. Provision for temporary advance by Bank of Uganda to Government without parliamentary approval is to mitigate short term fluctuations in revenue collection.
    2. It is a normal global practice and the advance would be paid within the financial year.
    3. Currently, section 82(1)(b) of the Act does not allow Bank of Uganda to make such advances.

The committee agrees with the above submission in as far as it seeks to easy the operational challenges highlighted above. However, the committee recommends that section 33 of the Bank of Uganda Act allows temporary advances only if the total amount of advances made under shall not, at any time, exceed 18 per cent of the recurrent revenue of Government. 

This is the import of the committee’s recommendation to clause 8. With that import of capping the 18 per cent and not exceeding that financial year from which the advance is made, the committee recommends that the clause may be passed by Parliament.

Clause 8: Amendment of section 82; amendment of Bank of Uganda Act

The proposal seeks to effect the proposed amendment in clause 7. The committee agrees with the above submission in as far as it seeks to ease the operational challenges highlighted above. 

However, the committee notes that section 33(3) of the Bank of Uganda Act allows temporary advances only if the total amount of the advances made does not, at any time, exceed 18 per cent of the recurrent revenue of the government.

Recommendation:
Redraft clause 8 to include a percentage restriction on how much can be extended without parliamentary approval in line with section 33(3) of the Bank of Uganda Act.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, I thought I saw something else.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, as we deliberated in the committee, one or two or three members did not agree with one of our recommendations. Therefore, herein is attached a minority report by hon. Ekanya. Thank you.

2.11
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the honourable Chair. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your permission to allow me thank God who saved my life last Friday because I would be history now. I also thank my colleagues and the citizens of Uganda who prayed for me. I have forgiven the people who wanted me dead and I pray that God touches their hearts not to cause death to any other person.

Madam Speaker, in pursuant to Rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I hereby present a dissenting opinion from the opinion of the majority of the members of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Areas of dissent:

Following the first reading of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in Parliament and its subsequent consideration by the committee, I disagreed with the recommendations on clauses 7 and 8 pertaining to raising loan by Government as temporary advance by Bank of Uganda without parliamentary approval.

Dissenting observation

The Public Finance Management Act, under section 36(5), permitted Government to raise loans without parliamentary approval for issuance of securities and management of monetary policy as provided in section 36(2)(b). 

However, the provision on issuance of securities requires Parliament to determine terms and conditions as provided for in Article 159(3)(a) of the Constitution. Presently, the terms and conditions are inexistent.

It is on this basis that Parliament need not widen further grounds of raising loans without parliamentary approval. This is to avoid abuse of public funds as was envisaged in the purchase of jets over Shs 2 trillion and compensation to Basajjabalaba over Shs 142 billion when funds were dispensed from Bank of Uganda without parliamentary approval. Such scenarios have led to Bank of Uganda being impaired leading to recent capitalisation on 29 May 2015 with Shs 860 billion.

Presently, due to fluctuations in exchange rates, the ability of Bank of Uganda to lend to Government has been weakened by the depreciating Uganda Shilling and appreciation of foreign currencies.

It is therefore important that Parliament regulates and approves loans as provided for in Article 159(2) and (3) so as to prevent incapacitation of Bank of Uganda.

More so, Bank of Uganda is an independent institution that cannot be directed on how to conduct its operations. Article 162(2) of the Constitution stipulates that, “In performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall conform to the Constitution but shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.” In this case “authority” means Parliament.

By amending Sections 36(5) and 82(1)(b), in effect Bank of Uganda would be directed to grant Government temporary advance, which is a loan as defined in the Constitution. This would tantamount to violation of Article 162(2) of the Constitution. Therefore, to proceed to amend the Bank of Uganda Act without amending the Constitution would be null and void.

Article 159(7) defines a loan to include any money lent or given to or by the Government on condition of repayment. Therefore, because temporary advance will be repaid, it is a loan. That is the definition of a loan and any other form of borrowing or lending. Therefore, temporary advances are loans that need parliamentary approval.

It is imperative to emphasise that provisions under sections 36 and 82 of the Public Finance Management Act be maintained as intact as they are.

Recommendation

Delete clauses 7 and 8 of the Public Finance (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act is an excellent piece of legislation that is intertwined and the amendment of one clause would indirectly affect it entirely. The Act did provide for controls that were geared at addressing Government budget indiscipline.

Unfortunately, the proposed amendments seem geared towards reversing to create conditions for fostering budget indiscipline. Therefore, it is prudent to allow the law that took three years to formulate to take ground in fostering proper management of public resources.

Finally, the framers of the Constitution envisaged that Parliament needs to perform its mandate any time and did not create a vacuum for non-existence of Parliament. In this case, what do I mean?

Madam Speaker, you know that the Parliament of Uganda does not expire. We can be called even over the weekend or at midnight and we can be here. Colleagues, never surrender the power of the purse; you will have surrendered yourselves forever. Hence, whether need arises, as has been occasioned, Parliament can be convened at any time and we shall be here to approve the money that the government needs.

I would like to beg you that once you surrender this one, you will have surrendered everything, including the first call as we discussed. I remind you and I beg to rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The main report was signed by the necessary one-thirds of the members and the minority report has three members. Let us hear the views of the other members of the House.

2.18
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I will go straight to the clause that the minister proposes to amend regarding the Gender and Equity Certificate.

In my view, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is responsible for planning and planning means addressing social injustices. Planning means addressing inequities and the only way to do that is through the budget. The budget is the source of reorganisation in society.

Therefore, when the Minister in charge of Finance, particularly planning, comes up with this proposal to remove what we advocated for, I think it is the greatest contradiction. When then do you plan for the marginalised? When do you plan for the inequities that we have in society? 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with what the committee has proposed here that this proposal is a bit ambiguous and not in line with the principle of gender equality and the principle of equity in our nation. 

To that effect, I stand to second the committee’s proposal that we delete that particular proposal. 

Madam Speaker, the second issue that I would like to address is about loans. This issue has perturbed us for a long time. The requirement for us here, as Members of Parliament, is to represent Ugandans. Therefore, when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes with such a proposal, which Parliament has resisted for some time - these loans are not only going to be paid by us who are living but also it is a generational issue.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need to be cautious about this proposal. Personally, I think it is a bit worrying because almost all the important proposals that we advocated for as Parliament are coming back for amendment and I think there is a problem there, particularly on those areas where our power as Parliament is being fettered. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to second the committee’s report that the Certificate on Gender Equity and Gender Equality should be maintained. That is a principle in our Constitution and that change requires us to amend the Constitution. This is the greatest achievement that we have as a country and as a Parliament in terms of advancing gender equity. 

I would also like to maintain that our role in allowing borrowing by Government in the way that the minority report has explained is very clear and perhaps, we need to rethink that area before we amend these proposals. However, the others are okay. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.21
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the committee report and particularly on some observations made on this amendment Bill.

Madam Speaker, I would like to re-echo your words during the last time that we were amending the Public Finance Management Bill. You said that we had the Budget Act, which lasted for long and which helped the government to improve its efficiency in managing public funds. You went ahead to say that the Budget Act could be amended where we see gaps. 

This has become true when you look at the sections brought for amendment as they agree with what you said before. For instance, in clause 6 which they have brought to amend section 25; substitution of Supplementary Appropriation Bill, in the old law; the Budget Act, Parliament had powers to allocate and appropriate vote by vote. However, the new amendment does not give powers to scrutinise vote by vote. This means it is a very good management process for accountability when Parliament scrutinises the figures, which are going to be submitted. It even helps Parliament to play its oversight functions, which this new Public Finance Management Act is trying to overrule.

When you look at 4(a), which they are bringing, it says the supplementary budget shall be financed by reallocation of the funds of the annual Budget without the approval of Parliament. However, the old law says that Parliament’s role of oversight, as mandated in the Constitution, is to look at monies and scrutinise them. 

Therefore, we have to be serious. As Parliament, we must be part of the process of the Budget. As we play our oversight function, we must also internalise what the government brings. We have the oversight role to know what we have passed.

With those few remarks, my observation is that I will bring an amendment on Section 6(a), (c) and (b) to go back to the old law of the Budget Act, which does not bring any encumbrances but gives powers to Parliament to scrutinise the funds that we pass and that are submitted to other sectors. Thank you very much.

2.25
MS SAFIA NALULE JUUKO (NRM, Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise up to support the recommendation of the committee to retain the requirement of the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. 

Madam Speaker, the genesis of this requirement came from the Constitution: Article 32 and other constitutional requirements of equitable development.

We have practiced affirmative action for 20 to 30 years and I understand that we have achieved a lot. However, the only way we can sustain these achievements is to get the issues of all Ugandans, especially the marginalised groups, into the annual Budget of this country.

Madam Speaker, the ministry is giving reasons that if they have to scrutinise each and every report for gender and equity compliance, it would take them a long time and it would delay the laying of the Budget to Parliament. However, I do not agree with this. 

In the last Parliament, there was a time when the ministries delayed to bring their ministerial policy statements here even without that requirement of producing a Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. We have not yet tested the effectiveness of this requirement because it is only this year when the certificate was laid. Why? 

I know that technical people must also be able to think about technical solutions to problems. The ministry has already developed guidelines to ensure gender and equity compliance. If I was a technical person, I would just develop a gender and equity checklist and I would crosscheck with it as I develop the Budget. At the end of the day, I would be able to produce a Budget at the same time that I produce the certificate.

Madam Speaker, global standards state that there will be no effective planning and budgeting when you leave out issues of some sections of the society. Therefore, I would like to again support the position of the committee to retain the requirements for the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance.

2.28
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for both reports. 

Madam Speaker, with the coming into force of a new legal regime in public finance management, it was not going to be business as usual. What seems to be the case is that many of our colleagues managing public finances are having problems in adapting to the new legal regime. Therefore, they are seeking to do away with the entire law. That is the effect of these proposals that they are seeking and this is quite unfortunate.

My view is that our colleagues managing public finances should adapt to the new regime because that was the intention. We had a history of recklessness and inefficiencies in managing public finance and we came up with this new law.

It is just a couple of months later and you are running to Parliament saying, change this and that. I think you have failed to realise that, that is what we intended. 

Secondly, there are two issues of constitutional implication: One, the right of Parliament to appropriate is constitutional. As Parliament, we have no authority to give away this right. In fact, in the recent case which affected some of our colleagues here and maybe those in the next Parliament, the Constitutional Court felt that Parliament has no right to give out its powers, which have been enshrined in the Constitution. If we pass these amendments, as are being proposed, we will be giving out some of our right to appropriate, which will certainly be unconstitutional.  

Two, when you look at the proposal in clause 9 about advances, advances have been clearly defined by the law and they mean a loan. It is the Constitution that governs acquiring of loans by Government and under Article 159(2), you cannot borrow money without the approval of Parliament. 

What does the Bill seek, Madam Speaker? It seeks for Government to borrow from Bank of Uganda, baptising it as an advance, without the approval of Parliament. That is clearly unconstitutional. This Bill is seeking to amend Article 159(2) that you can actually go, seek an advance and borrow without the approval of Parliament. This is illegal. We have very good legal officers on the other side and they should have advised Government that what it is seeking to do is clearly unconstitutional.  

Therefore, my well thought out view is that clause 8 is clearly unconstitutional. I do not know whether the committee had addressed itself to the constitutionality of clauses 8 and 4. Obviously, the issue about appropriation that we can now allow Government to appropriate money to be paid in a period that is not beyond the end of the financial year is clearly unconstitutional. 

Madam Speaker, I do not agree with the committee when they say in clause 5 that the local governments can retain part of the resources for two months. That is wrong and I will give you an example. For three years, I was privileged to be the Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee. My fellow colleagues and I went from district to district physically inspecting their books of accounts. 

One of the biggest challenges we had with these local governments was that they are inefficient and in most cases, they had not even utilised the resources as the committee points out on the part of local governments. 

To now get the more inefficient ones and give them leeway makes matters worse. The reasons you have given for the central government will cripple the local governments much more than what you are thinking. Therefore, I do not think it is correct for us. We should be working towards an efficient local government where resources have been allocated and utilised in time.  

Honourable colleagues, the biggest problem this country has is service delivery at local government level. Our people are not getting services in time. As of now, instead of us trying to see how we can utilise these resources very fast and in time, we are giving these inefficient and corrupt civil servants at local government level leeway to continue retaining public funds beyond a financial year. It does not make economic sense neither does it make common sense. 

Madam Speaker, I would propose that we have a statement from the Attorney-General about the issues, which I have raised. A well written out statement should be issued about the conflicts of this Bill and powers of appropriation of Parliament. He should read the recent Constitutional Court decision and he should also explain to this House if we have powers to amend the Constitution indirectly by introducing, in clause 8, a provision which gives Government powers to borrow without the approval of Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.35
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the committee position in as far as amendment of Section 9 is concerned about the appointment of an accounting officer. 

Madam Speaker, when you read Article 164, it gives that function to a permanent secretary or an accounting officer to be accountable for funds appropriated. Therefore, to take away those powers without necessarily amending Article 164 would mean that we are indirectly amending Article 164. 

I think that would be some of the issues that the Attorney-General must advise the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about. Article 164 says that the permanent secretary or the accounting officer is accountable for funds appropriated. It goes ahead to say that if an accounting officer left office, he or she would still be accountable for the funds.

Therefore, you cannot take away that responsibility from an individual to a sector and leave it as a general responsibility. I would like to support the committee. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the submission of hon. Katuntu in as far as amendment of Section 36 is concerned. When it comes to the reallocation, we have a problem in that when you go to every ministry, there is mischarge and diversion of funds. 

What is happening is that whereas the budgeting process takes into account the objectives of the entity, the mischarge alone undermines the objectives of that entity. Therefore, if we authorise virement through the Secretary to the Treasury, that is going to further affect the objectives of the entities. 

On that note, I would like to differ from the committee that even if the law does not allow virement, if you look at the Auditor-General’s most recent report, there was mischarge of over Shs 250 billion across the board. This means that even if you do not allow it, the technocrats are diverting money from the planned activities of an entity to where they want it without the law. 

Therefore, if you are going to allow virement within the entity, it is going to make the audit trail very difficult. I would like to submit that we should object to this because if need has arisen for any activity and you are raising a supplementary, the contingency fund should take in all those activities. 

That is why you realise that even when we appropriate money as Parliament, at times the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not release money to some sectors. When you ask them, they tell you that there were no collections. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should know that to achieve the objectives of the various sectors, they should receive all the money as appropriated. 

Having failed to do that in the past, it is not that the virement issue is what has been failing their operations. I challenge the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to rise up and dispute the fact that in every financial year, we have a mischarge of over Shs 250 billion.

Therefore, I would like to say that I partially support the committee recommendations regarding the other issues save for Sections 9 and 36. I beg to move.   

2.39
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the committee report in respect to maintaining, in the Principal Act, the Gender and Equity Certificate.  

I would like to thank the committee for the recommendation to maintain and retain that and I hope that the minister will concede because he has noticed that the majority of this House agrees with that position for all the reasons articulated in the committee report. 

Most importantly, we have just concluded the SDGs and all the SDG goals talk about gender mainstreaming, equity and inclusion. I therefore think that it would be a regression if we were to go back to that. I have also seen the Minister of Defence seriously supporting me there. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a few concerns. Hon. Katuntu has raised the issue of constitutionality of some of these amendments. When I look at amendment 3 in respect to Section 17, I think that constitutionally, the role of the Auditor-General is clearly spelt out in the Constitution. The Auditor-General is supposed to audit books of accounts for the end of the financial year of that account. 

If you now bring an amendment to extend spending of money beyond the financial year and you have not amended the constitutional provision, which gives the Auditor-General the authority to audit books of accounts for the end of the financial year, how will this affect the constitutionality of this amendment? 

In addition to what hon. Katuntu has stated, I think this particular aspect also violates the Constitution in respect to the role of the Attorney-General. Although the committee makes good arguments in respect to local governments, we all know that most of the issues around local governments are not about the law. Rather, they have to do with the inefficiency of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in releasing the money late to local governments.

Therefore, even if you amend this law and the ministry still releases money late, they will not absorb that money at the end of two months. Maybe you should have stated that these monies should be pegged to committed funds at the local government level as that would be more prudent. 

However, you still have to address the issue of constitutionality of the role of the Auditor-General auditing at the end of the financial year.

Madam Speaker, if you look at the aspects in section 20; amendment 4, it is generally dealing with issues that are foreseeable. This still brings us to prudence in financial management. If you want to re-allocate within the same sector, we have given you enough time to set priorities within your sector. You are now trying to tell this House that you do not know how to do your work as technical people.

Therefore, this amendment is related to foreseeable issues that are not permitted under the Finance Act in regard to supplementaries. I would therefore think that most of these amendments are much more to do with how technical staff are performing their duties rather than the legal aspect. We should actually ask them why they are not being efficient in doing their work. 

Lastly, on the issue of loans to be raised by Government as a temporary advance by the Bank of Uganda, I think the reason why we envisaged both in the Constitution and in other Financial Acts that Parliament should scrutinise loans, is that oversight principle. The oversight role of Parliament is a cardinal pillar of parliamentary democracy and it is one of the pillars of the roles of Parliament, which is to oversee the Executive, to oversee the excesses of the Executive and to check the prudent financial management of the Executive. If this is now taken away from Parliament, I do not know what other prudence we shall be doing as a Parliament if we also concede this role.

I would like to appeal to the Executive to concede on this matter because you have seen how active we have been. Recently, we were called back and within three days, we passed the Presidential Elections Act, the Parliamentary Elections Act – I do not know why the minister is laughing. I do not know why you are laughing but we have been very active. Why don’t you want to call us back and we scrutinise the loans and you leave this amendment? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.45
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. First of all, I would like to congratulate ourselves as Parliament for passing the Public Finance Act. Barely a year ago, the general talk in the whole country was that there is no money. Wherever you go, people say that these days, there is no money and things are hard.

As an economist, the biggest spender in the Ugandan economy is still the government so the moment the government becomes disciplined with using its money, everyone else in the economy is bound to cry that there is no money.

Therefore, this Public Finance Act, which we have passed here, has brought some degree of discipline in all the other sectors of Government. I have been here for 15 years now and part of the discipline came to Parliament as well. For the first time in 15 years, I have stayed for three months without pay. (Laughter) It is part of the discipline.

Therefore, if we Members of Parliament could sacrifice - We could have changed the laws to favour ourselves but we did not come to amend the Act. We have not been paid for three months yet we have campaigns but we are told that we should wait for the other quarter to get finished before they appropriate in the next quarter. What is wrong with that? That is discipline.

Therefore, if we are going to hurriedly amend this law and allow those permanent secretaries out there to have powers to remove money from building classrooms to go for useless workshops and trips abroad, we would have gone back to where we were at the beginning.

Madam Speaker, this Bill is not sellable. It is not because we have primaries that we are undergoing - we passed a law that any money which is not spent on any vote should go back to the Consolidated Fund. Why did we pass that law? This was because some money was remaining in billions and the technocrats and permanent secretaries were using that money. As Parliament, we came in and said that, “If there is any money that you have not used in a financial year, take it back to the Consolidated Fund.” You are now coming to tell us that except when the Secretary to the Treasury authorises - You are now removing powers from 390 people and giving it to one person who may also have interests in that money. We know these people.

There are some Government departments, which have been requesting for money and the Treasury says that there is no money. They give them money in the last two months of the financial year so that they do not spend it all and it is returned. When that money is returned, you know the people who eat it. Members of Parliament, let us stand our ground. 

Lastly, someone is saying that Government may temporarily borrow money without the approval of Parliament except if the borrowing exceeds one year. This is superfluous. You should instead tell us the amount that Government should not exceed. This is because in one year, I can borrow $ 11 million, which is the equivalent of the national Budget of Uganda. 

You should therefore put a maximum ceiling that if you have an earthquake in Bududa and Parliament cannot be reconvened, which reason we are not even convinced about, Government can go and borrow $ 1 million. Beyond that amount, come to Parliament for approval. Members of Parliament, let us stand our ground. We cannot make this Parliament passive in anything to do with the wallet. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.49
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will partially support the committee report.  Madam Speaker, the issue of retaining the gender requirement certificate is very important. I will request the minister to agree with the committee and with many of us who feel that there was a reason as to why this certificate of gender was also required in regard to financial issues.

Secondly, honourable colleagues, the moment we surrender our powers to another organ, we will be doing a very big disservice to ourselves. If we may recall, in the Eighth Parliament we used to elect our commissioners and we had those powers as Parliament. When you went to Kyankwanzi, I do not know what happened but you surrendered your powers and now we do not know how these commissioners are elected. (Applause) - They are not responsible to you because you are not the ones who elected them; so, you surrendered our powers. If we continue like that, even the other element that we hold onto a lot will be taken away. 

Therefore, honourable members, maybe only those who are convinced beyond reasonable doubt that they are not going to be part of the Tenth Parliament should be the ones going to surrender their powers because they have nothing to protect. However, if you are convinced beyond reasonable doubt that you are coming back, other factors being constant, you must hold tight to your powers; do not surrender your powers.

Madam Speaker, you know that we are very obedient whenever there is anything that necessitates us to come, and this is what we have done today. I do not think there is any argument that someone can convince us with that there are situations where Parliament cannot be here to approve what needs to be approved. However, this is a systematic way of taking our powers deliberately and we cannot afford that. 

Madam Speaker, I will request that as we go to the next elections and as we feel that we are Members of Parliament –(Member timed out.) 

2.53
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Women Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting this report.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the Public Finance Management Act has just come into force. I am really wondering what gap and what challenges have been experienced in its implementation within this very short period of time. I wish the committee had given us some information on the gaps and the challenges being experienced, especially regarding the clauses they have recommended to us for passing. That is my main concern.

However, I would like to also support the recommendation of the committee on extending time only for local governments to retain funds or money after the close of the financial year only for two months, though this should not be automatic. The accounting officers for those local governments should have strong and genuine reasons as to why the money has not been expended and that is when they can be given the time to retain it. Otherwise, it will encourage inefficiency; it will become a routine and it will encourage lack of commitment. Because our local governments still have many challenges, as they try to improve I think we can still give them a longer period than what is being given within this current Act. 

Madam Speaker, those are the only concerns I have. I thank the committee.

2.55
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Women Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I will start with the amendment of section 9, where they what to delete “accounting officer” and substitute it with “sector”. I wonder what logic is behind this; if you want to make a sector accountable, then who is the legal person within the sector? If we are talking about accountability, you cannot make a sector accountable. So, we must leave it to the accounting officer.

In section 17, where we are talking about the expiry of appropriation, I think this is crazy because, honestly, we are breeding inefficiency. This was brought about to guard against inefficiency and ineffectiveness. The local governments we are talking about have plans; they know what they want to expend within a particular year. Why do you want to give them an extension because they are being lazy? I think we should leave this as it is. Let the people work and let the Ministry of Finance give money where it is due and in time so that these people can do their work in time.

Lastly, in section 36 we want to give away our authority as Parliament to approve loans. The justification the committee is giving is that this is for short term loans. I need to be clear about the meaning of “short term”. What is short term? There are some loans that come to us and within three days we process and pass them. So, if you are saying you want to get advances because you need to use money or to borrow money within a short term, can you define to us what you mean by “short term” so that Parliament can still work within the short term that you want us to work within? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Jovah Kamateeka comes up, I would like to welcome pupils and teachers of Naminage Mixed Primary School from Kitayunjwa Sub County of Kamuli District. I represent them together with hon. Kiyingi – (Interjections) – Okay, they are represented by the hon. Asuman Kiyingi and the Speaker. (Laughter) You are welcome.

2.58
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Women Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the committee’s position on retaining the certificate of gender equity. Gender equity is about identifying real needs of men and women, boys and girls and making sure that those needs of these real people are addressed against or as opposed to just providing resources for programmes as a block. With gender equity, we look at specific needs of people and ensure that those needs are addressed. 

The certificate of gender equity, therefore, helps us to cater for and advance the rights of the minorities in our society. That certificate makes us better managers of our resources and so it should be retained. What is required is that we should internalise it, make sure that we operationalise it and then if we find any challenges, we bring them up and amend it to make it better rather than doing away with it.

Madam Speaker, catering for gender equity is what makes our Constitution one of the best. People from all over the world come and benchmark best practices in this Constitution. So, it cannot be us to undo the good work that we have put in place without even putting it to test. I would like to therefore encourage the Ministry of Finance to try and apply this certificate so that we can all work together to ensure we improve the processes as we go along.

I would like to support the fact that local governments should be given or be allowed to retain – (Member timed out)

3.01
MR STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice in thanking the committee for presenting this report. 

This report, however, seems to be rendering a committee of this Parliament jobless - the Committee of Local Government - if we pass the provision amending section 17, allowing local governments to retain funds. Madam Speaker, for the last four years I have been a member of the Committee on Local Government Accounts and we have had situations where local governments retain money and they even do not send it for two or even three years. Even as we talk, in the past three financial years monies have been retained by these people before they were even given permission. How about today when Parliament grants them permission? These funds will be abused. Therefore, I would urge this House not to allow this to happen because it will lead to poor service delivery and it will promote corruption in our local governments.

Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament, like my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, has already said, it is wrong for us to give away our constitutional powers or roles. We should at least have a role in the budgeting process. I kindly beg my colleagues; I support any good intentions of this amendment, but we should retain our powers as Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.03
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three concerns. One is in relation to clause 3. In passing the Public Finance Management Act, Parliament looked at streamlining the performance of Government.

However, we also looked at efficiency within the planning, budgeting and implementing processes of Government. By bringing this amendment to this Floor and considering it and maybe passing, we will breed inefficiency in the departments of Government. In as far as clause 3 is concerned, I do not support it. We must be strict and ensure that government departments do what they are supposed to do.

The other issue is in relation to clause 4. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, Government plans, budgets and there is the process of implementation. If we talk about functions being assigned to other votes and even moving functions from one vote to another, I believe this is a failure in planning and budgeting. We should not allow inefficiency of government officials to be protected by the law. 

The last issue is about getting advances from Bank of Uganda. Madam Speaker, whether it is for a short or long time, it remains a loan. Whether it is to be paid within that financial year, it remains a loan.  So, I would like to request honourable colleagues, as hon. Latif Ssebagala said, not to surrender our powers. Some of us who believe that we shall be here in the next Parliament would like to exercise those powers of approving loans for Government – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. John Ssimbwa, for yielding the Floor. I know the Attorney-General will clarify on this issue from a legal point but I think we should talk about the temporary advance from the central bank. 

I want my colleagues to understand this; when we talk about the temporary advance from the central bank, we are not talking about borrowing money outside the money we have appropriated. All we are saying is that you approved Shs 18 trillion in this House and - Let me give an example of one quarter; if you need Shs 3.5 trillion for that quarter but you find out that URA has only collected Shs 2 trillion for the quarter, all we are saying is that we go to the central bank and get this Shs 1.5 trillion as a temporary advance and it is capped –(Interjections)– Yes, that is what it means! You can say “no” but that is what it means.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Executive will have time of their own; let Members contribute.

MR SSIMBWA: I think I have got the information, honourable minister, but what you are saying is exactly what we are against. We cannot allow Government to go to Bank of Uganda and get the money. What happens if you fail to pay for what you have got as a temporary –(Member timed out.)

MR SIMON ALEPER: Madam Speaker, having listened to most of the Members’ submissions, I would beg for your indulgence, other than us going on with this debate - Hon. Katuntu raised a number of constitutional issues, which I thought if we gave a chance now to the Attorney-General to clarify on, that may redirect our debate. This is because the submissions from most Members are in agreement - We all have common positions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why are you speculating? Allow Members to speak. Do not speculate on what they are going to say.

3.08
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am of the view that if the honourable minister decides to agree with us, he may simply proceed and seek leave of Parliament to withdraw this so that we do not even need to go to committee stage.

Looking at the Bill, from clauses 1 to 8, it completely collapses on the principles of good financial management. Just look at clause 1 on the issue of shifting fiscal responsibility from a legal person called an accounting officer to an unknown institution called a sector; this is not acceptable. It totally contradicts Article 164 of the Constitution. We cannot continue with that.

Look at clause 2, which contradicts the principle which we all uphold of gender and equity responsiveness. We are not going to sit here and agree with you, honourable minister, on this. Look at clause 3 - the principle of appropriation and the fact that the money appropriated by Parliament elapses with a financial year. The minister now wants Parliament to allow an expending entity to stay with the money even beyond the first quarter now to October in the second quarter? This is not acceptable.

Madam Speaker, I do not agree with using local governments as bait. Local governments are not irresponsible; they are simply not spending because the money is released late to them. Correct that anomaly and you will see that we can still remain within the law. 

Look at clause 4 on the issue of the supplementary budget, with the minister wanting us to now circumvent what we agreed on earlier that the supplementary budget is only for the unforeseen. Now you want to shift functions from one department to the other and want to use that for supplementary expenditure. 

Look at clause 5 on the principle of virement; if we agree to give a spending entity up to 10 per cent of its vote for virement, this certainly will be a problem in terms of distortion of their expenditure plans. I do not think Parliament will agree to that.

Look at clause 6, Madam Speaker, on the role of Parliament being reduced to approval of post-mortem expenditures. We refused this but now the minister is finding a way of bringing it back here. We said if there is a problem, you can go to the Contingencies Fund. Now the minister brings a proposal to say, where the funds in the Contingencies Fund are not sufficient then the supplementary budget shall be financed by a reallocation. You make the Contingencies Fund useless! It is not useful at all.

When you look at clause 8, there is total contradiction between paragraphs (1), (2) and (3). In (3) you are telling us that the Bank of Uganda shall not guarantee a payment to any person or make any advance to any person on behalf of Government without prior approval of Parliament but in (2) you contradict that. 

My view is that, honourable minister, you can now seek leave to withdraw this. Really, we do not need to go to committee stage, Madam Speaker.

3.12
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to speak on paragraphs 4.3 and 4.4 - clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill.

Madam Speaker, clause 3 is to do with unspent funds, which have to be returned to the Consolidated Fund. I think there is a very big issue with funds which are not spent and then returned to the Consolidated Fund and we must take this very seriously as Parliament. I have attended several budget presentations but at no presentation have I heard the minister projecting the revenue or the amount of money to be returned to the Consolidated Fund and yet it is supposed to form part of the government revenue. It is not the ordinary collection of government revenue but it forms part of the money, which is available to be spent in the next financial year. 

My question is: who appropriates this money and when it is eventually returned to the Treasury, where does it go? I do not recall any time when we have received a report here that such billions of money was returned to the Consolidated Fund. I do not remember.

Madam Speaker, I would like to declare here that any money that spills over from one financial year to another is bound to be misused. The chances that that money will be misused are so high that everything possible must be done for us to ensure we seriously minimise situations where funds can be kept at the end of the financial year. In fact, except for committed money, we should have no excuses of this type.

Clause 4 seeks to remove the requirement of approval of Parliament in case there is need of reallocation from one vote to another. That brings me to the question: what is the purpose of us sitting here to appropriate money? If we sit here and appropriate money and then after doing whatever we go through here by an Act of Parliament, when it goes out there it is reallocated according to the will and whims of somebody seated at the technical desk, then there is no use of Parliament appropriating money. Probably, we could just surrender the whole function of appropriation of funds.

Madam Speaker, I believe that the committee is right; this clause must be deleted. We should not go with this clause. In clause 3, about the minister reporting to Parliament after two months of the Treasury exercising powers of postponement and so on, we must review this recommendation. It should not stay the way it is here. We are creating room for technocrats to share this money after the end of the financial year. I thank you very much.

3.13
MS ALUM SANTA (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for coming up with this report. 

I really stand to partly support the committee because this Bill is contradicting the Constitution so much. Look at Article 32 of the Constitution, for example; had tried to address the imbalances which are found in gender, race and minorities but his Bill is again coming to undo what the Constitution had done.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the issue of gender and equity, you realise that in the last Bill we had tried to correct this in conformity with the Constitution but now this Bill is saying that we should only look at this in the planning process. What about the implementation, which is very important? At one time I was in Rwanda and the Government of Rwanda has gone ahead to make sure that the gender certificate is handled up to the implementation level, even up to evaluation and monitoring. What are we doing here with this Bill?

Madam Speaker, I strongly support the committee on this; the issue of gender equity should be left the way we did it when we were handling the Public Finance Management Act. We should not undo what we have not even seen work. We are just trying to see if this can deliver us to where we want to go as far as gender issues are concerned.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the issue of the power of Parliament. We come here not on our own behalf but we represent people who give us power to come to this Parliament. If we are given power but now we want to throw away the powers given by the people, then what are we doing as Parliament? The previous parliaments preserved these powers for us; we should make sure we also hold onto the power of the people.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the issue of the accounting officer being replaced by the sector. I find this very disturbing because when you look at some of these sectors, there are so many departments there. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, for example, has so many other sectors down there. Supposing two of the other departments have complied with –(Member timed out).

3.18
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I think I have three issues to look at. One, we have different accounts; one is called the Reserve Account, there is the Contingencies Fund and the third is the Consolidated Fund. In good financial management practice, every country must have enough money in the reserve. However, there must also be money in the Contingencies Fund and we must be disciplined in handling the Consolidated Fund. If these three accounts are well protected, then we are safe.  

What is this Bill trying to do with the proposed amendments? Madam Speaker, to say that we should allow and give powers to the minister to go and allow some money to be borrowed from Bank of Uganda is actually falling short of saying we want to give power to the minister to raid the reserve. We must be honest on this.

Secondly, if, like the minister was saying, the collections from URA fall below what is required in a quarter, that means we are undisciplined with our Contingencies Fund. I did not do economics but the mere fact that Contingencies Fund is that account into which we put money for unforeseen possibilities, I think I understand basically that we should ask a blank question: is there money in our Contingencies Fund? If yes, why would we need amendments? If not, why should we make a permanent provision to do a correction for only one financial year or a quarter?

We are, therefore, giving unnecessary powers to the minister for no good reason and to the Secretary to the Treasury. The Kenyan practice is that even the Clerk to Parliament is at the level of Secretary to the Treasury so that money meant for Parliament, in the principle of being independent, is not meddled with by another Secretary to the Treasury who works in the interest of the Executive. The Secretary to the Judicial Commission is at the level of Secretary to the Treasury. 

I thought that in good principles of financial discipline, what we should have been doing right now here is to have amendments that give powers to the Clerk to Parliament to be at the level of Secretary to the Treasury. Instead, we are now taking away our powers and loading them onto one person, the minister.

Finally, when we were young, we used to go and pick maize seeds which were meant for replanting and had been kept in a sack. Later, our grandmother got a trick of hanging the seeds somewhere on a long string and she tied them somewhere so that when one touched the string, it kept moving from morning until when my grandmother came back and she would be able to notice that people had tampered with – (Member timed out). 

3.22
ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. When we considered the Public Finance Management Bill then, one of the things that were clear and a key concern to us was our powers of appropriation, oversight, budget scrutiny and accountability that were embedded in the Budget Act. The Executive came here and assured us that if we worked with them and built consensus on some provisions, all that we guarded so jealously in the Budget Act would be secured. Today, the whole essence of this amendment Bill is to trick us to give out even the little that we secured when the Budget Act was repealed.

THE SPEAKER: No, it was not repealed; we did not repeal it. That is what they intended to do but here we said, no.

MS ALASO: Okay, when we amended those provisions. Madam Speaker, look at this provision - the sum total of it is that the powers of budget scrutiny should be taken away from Parliament and given to the Secretary to the Treasury. The other bit is that the Secretary to the Treasury and the technocrats, together with people in the Executive, should now be the ones to deal with appropriation. What else are we left with when even accountability, where our oversight committees call the responsible officers, should also be taken and given to a nameless thing called “the sector”. Madam Speaker, I am extremely concerned.
Let me address two things, Madam Speaker. There is the issue of reallocating money from votes. Over the last few years, the concern that the Auditor-General and all of us have had has to do with an animal called “mischarge”. This is where money is picked and taken to another vote or activity and you cannot trace it, you cannot follow the trail and accountability. Now they even want to take that one and move it from seeking authorisation by PS/ST to vire the money to reallocate completely away from this House. That, to me, is terrible and a disaster for this country. 

The other thing is the provision that we should not scrutinise a loan. First of all, by the time we pass the Budget here, we pass it against a work plan. How dare Government or the Executive and the honourable minister come here and tell us “if the entity is short of money”. Where is the work plan? Where is the cash flow? Where is the procurement plan? 

Madam Speaker, yes we sit in this Parliament and we can say it is our power. Colleagues, it is not even our power; the mere fact that we sit here means that it is the power of Ugandans that we are using as given to us by the Constitution. Let nobody even say, “let us protect our power” – (Member timed out). 

3.25
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I only wish the honourable minister with whom we made this particular Act that is being amended, the former Minister of Finance, was still here; maybe we would not have got this Bill. That said, I would like to agree with the committee entirely only in respect of the aspects where the committee has recommended a deletion of the clauses in issue and disagree with it on the clauses it has recommended for amendment.

There are three areas in this Bill, Madam Speaker, that I disagree with. The first one is the question of virement. Virement is equivalent to improper planning and, therefore, leads to inefficiency. I definitely disagree with that.

The second area is the question of the supplementary budget. It would appear that the ministers have not scrutinised the Act they passed very well. When you look at section 25(1) of the Act, where we have the Contingencies Fund of 3.5 per cent of the annual budget, and section 26(1) that allows the minister to bring a supplementary budget again of the same amount, it would mean, in actual fact, that we would have a supplementary budget of around 7 per cent, which is a lot of money. Even then, the minister comes with this amendment when he has not complied with section 28(4) because they have not accounted for the money that has been given to them in the Contingencies Fund. So, you even want more money when you have not complied with section 28(4). That is abusing Parliament powers.

The third point is: why is the minister fearing this Act and bringing these amendments? The first fear is grounded in section 25(9) because they want free will to avoid what we termed “public financial loss” by them misusing the vote. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, if we allow these amendments, especially on the supplementary and virement, it would mean that we are dealing away with sections 4 and 5, especially the charter of fiscal responsibility. Section 7 of the Act and the fearful section of 25(9) will also be done away with. In essence, we shall have thrown into the dustbin the entire Act.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on borrowing without parliamentary approval, I entirely associate myself with the submissions of my learned friend, hon. Abdu Katuntu, about this contravening Article 159(2) of the Constitution. However, even then if we amend this particular section without amending sections 36 and 41 of the Act, we will be making two contradictory provisions. This is because sections 36 and 41 give authority to raise loans and the loans are supposed to be charged on the Consolidated Fund. If they are to be charged on the Consolidated Fund in terms of payments, then again revert to Article 154(2) of the Constitution. So, in all this one renders the sections in the Public Finance Act irrelevant and it wound be unconstitutional.

Also, we would have surrendered the powers given to us by the people; we are delegates who cannot be seen to delegate our powers. So, the entire Bill should be thrown away. If the minister is gracious enough, let him withdraw it and we move forward.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable members. As the Attorney-General comes up, I want to say that I am disturbed that an impression may be created that maybe the House does not support what the Government brings and yet on all the occasions that you have wanted us to handle business, Members have come. You can see the House. Members have problems in their constituencies but they are here. So, I do not know why you are circumventing Article 156 of the Constitution. Let me read for you Article 156 (2) of the Constitution:
“If in respect of any financial year it is found- 
(a) that the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or 

(b) that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, 
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.”  

We are here; I do not why you want to amend the law to fix one transaction. (Applause)  Maybe the Attorney-General will explain to us. Please, take the Floor.  

3.31
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigye Rukutana): I thank you, Madam Speaker. What you have just read is actually what I intended to begin with. In my view, the intended amendments do not in any way depart from the spirit of Article 156 of the Constitution, which you have read. On the contrary, they are intended to realign the spirit and intent of the said Article. In which case, it is not true, as stated by the Shadow Attorney-General, that the proposals are unconstitutional. They are not. It is just a question of realigning the laws or Acts of Parliament with the Constitution. 

That having been said, Madam Speaker and honourable members, a number of other issues were raised touching on the constitutionality of what is being proposed. Much as I can make submissions here, I do not feel comfortable enough to address the issues technically. I would seek for some time – (Laughter) - to go and realign my thinking –(Applause)– and come back with a proper legal exposé on the issues raised by the honourable members in the debate.

Madam Speaker, our jurisprudence is that provisions of the Constitution carry the same weight. I can see that honourable members are jumping from one provision to another without really trying to realign what is contained in those provisions. It is of special importance to know that the law we are trying to amend is a new one. This law only recently amended the laws that we were operating under, for example the Bank of Uganda Act. That we have found it necessary now to revert to the old law means that there is a reasonable cause as to why we want to go back. 

For that matter, Madam Speaker, allow us some bit of time to go and organise ourselves and we come back to this House to respond to the issues raised by the honourable members. I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have known hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana for many years and some of them were when he was a minister of state for finance. I have talked about this before. He was the one who went and said that they wanted NSSF under the finance ministry and it was immediately brought. The following year, he was taken to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and he said that NSSF should go back to that ministry and yet he had already taken it to the other side. It became hard and up to now, it is still hard. So, when you see him asking for time, you know what he wants to do - the same things that he used to do those years.

Madam Speaker, the law we amended was the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. I would like to read section 19 of that Act: “Every appropriation by Parliament of public monies for the service of a financial year, and every warrant or other authority issued under this Act in respect of a financial year, shall lapse and cease to have any effect at the close of that year and the unexpended balance of any monies withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund shall be repaid to the Consolidated Fund.” We used this law until 2014 and I had never seen hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana complain that we needed to amend this when he was in the finance ministry, the labour and gender ministry and now as Deputy Attorney-General.

The procedural issue that I am raising is that what they want to amend is what was being practised, like the local governments keeping money and Parliament having authority to approve. These are already there. The Constitution is very clear and you cannot change it. An advance, as hon. Katuntu said, is a loan. There is no crime in Government coming here and saying that they wish to go to Bank of Uganda to borrow Shs 4 trillion and the terms are as such. 

There was somebody saying that there is no interest on an advance and I laughed at him. If you go to Standard Chartered Bank or Barclays Bank and borrow for even one day, there is a commitment fee and interest for that one day. The Bank of Uganda also makes money from Government by charging interest and commitment fees. So, there is no crime for you to go and prepare a resolution saying that you want Shs 18 trillion to fund the budget and that you will pay it over the financial year. Go, prepare that and call Parliament and we shall do our work.

Madam Speaker, members like hon. Magyezi and Niwagaba have raised issues that this law does not make sense. Is it procedurally right for us not to go to committee stage and deal with this law and we finish it and go back for our primaries? In the FDC, we have started the process and we would also like to campaign just like the NRM that has finished. Don’t you think that it is procedurally right for us to go to the committee stage and deal with this matter? If we allow what hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana is requesting, he is going to apply the other gear of NSSF –(Ms Ruth Nankabirwa rose_)– Madam Speaker, I request that you rule on my point of procedure first. 

I was saying that, would it not be procedurally right or us to go to the committee stage to deal with the law? We have raised issues, dealt with them and we are going handle them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that we need to give ourselves time to put this matter to rest with proper arguments so that when we take a decision, we are all moving together - we either bury the Bill or we allow it. Honourable members, we are going to defer debate on this matter - the House will be called back on notice - so that we can get time to align our brains with the Attorney-General’s brains. The House will be called on notice, honourable members. 

In the meantime, I want to announce that on 29 October 2015, the Business Committee will sit between 10.00am and 11.00am for one hour. From 12 noon on the same day, the Appointments Committee will meet to handle the Equal Opportunities Commission, the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the National Citizenship and Immigration Board chairperson, and the nomination for one Judge to the Court of Appeal.

Honourable members, we shall call you on notice. Thank you for coming in such big numbers. I really want to thank you. The House is adjourned sine die

(The House rose at 3.40 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

