Tuesday, 18 October 2005

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils of Katikamu Secondary School, located in Katikamu North represented by hon. James Kinobe. They are here to see how you transact your business. We also have pupils of Phoebe Primary School, located in Bukoto, Ntinda represented by hon. Freddie Ruhindi. They are also here to observe the proceedings. You are most welcome to your Parliament! (Applause)

This morning, I received sad news from hon. Rex Aachilla, who lost his sister yesterday night. Jessica Alinga has been the vice chairperson of Kotido District. She was shot dead in her house, together with her three-year-old son. Another person who was injured is in hospital.  Apparently, the intention was murder because no item was taken from the house. It is very sad and as usual, let us observe a minute of silence. 
 
(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

2.41
MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA MUGERWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request government to improve the exercise of updating the voter’s register. I visited your constituency in Kabonera sub-county and also Buyunga last week, and I found out that the exercise is at a standstill because the person supposed to take photographs is not there. People wait until 1.00 p.m. and only lose hope when nobody turns up. When they finally appear, which is rare, they say they do not have batteries. Therefore, the exercise is at a standstill. I do not know whether we should keep the deadline of 28 October 2005. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, on a personal note, I want to thank you for exhibiting evidence of representing the entire district. I am glad you are concerned about my constituency, Bukoto Central. Thank you very much! Yesterday the same matter was raised here. I do not know whether the minister got in touch with the commission or is in position to give us any information. Similar messages were conveyed to him. People are not satisfied with the cameras and batteries and many other things. I hope the commission will take some remedial action to improve on this.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2005

2.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you for appreciating the work done by the committee and raising the many issues that you did. I will now make quick responses.  

The first issue was raised by hon. Baba Diri and hon. Lukyamuzi, on the difference of “political parties” and “political organisations”. The only thing I can say at this stage is that these words are used in the Constitution. We tried in the review processes to take out the word “organisation”. It seems many people are very fond of this word, so they insisted that it should stay in the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the other issue was on the code of conduct for political parties and the national consultative forum for political parties. As I said yesterday, these are matters already in the Constitution. All that the bill seeks to do is to implement those provisions. The committee, however, said that in trying to do this there is still room for improvement on the consultation process and on the powers of the minister to pass these regulations. The committee made recommendations, which I stated yesterday.

Mr Speaker, the debate on public officers is on. It has been on for a long time and it might continue even after today. However, the committee came to the conclusion that what was passed in the Constitution has to be implemented. All that we are doing in the bill is to implement what was passed in the constitutional amendment process. There is not much we can do now.  

Mr Speaker, the other issue that was raised is the housing for registration of political parties. You will recall that this is not the first time this issue is being discussed. It was raised during the constitutional review process; Prof. Sempebwa and his committee examined this matter during the Constitution review; the same matter came in the Government White Paper. 

The committee’s recommendation that time was that a separate organisation called “The Registrar of Political Parties” should be created. However, these provisions and proposals were not taken on. What we have seen over this period is that there has been a proposal that the registration, monitoring and other functions be carried out by the Electoral Commission.

Mr Speaker, there are many criticisms on this. People are proposing that the Registrar General continues to hold this. Honourable members should know that there is no such a thing as a Registrar General anymore. What we have now is Uganda Registration Services Bureau whose mandate has been stated earlier. It is a profit-making organisation. There might have to be some adjustments made. 

There were submissions that in other jurisdiction, for example, people cite the case of Kenya, where a separate organisation for registration of political parties is in place. Our committee was exposed to other countries, where the Electoral Commission has been charged with the responsibility of registering political parties. We did not see any reason why we should not support this. That is why the committee recommended that the proposals in the bill be adopted. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of independent candidates is not coming for the first time. It came long before this debate. People kept arguing that there should be no right for people to stand as independent candidates. However, the question has always been, “When should this right operate?” There were proposals that this right should only operate before individuals declare themselves and possibly lose in a primary election. After losing in a primary election, one loses the right to stand as an independent candidate. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee is of the opinion that this will be an unconstitutional procedure. If there was a way of waiving that right, that waiver must come from the Constitution. If this provision should be amended to support the situation, where somebody can be prohibited at any stage from standing as an independent candidate that could be challenged. 

There were issues on the financing of political parties. The committee concluded that the funding processes proposed in the bill should be supported.  However, Members have raised concerns and I am sure issues will be examined at committee stage, when we make responses to the specific issues for amendment.  

Mr Speaker, those were the issues raised. I must take this opportunity to thank the honourable members of the committee who offered their commitment. They made sure that this bill comes back to Parliament in record time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable members for their comments and deliberations on, “The Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005.” I agree with the committee that indeed the genesis of the terms “organisation” and “party” is in the Constitution itself.  All that the bill seeks to do is to repeat the wording in the Constitution and leave it to individual political entities to call themselves what they prefer. 

There are political entities, which prefer to call themselves “parties” like the Democratic Party; there are others which prefer to refer to themselves as “organisations” like the NRM/O and others. Therefore, there is nothing unconstitutional or illegal about the description of political entities as organisations or parties, as the case might be.

I also agree with the committee that the issue of the home of registration of political parties and organisations is not new. In fact, the debate on which organisation should register political parties began in the Sixth Parliament and it kept shifting from the Registrar General’s Office to the Electoral Commission. As the chairman pointed out, the Registrar General’s Office has been transformed into a semi-autonomous organisation with a specific mandate in the law to register business associations and not political entities.

Mr Speaker, I recommend that the Electoral Commission has the capacity to register and monitor the behaviour of political parties. A date could be created in Electoral Commission’s schedule to focus on the registration of political parties and political organisations alone. I find no contradiction at all between the current mandate of the Electoral Commission as outlined in the Constitution and the Electoral Commission Act itself, and the mandate that this Parliament seeks to confer on the Electoral Commission to register political parties. 

The function of conducting elections is in itself a political function. It is consistent, in my view, if the Electoral Commission in the first place receives and registers political parties and goes further to regulate the behaviour of these political parties during campaigns and when elections finally take place.  

On the question of public officers, government’s position is that they should remain as independent of political parties as possible. However, they will vote like all Ugandans. As pointed out yesterday, civil servants like other Ugandans who do not wish to join parties, will vote for parties based on their programmes and manifestos. Because of their delicate role in society, it is not prudent at this stage to require that they join political parties as though they were politicians. We recommend that this House maintain the legal position that a public officer should not be a member or officer in a political party or organisation.  

The idea of independence was exhaustively debated yesterday and hon. Nandala and hon. Kiwalabye were of the view that indeed once a person has participated in the activities of a political organisation in the primary elections, it is not in the interest of the growth of political parties that such people run for independence. 

I would like to agree with that view and colleagues would recall that under Clause 16 of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005, which this House amended, this Parliament is enjoined, among other things, to prescribe the behaviour and participation in politics by independent candidates. The requirement to restrict persons who lose in party primaries from running as independent candidates is, in my opinion, constitutional.

A lot of discussion arose on the code of conduct and Members were of the view that the minister in prescribing the code of conduct for parties should consult political parties and organisations. I cannot agree without any proposal. I think it is only fitting and proper that parties are involved in the formulation and the management of the code of conduct of their political parties.

Mr Speaker, the question of dual citizenship and how persons who acquire dual citizenship can participate in political party activities is clearly spelt out in the Constitution. The Constitution for the first time creates dual citizenship, but also enjoins this Parliament to come up with a clear law stating which offices persons with dual citizenship cannot run for. That law has not been brought to this House unfortunately. I think it would be premature for us to bar Ugandans who acquire dual citizenship from holding offices in political parties and organisations. 

The intention of this House in recommending that a law be brought to state which offices a person who holds dual citizenship can hold was to protect sensitive offices in the state, which would be compromised as a result of dual citizenship of the holder. My recommendation to this House is that dual citizens, like other Ugandans, should be permitted to hold offices in political parties or organisations.  

Mr Speaker, once again I thank the honourable members for their contributions. I commit the bill to you all for approval at the second reading. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, the motion is that the bill entitled, “The Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005” be read the second time.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Bill read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2005

2.58
Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that the definitions contained in the Constitution of the terms “public officer” and “public service” be contained in Clause 2 to defect those definitions.  I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals by the committee.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I do not differ from what the chairperson suggests. However, I want to add this statement to “public service”. “Those companies the Government of Uganda has sold but where still has interest and shares in.” They were government parastatals and are in the process of being sold off completely. People who work in such places should be treated as working in public service.

THE CHAIRMAN: You should have to take into account the definition in the Constitution. Do you want it to be broader than the definition in the Constitution?  

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I want it to be broader because those shares, which those companies have are more or less money drawn from the Consolidated Account. Therefore, there is no difference. Let us make the definition broader.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it possible for you to broaden the definition in the Constitution?

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, by your guidance, what does the Constitution say? I do not have a copy here now.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, could you please read it for us.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Article 257(1) of the Constitution defines public service as “ service in a civil capacity of the Government or of a local government.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Is Government defined?

MR MWESIGE: Government is defined. It means  “Government of Uganda.”

THE CHAIRMAN: That is right. Therefore, that is the problem. Statutes as they are, create the corporations. What do we do? The definition is clear.  However, you may prosecute your proposal by making submissions.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, it is true they are created by Acts of Parliament but those people are doing work on behalf of the Government. I suggest that those parastatals or whatever companies, which have been created by the Acts of Parliament should also be joined in this part of public service.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean wholly owned by government?

MR NANDALA: Whether wholly owned or where government has the majority of share control. The moment you have the majority share holding, that means you control that company.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean you become the owner simply because you have the majority shares? These are the problems. However, may be if it is wholly owned, that is understandable.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, a company may not totally have to be wholly owned but government can control it. A company where there is the majority shareholder, say 51 per cent, is owned by government. Therefore, these are parastatals or companies which government controls more than 51 per cent.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, honourable members, you have heard the arguments and the contributions of hon. Nandala Mafabi. Any further contribution to the matter so that we decide one way or the other?

MAJ. (RTD.) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, if it happens that government owns 51 per cent shares in a public company, does it qualify that company to be referred to as a parastatal?

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I was clear. I said companies and if it is a company, whichever definition or name you call it, a parastatal is one –if my colleague never understood me, I mean a company where the government has a majority shareholding.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Chairman, this is the kind of inclusion of employees in a public company; if we bring them in as government employees it may be confusing. Hon. Nandala Mafabi should give us further clarification on this Phoenix Logistics where government is likely to have majority shareholding. If people employed in Phoenix Logistics Uganda Limited, say the Managing Director is Mr Kashwada, are included as employees of Government of Uganda, it may be more conflicting controlling those people. If we mix them with such people who are wholly employed by government it will lead into further confusion and conflict. We need to reflect on that more and give further clarification on it.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, the moment the Government makes an investment in a company, it draws the money from the Consolidated Account and that is the money it is putting in that company.  Definitely it does not matter that the original money, which has been put there, came from the Consolidated Account. 

There is no difference between a company making profits and money, which is being drawn from the Consolidated Account. Because the money from the Consolidated Account is taxpayers’ money or whichever collection the Government has made whereas this company has used consolidated money, which it was given to them. 

So, Mr Chairman, these people also have resources they are using, which belong to government. It would be proper that companies where a government has majority shares are also brought under the public service.

THE CHAIRMAN: Since this clause is dealing with interpretation, can we stand it over and then proceed with others?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the idea hon. Nandala Mafabi is raising is a good idea, but he lost the opportunity to raise it when we were amending the Constitution because the definition of “public service” is in the Constitution, and we cannot expand it through the principle Act, which we are trying to amend now.  

If we are to follow his argument of “any person working in any authority, which draws its funds from the Consolidated Fund,” then we would not have had Article 257(2)(b). Because under Article 257(2)(b), ministers, the President, Members of Parliament, members of commissions and authorities, councils or committees established by the Constitution, are not public servants although they draw money from the Consolidated Fund and are paid emoluments from the Consolidated Fund. 

So, the argument that these companies get funds from the Consolidated Fund cannot be the reason why those who are employed in those companies should be called public servants. In short, the definition is covered in the Constitution, the wording is clear and precise, it cannot be varied or expanded in any other subsidiary law.
  
THE CHAIRMAN: Should I put the question on the proposed amendment?

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, if the issue of public service is the problem then we could say, “anybody as a public officer” and public officer means in traditional civil service, working for companies wholly owned by government. We put in local government and traditional civil service.  

Mr Chairman, I am bringing up this because the moment we leave this out – assuming I am working for National Insurance Corporation, which is 100 per cent owned by government, I have access to vehicles, I have access to all facilities in office and I can use them to the disadvantage of another person in campaigns. So, to be on the safe side, even people who are in organisations that are owned by government can easily put misuse on assets. Maybe if we cannot put them under public service –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe let us explore – you have read the bill, where do you envisage a situation where you may want to invoke what you are proposing, because then we may find a way of helping you? Where do you envisage a situation where the issue of a person employed in such companies is likely to crop in?

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I am referring to this because there is somewhere we are saying that public officers are not supposed to be cardholding members of parties, and these ones are not different from others because they are doing work in the interest of government. So, those are some of the reasons. We have to cure this thing just at this point.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then you maintain the interpretation as given for public officer and then we can say, “or a person employed in this and the other” without disturbing the interpretation, which was given in the Constitution. I think that can help you to achieve what you want to achieve.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I agree.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, this will come in when we come to a relevant clause where you think this will appear but we shall use “or a person employed in this and the other”. Okay?

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, we are making a definition, I would be happier if we – because a public officer means a person holding or acting in any public office, and that is where I am because we have gone now to make public service and we would go further to maybe put there that “where a government” somewhere in the definition.  

THE CHAIRMAN: If you would remember when you were making the constitutional amendment, there was a time when you said people who want to stand for elections should resign. The way you used it was to say “or a person employed in this and the other”; you said “public officers or….” So, the two were running parallel, and you can do it when we come to a relevant section where you want to prohibit them to participate, if you succeed to convince other Members.  

We should dispose of the amendments by the committee first then we can consider other amendments. (Mr Nandala rose_). No, it will come because we are not closing the clause; we are only dealing with a proposed amendment. So, I put the question to the proposal by the committee to transplant a definition of public servant from the Constitution to put it in the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to contest the definition of political party as stated in the bill. I would like to propose that the definition of a political party reads as follows: A political party is an organisation whose principle objective is to contest or form government. 

My justification is as follows: The Attorney General has already ably articulated his concerns about the definition of a political party and a political organisation, and he says that there is no real difference between the two. That being so, the definition of a political party or the political organisation as per the bill is not deep enough to address the scientific concerns of a political party.  

A political party, Mr Chairman, is quite different from an NGO; the definition of a political party in the bill can depict a responsibility, which can even be carried out by an NGO. For example, according to the bill, a political organisation is an organisation, “the objects of which include influencing of the political process or sponsoring a political agenda….” This can even be done by the boy scouts or brigade or an NGO.  

So, I would like to submit, Mr Chairman, that since we are in a dot.com age and a scientific age, it is important not to generalize issues. The specifics of the definition of a political party from the yardstick of international philosophers and scholars should not totally be abandoned. In light of that, I would like to propose the amendment, which I have just read out.

THE CHAIRMAN: Read it again.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  “A political party is an organisation whose principle objective is to contest or form government.” 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is it going to be prejudicial to what you think if we leave the amendment as it is? Does it prevent you to achieve what you want to achieve? You are still on the Floor –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I thought someone was giving me important information. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, hon. Babu.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  After looking at this very carefully, all it has done here is to say that this is an organisation like any other. The only difference is, this one sponsors people to go and compete. I think that is really splitting air because what you are saying here is that there is an organisation and its main function is to sponsor people to compete for political office; but that is obvious when you sponsor somebody is going to compete anyway. So, going into details here is really a waste of time. 

This is an international thing, everywhere you have gone the difference between a normal organisation like an NGO and a political organisation is that one sponsors political people who are going to stand for office. It is very clearly brought out here. The only difference I would see here is that there is an adjective saying, “political organisation.”  But basically a political party is an organisation whose objective is to sponsor a candidate for a political office. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can’t we give it benefits to see how it operates and if in future –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Can I conclude my submission?

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am not persuaded to accept the definition of a political party as per the bill because of the following: The definition in the bill says a political organisation or a political party is an organisation, “the objects of which include the influencing of the political process or sponsoring a political agenda….” You are stating the details of what the party can do, but what is the main assignment of a party and I tend to think that my definition addresses the concerns of what creates a gap.

THE CHAIRMAN: But suppose it does not achieve what you are proposing, does it cease to be a political party?

MR LUKYAMUZI: It does not cease but why should the definition meander? You are a lawyer, Mr Chairman, and when you meander in law you are creating unnecessary innuendos –(Laughter)- which your opponents can use to fight you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us put a question. There is a proposal by hon. Lukyamuzi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My problem is with regard to the definition of political organisations and political parties.  Political organisations and political parties are used interchangeably in the Constitution, but when we try to look at the objects of political organisations and political parties I do not see any difference. Unfortunately, in Article 257 of the Constitution these two are not defined. But me I take it that they are one and the same and I would not see any problem in us having one meaning for the two.  

I, therefore, propose, Mr Chairman, that a political organisation or political party means the political organisation the objects of which include the influencing of political processes, the sponsoring of the political agenda, the sponsoring of or offering a platform to candidates for elections to a political office and participation in the governance of Uganda at whatever level.  I beg to submit. 

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you hon. Wandera for giving way. I would like clarification from hon. Wandera. He says that political party and organisation are used interchangeably, but when I read Article 72 of the Constitution it gives me a different impression because it provides as follows: (1) “Subject to the provision of this Constitution, the right to form political parties and any other political organisations is guaranteed”. 

Clause (2) provides that: “An organisation shall not operate as a political party or organisation unless it conforms to the principles laid down in this Constitution….” Therefore, I think that political party and political organisations are distinct forms of outfits. So, I need clarification from hon. Wandera, to say that the two are used interchangeably.

MR WANDERA: I think you have made the clarification. Honourable minister, it is just a question of the meaning. If we understood the meaning then this whole question would not arise. If you look at Article 72(2) it says: “ An organisation shall not operate as a political party or organisation unless it conforms to the principles laid down in this Constitution and it is registered.”  

Now, the principles laid down by the Constitution for political parties and for political organisations are one and the same. The requirements for registering a political party and the political organisation are the same and it is on the score of that, Mr Chairman, that I feel these things are one and the same and we should not confuse those who will read the law. For example, the meaning of political organisation in the bill is saying that a political party is a free association and it does not say the same for a political party as if a political party is not a free association. So, we should harmonize these things.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think as the minister explained earlier, it is to provide a choice and alternative to those forming these organisations or these parties and those who feel comfortable by calling the political parties organisations rather than ending with parties and that those who may want to end by parties, this is to provide if you want to call yours organisation, call it; if you want to call it party – I think that is the purpose of having the two.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I invite you honourable members through the chairman to look at the definition of a political organisation. A political organisation means, “Any free association or organisation of persons the objects of which include the influencing of the political process or sponsoring a political agenda, whether or not it also seeks to sponsor or offer a platform to a candidate for election to a political office or to participate in the governance of Uganda at any level.”

Mr Chairman, I am an interested party in matters of political parties and organisations and all these things mentioned under the meaning of political organisation are things that political parties do.  We cannot attempt in this Parliament to coin a new meaning of what political parties and organisations are.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, have you addressed yourself to Article 72 of the Constitution?

MR WANDERA:  Mr Chairman, I have.

THE CHAIRMAN: You read 72 (1), (2) and (3). These terms are used.

MR WANDERA: Yes, but you see the Constitution –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: And, therefore, you cannot out rule them. You see, these are terms used when they were talking about systems they say, “Subject to the provision of this Constitution, the right to form political parties and any other political organisation is guaranteed” and an organization cannot operate as a political party or organisation – So, these are terms that are in the Constitution.  So, when you are making a statute, which is a subsidiary law to the Constitution, you cannot afford to outlaw any of them.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, when you see the definition of a political organisation up and you go down and you see the definition of a political party, we have defined a political organisation to mean “a free association or organisation of persons” and you see a political party is a political organisation, which is defined above. So, what is the difference between these definitions because you are saying a political party is a political organisation?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what you can do is to blame us the founding fathers who made the 1995 Constitution to include these terms. But until you change the supreme law, the Constitution has adopted these terms and you cannot now start fighting them when you are dealing with the subsidiary law, which is a statute.

MR WANDERA: On the contrary, the founding fathers deserve praise and I want to praise you, Mr Chairman, where there was doubt our founding fathers proceeded in Article 257 –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  And mothers.

MR WANDERA: Founding fathers and mothers –(Laughter)- for avoidance of doubt. Mr Chairman, our founding parents, according to hon. Nankabirwa, where they realised there would be confusion they proceeded in Article 257 to define these terms. And my reading is that, there was no controversy and that is why organisation and political party are not defined and that is why I submit that they are one and the same.   

You referred me, Mr Chairman, to Article 72(2), it says: “An organisation shall not operate as a political party or organisation unless it conforms to the principles laid down in this Constitution and it is registered.” The principles laid down in the Constitution for political parties and organisations are the same.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Chairman, you have been labouring to convince hon. Wandera that he is really dragging us in a futile argument. Is he in order to insist that a political organisation is the same as a political party when he himself has spent four years on this Floor arguing that we must open up and move from the Movement organisation and go to political parties?  

Is he in order to insist when the Constitution is clear for 10-15 years we have been in the Movement and we have just now opened up to go in partisan politics and it is possible to have politics without the parties, as it is possible to have parties without Movement as an organisation? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, I think the honourable member is in order in the sense that he is trying to persuade us that if we had a way we could delete these redundant provisions in the Constitution. That is what he is saying and he is entitled to express that one.  But I think let us put a vote on this.

MAJ. GEN.  OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. For the benefit of hon. Wandera, I would like him to know the difference between an organisation, the party and the Movement and a front. These are distinct organisations; fronts are a conglomeration of parties each one with its own programme working with other parties for a common purpose. 

A movement is a conglomeration of fronts, many fronts for some temporary objective; a party is monolithic ideologically with set of standards and objectives, which you must adhere to; an organisation is an organisation. An organisation is a coming together of many groups and a forum is a forum, you should understand that you have gone to school- (Laughter)-and you should know there is a difference between a forum and a front. Parliament is a forum and you cannot call Parliament a party; a congress is some UPC confusion.

MR AWORI: Mr Chairman, my honourable colleague is a protégée of UPC; he was brought up by UPC, educated by UPC and he suffered because of UPC. Is he in order thereby to reduce UPC to a mere confusion as he alleges, UPC and Congress are synonymous?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Unfortunately, I am not privileged to that background, but anyway honourable members I think hon. Wandera has got a good case but he has constitutional hurdles and because of these hurdles let us dispose of his proposal.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, for the sake of us proceeding, I will concede that we have two definitions. But I want to know; does it mean we take these meanings the way they are? Does it mean political parties will not have, as one of their objectives, the influencing of political process, the sponsoring of a political agenda, this is what political parties do? 

So, if we have two definitions, a definition for political organisations including those and excluding them from political party then it would mean parties would not do that. I, therefore, would like to move that we include the influencing of political process and sponsoring of political agenda under the meaning of political party. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, now he wants to add this.  Now, I put the question - (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Chairman, I have been following closely this debate, but from what you have been telling the House it seems that certain matters that impinge on the Constitution are not giving us a leeway. Should I assume that whatever is in the Constitution and appears in this bill however much we debate on it, it will not change and in that case should we just quit it? I need your guidance.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any provision of a subsidiary legislation that tries to be inconsistent with the Constitution is invalid, is null and void in as far as it is inconsistent.

Now, honourable members, I think now hon. Wandera is saying he wants to balance up but what is lacking in one definition and is in the other be also brought in that one. Is there any problem? I put the question to hon. Wandera’s amendment.

(Questions put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I have looked again through Clause 2 and the definitions, and I wanted to bring an amendment that public office means an office of public service or where government has more propellant interests –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Nandala, I think we agreed on how we shall take care of your reservations in that when we reach that stage we shall say, “public officers or any other person employed,” instead of disturbing a constitutional definition, we have no powers to do so. So now, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 2 stand part as amended –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, I need to be helped. According to the definition of an organisation here you find that each organisation or political party must answer the provisions of Section 10(2), that is internal composition of a party. But we have organisations, which cannot accommodate both men and women, for example, Mothers Union. Can we register it under the Electoral Commission- (Interjection)- it does, quite often they have complained of so many things. It depends on the memorandum and -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, as of now we are dealing with Clause 2, which is just defining terms.

MR NSAMBU: The reason why I am bringing this issue, after having accepted the definition it will be too difficult for me to take you back and I thought if you could consider them together then you would find probably one of these organisations should not have been registered at the Electoral Commission, and it would have been better if it remain under the Registrar General or as a non-governmental organisation.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have not come to that stage, we are now dealing with the interpretation clause.

MR NSAMBU: All I am saying is that the interpretation we are giving to a political party or organisation continues ahead and go on referring to it.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, if it continues ahead and we face a problem when we go ahead we shall make the necessary adjustment, consequential amendment. I put the question that Clause 2 as amended stand part of the bill.

(Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 3

MR OULANYAH:  Mr Chairman, honourable members, the committee proposes to amend in sub-clause (2) to insert the word “form” or to bring it in line with Article 29(1)(e), the provision as it is only that it talks of joining a political party. The proposal amendment is to the effect that every citizen of Uganda has a right to form or rejoin a political party or organisation. We propose to insert the word “form”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 4

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 4 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: (An. Hon. Member rose_) Did you have an amendment? But you see honourable member the rules are very clear. They state that when a bill is published, it gets the first reading and thereafter goes to the responsible committee, at this point any member who wants to make an amendment is supposed to submit it to that committee. Thereafter, it is only those amendments that were submitted and rejected in the committee that can be considered when we are at this stage.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I am at a loss. This is because if we are going to say that only the amendments that were submitted to the committee are to be considered then those of us who did not go to the committee should not come here? I really think that all of us are at committee stage and that should mean that we want to make the law. As a result, we should be given a chance to make that law. It is not necessary that –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Our Rules of Procedure that we follow state that the only amendment I may accept is one that is either consequential to a proposed amendment or one that was taken by the Member to the relevant sessional committee but was not adopted by the committee. If that Member insists on his amendment he can then bring it here. That is why I asked you whether you took your amendment to the committee first because if not then the rules do not allow you to present it here.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I think the matter articulated by hon. Nandala should not be left hanging. In the course of discussion and as we deliberate on matters of public concern, ideas can emerge scientifically. This may necessitate subsquential amendments. How can you rule them out?  

Secondly, there should be a distinction between amendments associated with constitutional transformation and those associated with ordinary laws.  

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, we seek your indulgence in this matter. I never thought it would occur but as hon. Lukyamuzi has said, as time goes on an idea can come up. Therefore, I seek your indulgence on this matter because it is a complicated one.

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem with exercising discretion is that if I do so for you today why shouldn’t I do it for another person tomorrow? The idea behind asking you to go to the committee and submit your proposed amendment is so that we can deal with these matters expeditiously. Once the matter has been agreed to there we can proceed quickly especially now that we have a lot to do. That is why the rules are there and I hope you appreciate those rules.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, if you are a first offender you are not punished as if you are –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Is the honourable member in order to keep on challenging your ruling when you are a Speaker and you participated in making these rules? Is he in order, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, my conclusion is that the Member is not challenging my ruling. Rather he is pleading in mitigation that he was not aware. That is why he said he was a first offender. Since you were not aware, can I hear your proposal?

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for your wise ruling and I hope my colleagues will understand. (Interjection) Mr Chairman, please protect me from hon. Kutesa.  Thank you very much.

I think we shouldn’t allow the Electoral Commission to be responsible for the registration of political parties and organisations. This is because we know very well that they are also the ones responsible for elections. By so doing, I think we are imposing a very big burden on them and I believe that a lot of conflict of interests may arise. I was of the view –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I am reminded that you are dealing with Clause 4, which we already passed. However, you have a chance to have it recommitted if you wish. Therefore, after we have gone through the entire bill you may ask for recommittal and we shall consider it.

Clause 5

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment in sub-clause (4) of Clause 5. We propose to amend by substituting the word “half” that appears in the last line with the expression “two-thirds”. This is meant to fulfill the description contained in the Constitution that parties should be of the national character.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question –(Mr Mafabi rose_)– yes, hon. Mafabi.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, currently the districts that we have in Uganda are the same. For example, in Bugishu we have divided ourselves into three districts. Therefore, I would think that if you went to one place and got the required number there wouldn’t be need to go to the other districts in the area. If the chairperson’s proposal was based on ethnic groups then that would be different. I think 50 percent is good enough as opposed to two-thirds. The chairperson’s proposal is just complicating matters within a small area.  

THE CHAIRMAN: You have heard the arguments for the amendment and the counter arguments –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, when the committee is proposing an amendment it is mandatory for them to explain the reason for that amendment. To simply raise the number of districts from 50 percent or a half to two-thirds is a big increase. What justifications have the committee for raising the number of districts? I would like to be persuaded by them if I am going to support their proposal.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, hon. Mwandha. The committee made this recommendation based on the submissions that were made and questions that were raised about what constitutes a national character. If you have signatures from half of the districts of Uganda compared to two-thirds of the districts, which one would be more representative of a national character? 

Secondly, we are proposing this in an attempt to ensure that the political parties that come for registration have covered the country rather than just going to small places consisting of only one section of the country and then proceeding with that.  

It is on that basis that the committee made the recommendation that a party that is going to vie for leadership and control of state power in this country should have representation in at least two-thirds of the districts of Uganda.

MR MWANDHA: Personally two-thirds does not necessarily mean that a party has national character. If, for instance, the committee had come up with a formula that since we know the four regions in Uganda and the law recognizes them- I say this because I represent one of those regions. If we specified the number of districts to be covered in each of the regions, I believe that would also reflect a national character. Actually one can have the required two-thirds and still not reflect national character. 

For instance, in my region we have about 22 districts while I believe the region with the least districts is the North. This issue of two-thirds might create a situation where the North is disadvantaged by concentrating on these other districts. Therefore, national character to me does not simply mean two-thirds. We can better this law and advocate for national character by specifying a particular number of districts to be covered from each of the regions.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which regions are we talking about?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I represent the eastern region, my colleague hon. Baba Diri represents the Northern region, hon. Ndeezi represents the central region while hon. Katuramu represents the western region. These regions are recognized in the laws of Uganda. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Which law? 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, they are recognized in the Parliamentary Elections Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: That deals with what? You see, these regions are recognised for different purposes. You cannot apply them generally. 

Well, honourable members, you have heard the proposal of the committee for two-thirds and the counter argument by hon. Mwandha. However, may I add, hon. Mwandha, that you should have made concrete proposals with the aim of improving the committee’s proposal but since there is no proposal, may I put the question?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I think it is important that you hear the concerns of political parties properly. The explanation advanced by the chairperson of the committee does not convince me at all. I am seeking further clarification being aware of the fact that to start a political party, according to the laws of Uganda, is not easy. I do not see any sense in complicating the activities of parties especially when one of those political parties could form a government after five years. 

According to the laws of Uganda, when an NGO is founded it can begin operating even before it is registered. But regarding political parties, one must ensure that the party is registered before it begins to operate. Why should we complicate the operation of a party, which party may be a source of sanctity tomorrow? The explanation by the chairperson has not convinced me. Therefore, before I vote for –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to honestly inform hon. Lukyamuzi that starting a political party should not be like calling a tea party. You are talking of an organisation that is vying for power to lead a country. It should not be an easy matter to establish it; there should be a basis. Hon. Otafiire has already pointed out that a party is an ideological organisation. If you do not have any ideology to express or to communicate to the population then you have no business starting a party. This business of having a party located around one hill or ridge must not be allowed.

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to seek clarification. The argument is that the intention of this law is to ensure that political organisations that vie for leadership reflect national character. However, we already have political organisations in existence that have taken advantage of the previous law and may not necessarily reflect national character. What are we going to do about them?

MR LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, I have failed to be convinced by the chairperson that two-thirds is a reflection of national character. I believe that even half the number of districts can project national character. You do not constitute national character only when you have covered two-thirds of the districts. The chairman has not convinced us and he should withdraw the amendment. 

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Mr Chairman, most of the countries that we see in Africa today and even those in other continents have faced problems as a result of many parties. Let us face it! We are already seeing people coming up with ideas to set up parties mainly to be known nationally. Furthermore, some of them even hope to get funds from the Government and that is not why we want to have political parties.  

As hon. Kabwegyere has mentioned, we are seeking for parties that are going to have a national character with ambitions to take power. Therefore, we must have strict rules if we are going to avoid having a bunch of people in Kampala also setting up a party with the sole aim of accessing national funds. That is why in my view we need to avoid scenarios like the one in Liberia where such a poor country had over 22 candidates vying for the presidency. In fact, they are going to have re-elections and it is all because the law was too lax. I would even suggest that we require three-thirds coverage of all the districts instead of just having a half. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to support the committee because if we talk about two-thirds of all the districts in the country, the required number from these districts is just 50 people, which is not very many. If a party cannot even raise 50 people from each of the districts in country then can that party really be of a national character? Currently we have nearly 76 districts and that constitutes only about 1165 people. I do not think that number is difficult to raise. If a party cannot raise that number then is it really a genuine party that can rule this country properly?

I would think that if a party wants to take over state power and wants to be considered as a legible political party they must be able to get people from each of the districts. For instance, if you consider Northern Uganda with the exception of Adjumani- (Interruption)

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, hon. Eriyo. I would think that it is not where you come from or the way you spread your ideas that give you national character. The 27 liberators came from one district but arrived with serious national character. What are you talking about?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, the 27 liberators did not use democratic means of organisation. The honourable should be informed in clear terms that we used means other than democracy for forming our political party, and we do not want a repeat of that because it is not necessary. I sympathize with hon. Lukyamuzi’s predicament because he has a small party. Please bide your time with your party of three people because I only know of three people in the Conservative Party.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am standing on a point of order. I am surprised that a whole Cabinet minister could make such a point when he knows that under the 1995 Constitution the Conservative Party was one of the four parties that were protected constitutionally. If we did not have any influence nationally, how could we have been protected? Is he aware that we have already climbed the ladders and even captured his area of residence? Is he further aware that we are commissioning a candidate to contest his seat? If that is so, then is he in order to make such allegations without substantiation?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I was travelling in a certain place and there I saw a writing small in size but heavy in content. Wouldn’t you like it to be said of you that although you may be small in number you are heavy in content?

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is true that the NRA/NRM started with 27 people but they have managed to convince the whole country to rally behind the 27. Any person, therefore, can start a political party, convince people, go to the various districts and get 50 people from each of the districts. We are advocating for a minimum of just two-thirds. If you cannot convince people the way the 27 convinced the whole country then I don’t know. 

Moreover then we were not under a democracy like this one but under a chaotic situation. The 27 came to bring back democracy and sanity to this country and they have managed to convince a number of people. This time there is a level playground for anybody who wants to start a political party and there are democratic means of forming those parties. All political parties have to do is have people from each of the districts of the country. I support the position of the committee. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MS NAMUSOKE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to request this House to consider hon. Mwandha’s proposal. If you are talking about national character, especially considering the way we have made districts of even small counties, I think it would be good for us to take into consideration the regional representation. 

We could say for purposes of this section that we will take the regions as they are considered in the Act that he was talking about. My point is that, if we are talking about national character, we need to have some form of regional representation and we need to avoid small parties that come up for the sake of being part of the crowd and being seen on the stage. Thank you.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and honourable members. This problem is historical and when we were making the Constitution, one of the issues that arose from the views of the people was how parties could be formed with a national character. Arguments were put forward, but one of our problems was that parties were being formed based on particular sectarian tendencies and therefore some sort of formula had to be found. 

How could we establish a party with national character? One of the reasons why districts were considered was because they were the entities that had been formed in the Constitution. As a result, they could be used as a basis for knowing how many Ugandans were part of that particular party. I think that if you took that basis for the formation of our own Constitution and the background of our problems with political parties in the 1960s, you will find that the best tool we have at the moment is to make sure that parties transverse the whole country, convince people and are recognized. 

I think that instead of arguing about numbers, we could consider the issue of regions and if they exist in the Constitution today. The point is that at the moment the only boundaries we have are political and involve recognised districts. Therefore, the best way to handle this and to avoid having the required 50 percent consisting of only the east and west or North and south is to take the amendment by the chairperson of this committee very seriously. This is because he is using what is available today. Tomorrow if you want to amend this when we have established regions, I do not see any problem at all. I would like to thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR WANDIRA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I am sitting next to the mover of the amendment, hon. Mwandha and the information that I want to give is that regions are not permanent. They depend on what you are talking about. Right now the reason we are using districts as a basis for forming a party is because we are looking at the number of people, and because we believe that all Ugandans are aspiring for the same thing. As the economy grows, we may have another reason for zoning regions. We may even have different economic regions. 

Should there be need to prioritise this country in terms of the environment, we shall have different environmental regions. I remember when I was in the ministry responsible for marginalized groups we had to find a way to cater for the needs of marginalized people. As a result, we saw it fit to create the regions that we did. 

Concerning the issue on the Floor, I would like to say that you cannot argue that the regions as they exist under the system in which you were elected are of national character. Furthermore, administrative units that are the basis for people who want to be in power are changing all the time. Districts are increasing in number and a good number of them are based on issues of marginalisation.  

Look, for instance, at hon. Dombo’s constituency. It has become a district because the Banyole, the majority of who live there, were marginalized. Likewise, Bulamogi where my mother comes from is a district now because the Balamogi felt marginalized within Kamuli District, which is full of Batenga. The Basiki also feel marginalized and for that reason they are getting a district. 

Therefore, I would like to inform hon. Mwandha that we use administrative units that contain voters because political power is based on your capacity to administer. I would also like to advise those who have small parties that they can start by forming NGOs like the one the honourable Reverend sitting in front of me has. Later you can capture power in that region and then move nationally. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: For purposes of clarification this bill is not going to affect existing parties. It is only being retrospective and concerns parties that will be formed in future. Therefore, even small parties will continue to exist much as we are making this law.  

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Chairman, I think we ought to understand what the authors of the report intended to mean by national character. Otherwise, if you are talking about 56 or even 34 districts, that is already two-thirds or a half respectively. Furthermore, this could still fall short of your description of a national character. I would have thought that an addendum would have been added to the effect that all regions of Uganda are catered for when you are registering your party. 

As it is, one can raise 54 districts by concentrating in the central and western parts of this country. As a result the eastern and Northern parts would be left out and that would not be national in character. Therefore, I support hon. Mwandha’s amendment that the required number of districts be representative of the whole country rather than making –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Be informed, honourable member, that there is no amendment by hon. Mwandha. He just made a suggestion that never concretised into an amendment. I only have one amendment.

MR SEBULIBA: We can improve on the proposal that he put forward on the Floor of this House because either way it is representative of the whole country, as I have already submitted on the Floor of this House. Let us just add or improve on that proposal and say that signatures should be got from districts encompassing the whole country. 

You remember, Mr Chairman, when we put fetters on the qualifications of who should come to Parliament. People went gambling and even presented fake documents for qualifications. We should aim for something that will make it easier for people while at the same time achieving our goal.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Before you proceed, honourable member, this is the position. As far as we are concerned, apart from regions that may be formed under the law that has not yet come into effect, we do not have regions. It is true that certain groups, say persons with disabilities, the workers and so on for their personal reasons coined the term regions. However, for a national matter like this, Uganda does not have regions unless we put it in our law that these regions be based on colonial provinces. Otherwise, we do not have regions on which to base this particular law.

MR SEBULIBA: Mr Chairman, on that note, we can use the districts on condition that they are representative of the whole country. Let us put in place regulations to the effect that at least every area with a district in this country is represented at the time of registration instead of concentrating in certain corners.

THE CHAIRMAN: Does that mean you want a total of 100 percent representation?

MR SEBULIBA: It is not total, it will come to a half but well scattered.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, as I listened to various colleagues contributing on this matter and especially hon. Kazibwe, I am convinced that the proposal by the chairperson truly does not describe a national character. The proposal is to concentrate on a particular part of Uganda and eliminate another part and that to him would be displaying national character. 

The proposal I am making and which I will table as a substantive proposal for an amendment provides for spread. Much as people may say we do not have regions, we know that we have them. Unless you want to say that I do not belong to this House. I represent a region and the people I mentioned also represent regions. Therefore, I would like to propose that, for purposes of this law and to avoid the use of the word region as used in the Constitution as amended, we come up with an expression of geographical regions and define them. This is because in the Parliamentary Elections Act the districts in those regions are already listed.  

However, for purposes of this Act we can adopt those regions as stated in the Parliamentary Elections Act and provide that for a party to be of a national character, it must have at least 50 percent representation in each of the regions. That will give it an opportunity to spread out so that every part of this country is covered. Then we will be able to say any party that desires to be considered a party must have representation from the geographical regions of Uganda. 

Only this morning we had a meeting organised by the Population Secretariat for this same reason and we all knew whom this meeting was intended for. All the people from the eastern region assembled at the parliamentary hall and we had the meeting there. We should not hide our heads in the sand and pretend that we do not have regions. In any case, we can define regions for purposes of this law so that we actually have parties of national character. This is because the two-thirds as provided for in this proposal does not provide for national character, as I understand it. I beg to move, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, as far as I am concerned there is one amendment and we have extensively dealt with this amendment. There was no counter proposal or any amendment. I am putting the question to the proposed amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, maybe my English was not good enough. I move –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 5 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5, agreed to.)

Clause 6

THE CHAIRMAN: For those who may have some amendments, please you put them down and maybe we may recommit this particular one. When you make such a proposal as you have done, you have to again define what a region is. You say geographical regions but you have also to define it but as of now it is not clear.

Clause 7

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes a series of amendments to this particular clause. I am going to proceed with them one by one. The first proposed amendment is on sub-clause 1(b), which is to substitute the expression “one-third” appearing in the third line with the expression “two-thirds”. That would be consequential upon the decision already taken.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I want to seek a clarification from the minister and the chairman.  The minister under clause 5 said, “at least half of the districts,” then when he came here he said, “at least a-third of the districts.” What was the rationale behind putting this half and this becoming a-third? That means there must be a reason and when the chairman says consequential, this was not equal to the other one in the first Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is being amended. There is a consequential amendment. This is what the chairman said. It is consequential, having passed the other one it was a necessary amendment.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, yes, I have agreed with the chairman’s consequential amendment but the minister in his Bill under 4 said, “at least half of the districts.” Then when he came to 7(b) he said, “at least a-third of the districts.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, why do you ask the minister? The minister brought us the Bill in the way he brought it. We did not give it a second reading; we recommitted it to the committee. The committee has looked at it and has decided to correct what is wrong and we are now dealing with the corrections. What has been proposed is a consequential amendment because of the previous amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose a second amendment in sub-clause 6(a) by substituting the expression, “as soon as possible” appearing in the first line with the expression, “within 14 days.” This is to state the actual period within which the commission should give notice of its opinion so that the concerned party is not left in suspense for an undefined period. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose an amendment to sub-clause 11 in the report - it is marked 2 but it is supposed to be 11. We propose to replace the last word on that sub-clause, which is “expeditiously” and replace it with “six months” to provide a definite period within which action should be taken instead of leaving it as it is.

MR WANDERA: Why all the six months? I would propose maybe three months, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, there is a proposal of three months, honourable chairman.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we proposed six months because of the processes involved: verification and so on and so forth, which might not be properly handled within three months. So we gave that period of six months to take care of all situations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, sub-clauses 12 and 13 are a bit problematic and the drafting that has been done does not seem to answer what the committee has said. This is the point that I would like to explain to the House.

In sub-clause 12(b) where the Electoral Commission fails to act on an application and then in 13 a person who is aggrieved by the fact that the Electoral Commission fails to act on the objection and the word that has been provided in the Bill is for an appeal, we debated this and said, is there a possibility of appealing against a decision that has not been made? Because there are two situations here: there is a situation where the Electoral Commission has refused to register and then there is a situation where the Electoral Commission has decided against an application for an objection. Those would be proper cases for an appeal, but where there is no decision we are proposing that there should be a procedure for a petition to the High Court to end this process. But as you would see the drafting has not been perfectly represented.

THE CHAIRMAN: So?

MR OULANYAH: I am proposing that you give us time to redraft this provision so that we can come back to it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore, we stand over it. Okay, clause stood over because there are certain proposed amendments, which have not been finalised. So we shall deal with it later, meanwhile you work on it.

(Clause 8, agreed to.)

(Clause 9, agreed to.)

Clause 10

THE CHAIRMAN:  Have you got an amendment?

MR KITYO: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment, which I submitted to the committee. Clause 10 is referring to internal organisation of political parties or organisations. As I said yesterday, Ugandans have got a stake in any political party formed because it can take state power. Therefore, there is no party that is formed and it does not concern all Ugandans. The internal democracy within the party is very important to all Ugandans.  

I want to move an amendment to sub-clause (3) where it is proposed in the Bill that the election of members of the executive committee of every political party or organisation shall be conducted at regular intervals. Mr Chairman, these regular intervals are not properly demarcated. The regular intervals can be 20 years. It is important for this Bill to be very specific otherwise we can have political parties having their leaders for more than ten years.  

My amendment under 3(a) says, “The political parties should submit their electoral calendar to the Electoral Commission so that the regular interval is known. As they register the party, they are supposed to show how regular they will have their elections within the organisation.” 

3(b) “They should elect their leaders by secret ballot.”  We have already started to hear that some parties are saying founder members are not going to be subjected to elections but those who came later can be elected. This is not democracy. I want to appeal to this House to show much interest in how the internal democracy of parties is going to be developed otherwise we shall have undemocratic parties ruling this country, which will be contrary to the Constitution of Uganda. I submit, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: How do you go about this provision of regular intervals, do you have a period in mind? Do you intend to impose that on parties, because one party may say, “We have elected you to serve for three years to see how you perform and then give you sufficient time”. Another one may say five years; how are you going to deal with that?

MR KITYO: Mr Chairman, we are not imposing the regular intervals but power in this country is normally held for five-year intervals and I think every five years parties should hold new elections.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I want hon. Mutebi Kityo to clarify, because when you are submitting your application for registration as a party you are supposed to submit your constitution, which is supposed to provide for the internal organisation of that political party. So, do we need to bring it in this Act? Do we need to copy all constitutions of all political parties and organisations and include them in this Act or they are supposed to be regulated by their constitutions?

MR KITYO: It may not be a requirement -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you perhaps want to hear about – is it a clarification hon. Omara Atubo?

MR ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I appeared before the committee and I also made some substantive contribution to this clause 10. Hon. Dr Okulo Epak, who is not able to be here, has also drawn my attention to the fact that he also appeared before the committee and made some substantive proposal. 

However, the committee seems to have - for reasons unknown to us - not come out with any substantive proposal on clause 10 and I think what the committee did is simply at page 6 of its report to put in the form of recommendations, the following: “As an operating commitment, the political parties should respect, defend and uphold fundamental principles of internal democracy.”

I agree with this statement but the point is that it has not been put as part of the law. How are you going to ensure as part of the law the fact that the parties will respect, defend and uphold fundamental principles of democracy? I am aware that in clause 10 there is something, which is broadly stated there. It says, “A political party or organisation shall, in its internal organisation, comply with the provisions of the Constitution in particular Article 71 and 72 of the Constitution.”  

When I appeared before the committee I made it clear that with modern drafting you make it easy for a person who has bought a copy of the Act, not to be forced to refer to various provisions of other laws, including the Constitution. I drew it to the attention of the committee that it would be proper to come up with exactly what the committee wants out of the Constitution’s basic principles, and put it here so that when I buy a copy of this Act, the Political Parties and Organisations Act, I may not be forced in any way to buy a copy of the Constitution and read them side by side. That was one.  

The second one was the issue of internal democracy. Internal democracy is looked at in different ways and I wanted the committee, when I appeared before it, to bring out some basic ingredients of what the parties should have as basic principles of internal democracy. Because internal democracy to somebody in a socialist system may be different from that of somebody in a communist system; and may be different to somebody in a capitalist system. He may look at this internal democracy differently and he may call it internal democracy, “That is our internal democracy. You see!”  

So I was saying that as we look at parties and we really assist them to grow and to mature into national institutions good for all of us, we might have to look afresh at this provision. In particular, when you look at the amendment, which Dr Okulo Epak asked me to –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, honourable member on the Floor, we had a proposal, which was not clear.

MR ATUBO: Oh, this internal interval –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: A proposal by hon. Kityo, it was not –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Yes, I want to inform this House that when I appeared before the committee, for example, on the issue of regular interval - I agree with hon. Kityo. Hon. Kityo, when I appeared before the committee, I proposed that our period of elections in this country is five years and actually I put it before the committee that these regular intervals – regular intervals to one party maybe the life of a party president or the life of somebody who is sitting there.
 
I think in France the life of the President is to be seven years; in Rwanda I have also been told it is seven years but ours here is five. In America it is four years and in Britain it is five years and so on. So, why don’t we come up with something to guide parties because you are running into a risk of somebody defining the regular intervals to mean anything? I am proposing that this is actually a proper clause to stand over for the committee to sit with the interested parties and come out with - for example Dr Okulo Epak has come out with even a sanction, a provision where if you fail to comply with this provision there should be some punishment levied against you. All this was put before the committee I do not know what happened.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us do this: it seems there are no clear amendments but the ideas, maybe we stand over each provision so that hon. Omara Atubo and hon. Kityo can meet the chairperson and work out something, which is clearer than the position here.  

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, it is true that these proposals were made to the committee and the committee examined them. If you look at our recommendation No.3 in relation to the general things formulating a code of conduct for political parties, the committee was of the view that the proposed code and all these things should only provide general guidelines and not attempt to regulate the internal affairs of the political parties.  

The committee thought that the political parties have constitutions. If in their constitutions they have regular intervals of 20 years and there are members who have agreed to this, who are we to amend for them what they have adopted in their constitution? So, the committee examined this matter and it was found that we couldn’t go to regulate in detail the internal affairs of the political parties. That is why it was not adopted as a recommendation.

THE CHAIRMAN: But can’t you sit say at least every three or five years so that it is in the Bill? So that it is compelling them?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think I understand the sentiments and views of hon. Omara Atubo given our recent experience and going beyond but there is a limit to how much we can subject to parties, what their name is, to external disciplining. What he is talking about is democratising society so that they can judge who is worth leading them and who is not worthy of leading them. But if we are to say for example a party - and I want to mention UPC - should do this then we have to have a mechanism of who goes to detect this and then arbitration, and so on and so forth. Let us not really think that we are here to manufacture parties. They did it in Nigeria, they drew up constitutions for parties and they did not seem to work.  

We are really talking about the maturity of the population, the maturity of a political class so that they do things that are consonant with the Constitution. Because the guidelines that are in the Constitution are good enough, in my opinion. I think we are getting too far to the point of bringing policemen in the political parties.

THE CHAIRMAN: What do you mean by regular intervals?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Regular intervals would be defined within the party constitution. If the party says, “For us we elect our leaders every five years or every ten years”, the issue is, whether when then they do that they are vying for political office, their own constitution can be an instrument they can use to convince the population. But if a party like CP says, “For us –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, then I think what we can do is to say that every political party shall in this Constitution provide for regular – or conduct elections at regular intervals so that each constitution must have this particular provision. Maybe that may solve the problem.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, one of the most severe accusations against political parties in this country is for leaders of parties to over stay in office. The Constitution empowers this Parliament to make this law and I think we shall be failing in our duty if we do not come out clearly on a given period. In my view “regular intervals” is not good enough. 

We should make a provision that parties must carry out elections after every five years because we know that in the Constitution every five years we change. We go for general elections and I think this is the only way to go rather than simply providing for regular intervals. That means nothing and we shall have failed in our duty to regulate parties. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: But honourable member, if you provide for five years, when will the new leaders too prepare for national elections? I think it must be less than five years because if it has to be five years, when will the new leader organise himself?

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I would like first of all to convince hon. Kabwegyere, the minister to leave the chairman of the committee alone so that he listens to my submission. 

I want to convince this House that we are in an era where we are talking about good governance, democratic principles and these are issues that determine the way we interact among ourselves and the way we are judged by the population and maybe other people who look at us. 

I want to agree with hon. Mwandha and hon. Mutebi that this regular interval is not enough. So, I wish to propose that we say the election of members of the executive committee of every political party or organisation shall be conducted at regular intervals of five years or less. If the organisation thinks that their interval - after all we are not saying that they should remove their leader or whatever - we are saying that let the people within that organisation have a choice or have a say in whoever is going to lead them. 

This regular interval, suppose the organisation says they want somebody to lead them for 20 years, I mean they submit regular intervals to be 20 years, is that good governance? Does that fall within the ladder of good governance? I think we need and for me I agree with hon. Kityo that we should also put secret ballot as part of it.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, the proposal is five years. I put the question that within a period not exceeding five years - that is the amendment. I put the question to –(Interruption)

MS NAMUSOKE: Within a period not exceeding five years.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I agree that they should not be at intervals OF more than five years but assuming there are extenuating circumstances and a political party cannot hold its delegates’ conference within that period? Would it not be prudent that we put in a provision that such a party should notify the Electoral Commission of such inability?  

THE CHAIRMAN: This circumstance could be that we do not have money. I think let us try it – (Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I draw this from the Trade Union Act, which creates the National Organisation of Trade Unions and also provides for the registration and operation of registered trade unions. It allows unions to notify the labour commission and there are cases where a party –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: You are saying unless there are which provisions?

MR WANDERA: There are certain reasons, I may not come up with a specific reason right now but if we stood over it, it is something that we could think about.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, if you allow such provisions there will always be reasons for failure to convene a delegates’ conference. So, the parties must make sure they hold a mini delegates’ conference to beat the deadline.

MR OMARA ATUBO: The only reason in our Constitution where you can extend the life of Parliament or of a presidency is when there is war. So, even for national elections there are no good reasons. The only good reason I can see for postponement of party elections is possibly when there is a situation of war in the country and that would also affect the national elections. So, I do not see any other reason.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 11, agreed to.)

Clause 12

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in clause 12 the Bill proposes in 1 that every political party or organisation shall maintain its head or national office. The committee found difficulty with this description of “head or national office” and we propose to substitute this phrase with the expression “national head office”, for clarity.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I wish to move an amendment to clause 12(3) and 12(4) – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now hon. Kahinda Otafiire is going to say you are enforcing –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, it is just a simple amendment; it is not really complicated that it needs something because 12(3) says, “not later than six months after the financial year of Government.” This is presupposing that government will be funding a political party, but a company can decide its accounting date to be in March, February or whatever it decides. So, I was saying that this should be after the end of its financial year.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where do you want to put the amendment, which clause?

MR NANDALA: Clause 12(3), that the accounts of every political party or organisation shall be audited once in every year but not later than six months after its accounting financial year. Simply like that, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, the last one is on 12(4). At the end they are saying, “The Electoral Commission within such a time as it may specify” that one makes it vague. The moment you have said the accounting period is within six months that means at the end of six months you should submit the final returns. So I am saying there that, “This party should, within six months from the end of their financial year, submit to the Electoral Commission their accounts” because if you allow them not to specify, the commissioner can keep quiet and these people relax.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 12, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 13, agreed to.)

Clause 14

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in clause 14, sub-clause (1), we propose to substitute the word “five” appearing in the third line with the word “twenty.”  In other words we propose that the currency points in that clause be twenty thousand currency points and not five thousand currency points. The justification for this is that the ceiling would be unreasonably low to cater for the activities of political parties as they try to raise their funds.  

A case was put that if a political party receives, for example a double cabin pick-up that would be it for that year and that would not be fair to other activities of the political parties. The committee recommends that this be enlarged to take care of the broader activities of the political parties. We beg to propose.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I have got an amendment –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let us deal with this one first.

MR LUKYAMUZI: But it is related to that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Oh, yes? So I put the question to the chairman’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in the same breath in sub-clause (3)(a) we propose a figure of 20,000 currency points to replace the 5,000 currency points in that provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (3)(b) we propose to replace the words 50,000 with 200,000 currency points. The justifications are just as illustrated that political parties need more space to get more funding for their activities.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose in sub-clause (5) that the whole sub-clause (5) be deleted because it is unnecessary to impose any obligation on any foreign countries and foreign institutions that have made contributions to the funds of political parties since the political parties themselves are under obligation to declare what they have received.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (7) we propose that the phrase, “from time to time” appearing in the second line of that clause be deleted and replaced with the expression, “and with the approval of Parliament.” 

The justification for this is that the minister should not just wake up in the morning and declare those countries to be hostile and so on and so forth, but it should be a matter that should pass through Parliament so that everybody knows that this particular country and that particular organisation have been prescribed as organizations from which funds should not be sourced. We beg to propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: That is all, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Hon. Lukyamuzi, are you catered for?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I will talk later, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So I put the question that clause that 14 as amended do stand part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 15

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in clause 15(3), paragraph (b)(ii) on examination and consultation we found that the word “two” got there by a typographical error and the amount there should actually be 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both. We propose to delete the word “two” from that provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KABAREEBE: I wanted to move an amendment to clause 15(i) where instead of looking at a political request to an officer only, I would not say that it should be a specific person. That the Electoral Commission may, in writing, request the chairman of a political party or organization to furnish for inspection by the Electoral Commission records required to be maintained under section 12, et cetera. Instead of asking an officer, let it be a specific person, either the chairman or the secretary general. I beg to move.

MR WANDERA: Assuming we have a party that does not have a chairperson as one of its – maybe what could be done is to ask a political party to designate a particular officer to whom such communication can be made.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now what is the amendment? Are you trying to assist him to define it?

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Chairman, to simply say an officer of a political party, does it mean that the Electoral Commission can meet any officer anywhere and say, “Please, give us this information?” That is why I wanted it to be specific so that we know a certain person or political party is responsible for delivering such messages.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, the amendment is not called for because upon at registration each party submits its constitution and the constitution stipulates who the chief executive officer of such a political party is.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so I put the question that clause 15 as amended stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 16

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, clause 16 has come up and talking to people who are not supposed to be in political party or political organisations, I want to move an amendment in addition to members who should be included in this -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But how many times am I going to use my discretion to allow quoting the rules of procedure? I did it once and now it is becoming open ended. The purpose of tabling amendments is to list them and see which one to deal with first. I am not allowing that.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, you remember initially - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I am not allowing that because now one step, second step, fifth step then we are forgetting about the rules. I put the question that clause 16 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we had proposed to insert two new clauses after clause 16. If that could be the proper housing for it, this will be the provision that we had proposed earlier to deal with the merger of political parties and organizations and regulating the alliance of political parties and organisations, if this will be the proper place for it under the circumstances.

THE CHAIRMAN: But merger of political parties was there, any doubt that parties can merge and form one party? So long as long they are registered under the law, do you have to? Because if they merge, therefore, they are changing the name they registered themselves in? Now what is the problem? Why do you have to provide for it? Because it is clear today that we were this party and decided to change to this party so we have to obey the law and register that is the end of it.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we were of the same opinion but there were serious submissions and also comparisons with other jurisdiction. I give you the case of Ghana; there are specific provisions on how to make regulations relating to merging political parties and also the issue of alliance of political parties. 

I propose a new clause 16(a) to read, “Merger of political parties and organizations: where two or more registered political parties or organizations come together and merge as one party or organization, 

(a) The registration of each party or organization existing immediately before the effective date of the merger shall lapse; and 
(b) The party or organization shall require registration for the purposes of this Act.”  

16(b) Sir, -(Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: I thought that the chairman was going to provide a little bit more than what he has provided because various parties will have assets; they will have other things. How are these going to be treated according to this law? If we find it necessary to provide for merger of parties, is it enough to simply say one shall lapse and then you begin applying for a new license, which the chairman has already stated? I thought there was much more that the committee was going to propose to provide for an effective and smooth and transparent manner of mergers.  

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, the chairman of the committee is right. A merger is conclusive. Otherwise, if you leave it hanging a partnership is a loose relationship and people can stick to what they do and this is really to discourage parties from merging for the sake of removing legitimate governments. So this is very good; it cures some collusion that is not principled.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, it is also important for the committee to explain what all this alludes to because there are forms of merging. Some forms of merging lead to collusions. It is not bad for the political party to work together with others with the intention of winning an election.

THE CHAIRMAN: But there is (b), an alliance.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification because (a) says, “The registration of each party or organization existing immediately before the effective date of the merger shall lapse.”  I am not a legal person so please, help me to understand. When they merge and lapse, does that automatically take care of the liabilities? The new one takes over, is that automatic? I need to know that.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, “merger” means the groups, which are coming together, lose individual identity immediately. So with this the committee is right and the moment you go in a merger that means your identity is finished.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose a new clause 16(b), “Alliance of political parties and Organisations: where two or more registered political parties or organisations form an alliance of their parties or organizations, the following provisions shall apply:

(a) Each party or organisation shall remain as a separate registered political party or organisation for the purposes of this Act.

(b) Each party or organisation shall furnish the Commission within such period, as the Commission shall direct a copy of the terms of the agreement of the alliance.

(c) In any public elections, each candidate shall be personally identified by the symbol of his or her political party on the ballot paper.

(d) Where the parties nominate separate candidates to contest, an election in the same constituency, each a candidate shall be identified separately on the ballot paper and in relation to his or her party only.

(e) Fees payable under this Act or any regulations made under this Act by or in respect of a candidate for elections shall be paid separately by or for each candidate standing for the elections in the name of his or her own party, the alliance notwithstanding.”  

I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clear. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 17

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 17 be deleted. Clause 17 relates to the funding of political parties by public resources. I stated yesterday during the general debate that the law, among other things, is meant to cure an evil and indeed there are evils within political parties in this country and the evils touch on matters of internal democracy, weak leadership, lack of clear ideology and others. 

The issue of limited finances is not one of the biggest problems of political parties in this country and I do not see how the financing of the political parties by the State will give them strong leadership. 

Secondly, parties are a group of people with a common policy programme who want to take government. If you want to take government and you cannot sustain yourselves and you require the State to support you, then you are dangerous to our politics.

Thirdly, political parties are not the only organisations in this country that service the public goods; we have many free other associations. We have community-based organisations and we have private companies that also service the public goods. But when they run bankrupt the state never moves in to bail them out. So with those few remarks I request my colleagues to support my amendment that we delete this clause. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we substantively debated this matter yesterday. I think you have decided which side you will take; why do we not vote?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I definitely support this proposal with a minor observation. I think this business of funding parties from the word go turns parties into income generating projects for certain people and this should be discouraged. However, I would like to retain (c) and I want my colleague, hon. Wandera, to agree with me that after a party has proved itself and gone through an election, then some funding can be given to a party on the basis of its strength in the elections; and I think this is the practice also in other countries. That way parties can be assisted to meet some of the costs of running the parties. But to begin paying a party because it has registered, to enable it to campaign, to me that is not good enough.  

However, yesterday we had many examples of other countries, including Germany and so on, where parties can be supported financially by the State on the basis of their performance in general elections. So, I would suggest that we retain (c).

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, I can see why my colleague is trying to sympathize with some parties and imagining that there must be a threshold. The fear I have, and maybe the clarification I want from him is, one: at whose discretion must this party be judged as deserving funding? 

Two: for the same reasons, we are against funding the parties, how are you sure that parties are not going to borrow money to go to that stage with a view of getting money from government to pay their debts? Further, this is going to discourage hopeless parties. Imagine now we have 33 parties registered in Uganda. Some of them are single-person parties. Why should the public forego money to fund these parties? 

Lastly, once a party has failed to raise money, then it has failed the litmus paper test that it does not have the people capacity to fund itself.  

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Chairman, I have listened to hon. Rwamirama but I want to bring out this side as well. We need to have the mentality of knowing that even a political party that has not won elections, especially if it has membership in this House, is representing people and it has a contribution to make. Government is as institution funded by taxpayers and even those who are represented by the opposition deserve to get some support from the taxpayer’s money. 

I want to propose and to agree with hon. Mwandha that (c) should be left and that once a party gets representation in this House, it should get government funding so that it plays the role of the opposition effectively. We need to move away from the thought that the opposition are people who want to take us away and, therefore, we must make sure that we are ahead of them all the time, and look at them as having a contribution to make on behalf of Ugandans and therefore need to benefit from government support in this House. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have got two amendments. There is an amendment for complete deletion and another for partial deletion. The amendment, which goes furthest, is the complete deletion. Can we start with that and vote on that because if it succeeds, the question of partial deletion will not come up?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I oppose both amendments. First, the state has a duty to nurture and develop political parties, more so in a young and growing democracy like ours. So that is the principle. In (a) we propose that government will fund political party activities only in respect of elections, not in respect of normal day-to-day activities. So this is consistent with the concerns of hon. Mwandha.

In (b) the committee had proposed an amendment but it appears the chairman seems to have abandoned that amendment because he has not risen.  Otherwise, I agree with the committee’s amendment that funding in respect of the first elections because we do not have the criteria of the strength of parties in the House yet we have not even had the first multi-party elections. 

Funding should be restricted to presidential candidates, not just presidential candidates representing political parties, but also candidates who will run as independents. This is consistent with the provision in the Presidential Elections Bill, which we will look at later. So there is no contradiction between (a), (b) as amended by the committee, and (c).  

I agree that, yes, provide funding to political parties but in respect of elections and after the first elections, having determined the strength of the parties in Parliament, funding should then follow the number of seats a party commands in the House. So I would like to oppose the amendments and to propose that the formulation in the Bill as amended by the committee be maintained.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like the minister to clarify on 17(a) in respect of elections. How can we determine elections? Is it presidential elections alone? If it is presidential elections alone, then it should be clearly stated here. But if you just say elections, there are various elections taking place and all political parties are going to participate in those elections. What formula is going to be used in funding these political party elections? I really think this will be ridiculous.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, if your intention is to fund a presidential candidate, be it of parties or whatever, you rather leave this for when we deal with the Presidential Elections Bill. It would be better that way because this is dealing with parties.

DR MATOVU BYATIKE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am just wondering whether the chairman or the minister could consider – I am supporting the retention of (c) - the percentage of votes that have been cast in the first elections rather than the number of votes. We say a party that has achieved say more than five percent qualifies and anything below that does not qualify for any funding of the state.

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, we are a poor nation and I am surprised that when we cannot even supply aspirins to our people, we can still think of funding political parties. Let us look at the history of political parties in Africa and if you want, particularly in Uganda here. These political parties came up to struggle for independence, whether it was Uganda National Congress, Democratic Party and so on. They were people organized, people oriented, people mobilized. Whether you are talking of KANU in Kenya, or parties in Tanzania, they came out of themselves and funded themselves, got resources from themselves and so on.  

So, if you are now talking of parties going to be supported by a poor country like Uganda and you are going to support them, that is difficult. If you are talking of supporting presidential candidates and other candidates, then we should wait for the particular law as the Speaker has rightly put it. But if you are talking of supporting political parties, these are public and some times private organisations, let them get their resources. Some of the people who fund parties are very rich people, they will be able to ensure that they support a new party and they will be able to do this –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us vote on this. I put the question; there are two amendments, one is for complete deletion another one partial. We start with the complete deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 17, deleted.)

Clause 18

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I seek your indulgence and guidance on this. I am proposing an amendment to insert immediately after this clause 18 another clause 18(a).

THE CHAIRMAN: So, let me put clause 18 first. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, yesterday we talked about this and we came up and said in our debate that the moment these parties are still young, the moment we allow people to jump about having made little or no commitment, it is very dangerous. So I would like to make a small amendment in 18(2); this is how it will be, that anybody who has been in a party should stay in that party even if he has lost primaries but he should not come out to say that I now want to stand as an independent candidate having lost the primaries in a party, because that would make parties not to grow. But if we want them to grow, we need to make sure that there are real serious democratic intentions and people there adore to the constitutions and the operations of the party. So I want to move that –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But as explained yesterday and now by the minister, you cannot tie a person to a party. (Applause) Today he maybe in that party and tomorrow he may say, “I am no longer interested in party politics. I am an individual, and I present myself as an individual.”  The moment you say that whoever abandoned their party cannot be allowed, it may not be easy. As I told you, you become a candidate when you submit yourself to the Electoral Commission. So the Electoral Commission should not ask you, “What is your background, I thought you were in this party, what has happened?” 

So, constitutionally it may not be feasible to tie a person to his past. Of course you can go during the campaigns and say that this person and the other, but to prevent him from standing may not be constitutionally proper. 

DR KIYONGA: Mr Chairman, this law is being enacted to provide for durable or strong political parties. That is why we are talking about internal democracy; that is why we are talking about the funding and on and so forth. Each party must have a code of conduct, which members must follow. If you are a registered member of a party and you have a card and you have stood in the primaries and it is expected that not all those who stand go through, only one must go through. On getting defeated in an election, which you have stood conscious of the fact that only one is going to be elected, and then immediately you are defeated you say, “I am now an independent” –(Interjections)- may I finish first please? Let me make my point.  

I think we are creating a climate, which opportunistic individuals will take advantage of and weaken these parties, which we are legislating to protect and nurture to grow strong. So in my opinion it is not even a good guideline; it is not even a good encouragement for a person who genuinely stands and loses and cannot recognize that defeat to stand again. In politics this should be understood and respected. 

What guarantee do we now have that this person, when he gets a seat as an independent, suppose he wins that, when he gets here, he will also avoid going elsewhere? We have already put it in our legislation that when you cross, you go back. That principle should be seen to percolate to the grassroots into the parties. Take it or leave it, I am saying it and I want it to be on record that it is not in the interest of parties that you encourage people who have stood genuinely in primaries to become independent candidates.

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I was on the Floor when the minister stood up. What we are trying to put up, which the minister has said, we are not saying that we are telling somebody not to be an independent candidate. If you want to be an independent candidate, decide now to be an independent candidate. (Applause) But the moment you go in the political parties you must abide by the rules of the game. If you want to cross after the primary elections, you wait for the next elections and then you can do anything else. That is the way we can move.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, we have history to learn from. In 1981 we had elections and they were rigged. We went to the bush because there was rigging and there was no where we could appeal to. We have experience in recent times where hon. Cecilia Ogwal was barred from standing. We cannot legislate for the internal democracy of parties; we are legislating for national democracy. If I am in party X and I am defeated in primaries, therefore, you assume I am a weak candidate. Then, why do you fear for me to stand as an independent candidate?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. You must always develop hypotheses that are simple and workable. Many people go to parties, develop their stature through these parties and then suddenly because they have duly lost an election, they want to abandon the party that built them. As if that is not bad enough, these people can even be used by other parties to weaken the party they belonged to so that the other parties win. These people who jump all over the place are prone to that sort of behaviour. 

As a matter of fact, I think I need to be corrected, but in Tanzania you make up your mind that you belong to political party X or Y. If you do not, you have no business being in the elective process. It is dangerous; it is unworkable and unethical for us to allow people to jump all over the place. The honourable member used, as an example, the 1980 elections. Of course we have now developed a reasonably efficient legal system. If anything has gone wrong with your party, you go to the courts of law and sue whoever has wronged you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think the problem came in formulating this law. This Bill was for political parties and their activities. It was not for independent people who are not operating under parties. Independent people who are going to stand for elections are going to be catered for by the parliamentary electoral law. So, there was no point drafting this law under clause 18, to have brought in a person who may stand for elections as an independent candidate without being sponsored by any political party or organization. 

Here the Bill is dealing with political parties and organisations. Whereas there is a case for people to stand independently, I think this should be dealt with when we are dealing with the Parliamentary Election law. This is my assessment and I am just advising.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I honestly take your guidance that this provision is an electoral provision so it should go in another electoral law. Accordingly, I undertake to amend the Presidential Elections Act and the Parliamentary Elections law to accommodate both what is here and what hon. Nandala has proposed. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: What do we do? You want to delete the whole thing so that it is catered for later? We shall be able to debate when he brings it in the other Bill. 

MR MWESIGE: I, therefore, propose that on the understanding that this provision will be introduced in the electoral laws, the current clause 18 of this Bill be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 18 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 18, deleted.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Will that prejudice your stand honourable member? When we deal with the other one, you make your case.

Clause 19

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in clause 19, sub-clause (1), we propose to amend by inserting the expression “and the political parties” between the words “commission” and “and” appearing at the beginning of the second line. This amendment is meant to cater for our recommendation that the code of conduct for political parties should be formulated in consultation with the political parties.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I would like to make a proposal for replacement of the entire clause in the following manner - if I replace clause 19 with my proposal, then clause 20 will consequentially fall on the wayside. The amendment is that:

“1. The political parties and organisations under the National Consultative Forum may create such positions or offices that may be necessary for the realisation of the objectives of the forum.
2. The political parties and organizations shall prescribe the rules and procedures for the smooth operation of the National Consultative Forum for Political Parties.
3. The functions of the National Consultative Forum shall include prescribing a code of conduct for political parties and the resolution of disputes between and among political parties and organisations.” 

The reason that I am moving this amendment is that the relations between parties and organisations should be regulated by parties themselves and the way they behave should be something they should come up with if they are to own it and I draw this from the Ghanaian experience. Otherwise, we shall be looking at political parties as organizations that are not mature enough to come up with a code of conduct. 

Secondly, if we leave it to the minister, the minister is partisan; he comes from a political party and he may come up with a code of conduct that is not fair.

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, with due respect to my good friend, I think he will see the reason why it is important that political parties should not provide a code of conduct on their own. Political parties are important national institutions; they have public interest and the present provision involves the Electoral Commission, the political parties and Parliament to come out with a code of conduct. I think it is the best and safest way. If you say parties should really sit on their own and provide a code of conduct, they may provide it in a way, which does not cover in totality the national interests, a mischief we want to address. 

I want to inform the House that there are even other laws, which address private institutions, and the law even provides more strict provisions. Take for example the Companies Act. Hon. Wandera, if you form your own private limited liability company, there is a very strict law in the Companies Act. It is your private limited liability company, Wandera and Sons Limited, but you have got to register it, get a certificate, get Articles of Memorandum of Association, file annual returns of directors and the Revenue Authority will follow you up. The same applies to the Trade Unions Act. You know as a Trade Unionist, the strict laws which govern trade unions, the law which governs partnerships, laws which govern universities, et cetera. 

I would urge my brother Wandera not to leave political parties on their own to provide their code of conduct. Let political parties be involved, we are not excluding them. The present amendment was actually part of the argument we brought in when we appeared. The original provision was for the Electoral Commission and Parliament alone, but we are saying political parties should come in. I think the involvement of political parties together with the Electoral Commission and Parliament is a good safe guard already but not to leave it to political parties alone.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 19 as amended stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 20

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the committee recommended that in clause 20 the functions of the National Consultative Forum should be prescribed in the law rather than being left to the minister to do it by regulation; but we have not been able to formulate these functions as of now and I would request that we stand over this clause to allow us formulate it.

Clause 21

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in clause 21 we propose to amend sub-clause (2), the running paragraph after (b). This follows our recommendation that a political party should not just cease to exist by operation of the law. There should be a process involved in the court and we, therefore, propose that after (b) the running clause should be that “The Electoral Commission shall apply to the High Court for an order to de-register the political party or organisation and the High Court shall make such orders as may be just for the disposition of the property, assets, rights and liabilities of the political party or organisation”. We beg to propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to amend clause 21, sub-clause (2) as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 22

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, in clause 22, sub-clause (2) on appeals, in the Bill proposes that the distinction of the Court of Appeal under sub-clause (1) shall be final. The committee is of the view that matters of this nature should go to the highest court in the land so that the aggrieved persons do not feel any gap in their redress. We, therefore, propose to replace sub-clause (2) with the following: “Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Court of Appeal may appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question that sub-clause (2) of clause 22 be amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KIWALABYE: I seek clarification on sub-clause (2) where an appeal under this Act has been determined by the High Court. I think the High Court here is a court of initiation and cannot be an appeal court. There is something wrong there where any case under this Act has been determined by the High Court.

THE CHAIRMAN: It could be that earlier there were things over which one could appeal to the High Court so that the court, when dealing with that issue, is dealing with something that has already been determined by an earlier tribunal. That is what they are talking about that particular appeal.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 22 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 23

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose to substitute the expression “High Court or Court of Appeal” appearing in the second line with the expression “High Court, Court of Appeal or Supreme Court” as a consequential amendment to what has been decided.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 23 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 24

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 24 stand part of the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 24, agreed to.)

Clause 25

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 25 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 25, agreed to.)

Clause 26

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose to replace the provision of clause 26 with the following, “The Electoral Commission may designate any of its officials to carryout any functions conferred upon it by this Act.”  This is to clarify the provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 26 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 27

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 27 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 27, agreed to.)

Clause 28

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 28 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

(Clause 28, agreed to.)

Clause 29

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose in clause 29, sub-clause (2) to delete the expression “before the commencement of this Act”. This is just good drafting as it is repetition.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 29 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.)

First Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the First Schedule stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
(The First Schedule, agreed to.)

The Second Schedule

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose that in the provision appearing in brackets under item 2, starting with the word “note”, insert the expression “district” after the word “sub-county”. This is to answer the full details for registration.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Second Schedule, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled “The Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005” and adopted clause 1, clause 2 with amendments, clause 3, clause 4, clause 5 with amendments, clause 6, clause 8, clause 9, clause 10 with amendments, clause 11, clause 12, clause 13, clause 14 with amendments, clause 15, clause 16 with amendments, clause 17 with amendments, clause 19 with amendments, clause 21 with amendments, clause 22 with amendments, clause 23 with amendments, clause 24, clause 25, clause 26 with amendments, and clauses 27, 28, 29 with amendments. 

The committee stood over clauses 7 and 20 and deleted clause 18. It also adopted Schedule 1 and Schedule 2 with amendments. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORTS 
FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I must say I am pleased with your attendance, which has greatly improved, and the manner in which you have expeditiously dealt with this particular Bill. We hope to complete tomorrow so that we can start general debate on another one. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 19 October 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

