Wednesday, 7 October 2015

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, the honourable Leader of the Opposition and honourable Members of Parliament, it is unfortunate that in less than three weeks when we last paid tribute to our colleague, the late hon. Nyakairima, we are again gathered here to pay tribute to hon. Dr James Mutende, the Minister of State for Industry. 

As we approach the end of the Fifth Session, you may recall that in the past, we have had similar sittings for hon. Michael Oromait of Usuk County, hon. Cerinah Nebanda of Butaleja, hon. Eriya Kategaya, an ex-officio Member of Parliament, former minister hon. Stephen Malinga of Butebo County, hon. Joy Karisa of Buhweju and hon. Gregory Matovu of Bukanga. 

Dr Mutende joined Parliament on 7 June 2011 as an ex-officio Member of Parliament, having been nominated by H.E the President to be appointed as the Minister of State for Industry. 

You will remember his energy, zeal and commitment. He was very instrumental in the processing of the budget of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and he has been diligent both in the plenary and in the committee. He will be remembered for his immense contribution to the institution of Parliament and the country as a whole.

On behalf of the Parliament, I would like to extend our sincere condolences to our friend and colleague, hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende, the children, relatives and the country at large.

In particular, I also wish to extend our condolences to the people of the highlands of Masaba. We convey condolences to the President for losing two ministers in a very short period. We also offer condolences to hon. Amelia Kyambadde and hon. David Wakikona, colleagues in the ministry where he worked as well as the entire Cabinet where he was a member. 

Distinguished colleagues, although this is an emotional time, I would like to appeal to the movers of the motion to use a maximum of 30 minutes in moving and seconding the motion. This is so that the remaining one and a half hours can be used by the other Members of Parliament. This is to enable us to conclude the sitting and tribute by 4.00 p.m. so that the body can be taken to Mbale. They would like to arrive before nightfall. 

Therefore, that is my appeal that we use as little time as possible in doing the needful. Thank you very much. I now direct the Clerk to bring the body into the Chamber. 

(Entrance of the late Dr James Mutende.)

The National Anthem.

The East African Community Anthem.

THE SPEAKER: Before I lay the wreath, I would like to welcome, in the Distinguished Members’ Gallery, staff from the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry where our colleague worked. We have the Permanent Secretary, Ambassador Julius Onen, Mr Abdul Kasule, Mr Patrick Ibembe, Mr Davis Malowa, Mr Jackson Nabongo, Mr Emmanuel Otim and Ms Juliet Kagona. 

We also have Mr Jean Bakole, the representative of UNIDO. I do not know where he is seated. You are welcome. We also have the following former Members of Parliament: hon. Chris Mudoola, hon. Anthony Butele, hon. Beatrice Byenkya, hon. Rhoda Acen. Thank you very much for coming to give support to Parliament.

Laying of wreaths.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. DR JAMES SHINYABULO MUTENDE, MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (INDUSTRY) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I invite the Leader of Government Business, it is my unfortunate duty to bring you more bad news as a parliamentary family. Our colleague, hon. Justine Khainza of Bududa has just lost her baby. As you know, that baby was born when she was here. Therefore, he is part of our parliamentary family. He choked on food. That is the bad news I have, in addition to what is happening today.

I would like us to welcome hon. Dr Kisamba Mugerwa of the National Planning Authority, a former Member of Parliament. He is behind there.

We also have messages from the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly, Rt hon. Kidega; a condolence message from the Government Chief Whip, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa; a message from hon. Muloni, the Minister of Energy and Minerals; a message from hon. John Nasasira, Minister of Information and Communication Technology; another message from hon. Kataike, the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle and one from hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Member of Parliament for Budadiri County and also Secretary-General of FDC. We have Dr Christine Mwebeeza’s message, she is the Vice Chairperson of the Health Service Commission.

We also have one from the Parliamentarians Savings and Credit Society signed by hon. Kasamba Mathias. Hon. Mutende was a member of the SACCO and they have contributed Shs 1 million. Rt hon. Prime Minister, you may now move the motion.

2.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr James Shinyabulo Mutende. I move this motion under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure. With your permission  – 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded from both sides of the House. Proceed.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues for overwhelmingly seconding this important motion.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received the sad news of the untimely demise of hon. Dr James Shinyabulo Mutende, the Minister of State for Industry which occurred on Saturday, 3 October 2015;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. James Mutende, an illustrious son of Uganda, was born in Mbale District on 26 February 1962 and attended Busoga College Mwiri, Makerere University and later the New School University in New York;

NOTING that the late hon. James Mutende obtained Bachelor’s degree in Veterinary Medicine and a Master’s degree in Business Administration from Makerere University and a Doctorate of Philosophy in Economics from the New School University in New York;

RECOGNISING that the late James Mutende served Uganda in various capacities as an assistant lecturer at Makerere University, a senior manager at the former Uganda Commercial Bank, a researcher with United Nations in New York and as assistant professor at New School University in New York;

RECOGNISING also that he served as a deputy director at the Uganda Investment Authority and later as State Minister for Industry;

APPRECIATING his intellectualism, integrity, experience, leadership skills and charisma;

AND COGNISANT of his invaluable experience and articulation of legislative issues especially on matters of agriculture, investment, industrialisation and trade;

FURTHER COGNISANT that the late hon. James Mutende was a hardworking and diligent citizen who greatly contributed to this nation with excellence and integrity;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends, the people of Uganda and particularly the Bamasaba community that he was very proud of.

    2. That Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution made by the late hon. James Mutende to Uganda.

    3. That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants our departed colleague, hon. James Mutende, eternal rest.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You can justify.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as a justification to this motion to pay tribute to our comrade, James Mutende, it is with deep sadness that Parliament has convened this afternoon to pay tribute to yet another fallen colleague and comrade, the late hon. James Shinyabulo Mutende, the Minister of State for Industry.

Death has once again robbed us of a hardworking and dedicated comrade, James Mutende, barely three weeks after seeing off another comrade, the late hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, our former Minister of Internal Affairs. 

This is a difficult period for all of us to be going through. Hon. Mutende passed away in his sleep at his home in Makindye, Kampala on 3 October 2015. Pathologists at Mulago Hospital, who carried out the post-mortem, reported that our departed colleague died of natural causes occasioned by complications in the liver and lungs.

Madam Speaker, I have a post-mortem report here. The gist of the post-mortem report – and by the way, the post-mortem was done at Mulago by the following: 

    1. Dr Moses Byaruhanga, Forensic Pathologist and head of Police Health Services; 
    2. Dr Sam Karungi, Consultant Pathologist, Ministry of Health; 
    3. Dr Male Mutumba, Consultant Pathologist, Ministry of Health; 
    4. Mr Andrew Mubiru, Toxicologist and Senior Government Analyst.

The examination was done in the presence of the following observers/representatives selected by the family:
    1. Dr Agatha Nambuya, Senior Consultant Physician, Ministry of Health; 
    2. Dr George Mukone, Senior Medical Officer, Ministry of Health; 
    3. Mr Mutende Geoffrey, brother to the deceased; 
    4. Mr Wapakhabulo Fred Robert, brother to the deceased; 
    5. Ms Khainza Miriam, sister to the deceased.

The main findings at the post-mortem were in the lungs where the right lung was enlarged, solid and had no air in it. That means that it was an abnormal lung. 

The second main finding was in the liver and the findings in the liver were that the liver was smaller than normal and it showed features of chronic infection. The cause of death was attributed to the pathology in the liver and also in the lungs. Madam Speaker, I wish to lay before the House the full post-mortem report for colleagues. 

The late hon. James Mutende was born on 26 February 1962 to Michael and Florence Mutende in Madufu Village, Bubulo Sub-County then Mbale District but currently in the present day Sironko District.

He started his education at Fairway Primary School in Mbale from where he proceeded to Busoga College Mwiri for his O’ level and A’ level. He then joined Makerere University graduating with a Bachelor’s degree in Veterinary Medicine in 1987. He later returned to Makerere University for a Master’s degree in Business Administration completing in 1999.

In search for more knowledge, Dr Mutende joined the New School University in New York in the United States of America for a PhD in Investment Economics.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as you can tell from the above summary of Dr Mutende’s academic accomplishments, he has been a man with multi-disciplinary talent, which the government and the people of Uganda have tapped into in many ways.

Madam Speaker, as Minister of State for Industry, a role His Excellency the President Yoweri Museveni appointed him to in 2011, Dr Mutende has been instrumental in promoting the development of industries across the whole country.

Between 1998 and 2010, Dr James Mutende was a deputy director with the Uganda Investment Authority where he played a key role in designing policies for attracting and facilitating investments into the country.

In this role, he, among other responsibilities, participated in the Presidential Investors’ Round Table, a high level forum chaired by His Excellency, the President to promote investment, address bottlenecks to doing business and boost our country’s competiveness.

Earlier in his career, Dr James Mutende worked as a banker with the former Uganda Commercial Bank and as an assistant lecturer at Makerere University. The late Dr James Mutende had a breadth of intellectualism and exposure and it was always evident whenever one engaged him. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, we have lost a great resource that the country still needed for many years to come. We are however grateful that in the short 53 years of his life, Dr Mutende served Uganda with great dedication.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of Government and on my own behalf, I take this opportunity to convey our deep condolences to the family, particularly to the widow, Lydia Wanyoto Mutende and the children, Junior and Lindsay, to the Bamasaba community, to His Excellency the President and the people of Uganda for the loss of this brilliant son. 

Hon. Dr James Mutende’s service to this country will remain firmly etched in our memories. He deserves our collective tribute, May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister. I now invite the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Wafula Oguttu.

2.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Rt hon. Prime Minister, thank you. 

Madam Speaker, once again we are back here to pay tribute to yet another gallant son of our country. It is hardly a month since we were here to pay tribute to Gen. Nyakairima. 

I was rounding off some figures, Madam Speaker and I think that the Ninth Parliament has died a little bit more than the rest. We have lost close to 10 people in four years. A number of our colleagues have departed and I think it is a bit scary. They are not dying because they were very old people; some of them are dying very young and some of them have died due to unexplained circumstances. The last two have died in their sleep. I think there is cause to worry as we do not know who is next. However, it is all God’s decision. 

We would like to express our condolences to the family of the late Mutende and particularly to our colleague, hon. Lydia Wanyoto. Yes, God gives and God takes away. I hope you will remain firm and take care of your family. We are with you and we grieve with you.

Madam Speaker, the late Mutende was one of the very rare professionals. He studied Veterinary Medicine and yet became an Economist with a PhD. Therefore, you had a scientist and an artist all wrapped in one. We do not have many people like that but he was one. Definitely, the country will miss him and his services to the country, but I think he has executed his duties successfully and we shall remember him; we thank him for that.

He was one of the three most educated ministers in this Parliament. He was also a very humble man. Personally, I will remember him as a person who always greeted me in Lumasaba and teased me that I belong to them; that I also belong to a group that ran away from circumcision because the Samia and Bamasaba come from the same person.

He was a jovial man - I talked to him the last time we were here. He was also a person who – anyway he was NRM but you could not read that in him; he was just a Ugandan. He had good working relationship with us and treated people, even in Mbale, like Ugandans and Bagisu. He did not treat them because they were FDC or NRM. As long as you were willing to work for Uganda, hon. Dr Mutende was willing to work with you. 

We noticed that when he lost his seat, during by-election, to hon. Jack Wamai, he did not only concede defeat but also cooperated with him in the interest of the development of Mbale. That is how it should be; working together as nationals of the same country.

The late hon. James Mutende was one of the few Bugisu leaders who tried had to bring life back to the Bugisu Cooperative Union, which plays a major role in the lives of the people of Mbale. We have been told that hon.  Mutende was very active in the making of the 2011-2016 NRM manifesto. It is unfortunate that he will not be able to see what will come out of that.

The late hon. Dr James Mutende was very passionate about infrastructure development, which would be a catalyst or an attraction to investors. He was also very passionate about attracting investors, as the hon. Rt Prime Minister has just pointed out because he loved Uganda; he loved development.

Madam Speaker, while he was a minister, the issue of Kaveera came up in this Parliament and he was spearheading it to ensure that the Kaveera, which Parliament had banned, is affected. We still have Kaveera and unfinished business. We would like to appeal to the minister and Government that we honour him by having this Kaveera- or the ban implemented as Parliament passed it.

Madam Speaker, we shall also remember hon. Dr James Mutende as a person who liked improved agricultural production through cooperatives and innovation, technological advancement. On talking to him, those are things he talked about. One time in this Parliament, we on this side talked very passionate about the cooperative bank or an agricultural bank, and he said that the ministry was working on a proposal to re-establish the cooperative bank. He also said they had already prepared a Cabinet Memorandum and that it would soon come to Cabinet and of course Parliament.

We would like to ask Government that this, as one of the things he proposed, should be fulfilled in his honour and we shall be happy when that is done because the cooperative bank or an agricultural bank is very important and necessary for our country. We once had a bank, it was killed and I am sure it can be resurrected. 

We wish to join all Ugandans and particularly the family of hon. Dr James Mutende, friends and relatives, to mourn a good son of Uganda; a humble man who was willing to work with everybody and a friend of all. May his soul rest in eternal Peace. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much hon. Wafula-Ogutu. Honourable colleagues, as I indicated earlier, we would like to leave the family by 4.00 p.m. so the guillotine will now start. Only three minutes to those contributing. 

2.55
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion for paying tribute to our brother, the late hon. Dr James Mutende. 

Hon. Dr James Mutende has been one of the great leaders in our region. He was a leader who always stood for development in Mbale, Elgon Zone and of course including the entire country. He has been spearheading the establishment and development of industrial parks. But for us in Mbale, he specifically made sure we secured land and he had gone ahead to ensure investors come to Mbale with a view to establishing industries and creating employment opportunities for our people.

Secondly, he has been behind the establishment of the financial capacity for Bugisu Cooperative Union. Recently Bugisu Cooperative Union had a financial challenge, but he and colleagues at the Ministry of Trade and Industry, led by hon. Amelia Kyambadde, made sure we secured funding for Bugisu Cooperative Union. As I talk now the union has been able to pay the farmers and the union is back on the sound financial footing. Therefore, he has been a leader who was always out there to ensure development is realised, not only in Mbale and the Eastern region but the entire country of Uganda. 

Socially, hon. Dr James Mutende - he has been my Muko. You may be surprised but we married from Dr James Mutende’s family. Our side married from his family and that is why, while in this House, we always referred to each other as Mukwasi, which means brother-in-law.
He was a person who would listen to each and everyone’s challenge or problem. Even if he would not be able to solve that problem, he would offer advice and that is the leader we are missing.

On the cultural front, hon. Dr Mutende was proud of his culture and – (Member timed out_) 

3.58
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale and my family to convey sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Dr James Mutende, relatives and friends. 

The later hon. Dr James Mutende was my great friend. I knew him when I was serving in our mission in China and at that time the Uganda’s foreign policy had changed. It was now commercial diplomacy and I was engaged in attracting investors to Uganda. But when these Chinese returned to China, they came to the mission and complained that it was difficult to do business in Uganda because first of all, they had to find land and get a title. And that after one got a piece of land, they had to get water there, make a road, to get electricity, NEMA impact assessment report, among others. So, it was very difficult to invest in Uganda.

I travelled to Uganda, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I went to the Uganda Investment Authority and I wrote a paper; an idea from China where they have got investment parks almost in every town. Dr James Mutende took up this idea. So, you can see how very passionate he was about investment parks, Namanve and the park in Mbale. That was way back before we became Members of Parliament.

In 2010, we found ourselves on the opposite sides with Dr Mutende and I both contesting in Mbale Municipality. But during our campaigns, the late hon. Dr James Mutende never uttered a word or throwing mud, like you see other politicians do. He never said anything negative about me and that was him. He was not malicious at all. We went back to elections in 2011 and I won but the late Dr James Mutende came, embraced and congratulated me. How many Ugandans can do that? 

We remained good friends even when he was appointed as an ex-official and he was in Parliament. Members of Parliament used to wonder whether we had contested against each other because we were so close and always eating together in our canteen up there. 

On Wednesday, before his death on Saturday, I was seated with the Attorney-General, the hon. Fred Ruhindi eating together. When Dr James Mutende walked into the restaurant up there, hon. Ruhindi called him to join us on the table. We were three of us and that was the last time I saw Dr James Mutende.

It is so sad that Dr Mutende has departed just before we went into 2016 elections; he has been so passionate about our industrial park in Mbale – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, a half a minute for the Mbale Municipality Member.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I would like to request Government - Dr James Mutende was a very hardworking person and worked on that industrial park in Mbale - the Prime Minister to continue and finish the works on that industrial park and it should be named after Dr Mutende. I thank you very much. (Applause)

3.03
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I too would like to support the motion for paying tribute and commendation to Dr James Mutende for his illustrious life and huge services to the people that he led in Mbale and the country. I would like to register condolences to our sister, Lydia and the children in the entire family, the NRM Government and people of Uganda, over this most untimely loss.

I was fairly close to Dr Mutende. We spent a lot of time discussing and trying to generate solutions to many vexing topical issues and problems and one could always see that he had an inborn desire to transform the lives of his people and to make an impact on the Ugandan society. We had quite a number of discussions to do with Busoga College Mwiri, the industrial parks and Ugandan’s position in the great lakes region and lately depreciation of Uganda’s shilling. 

 But also we always discuss how to sustain our legacy after we have departed. I did not know that it would happen so soon, but we had that discussion.

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Dr James Mutende went to Busoga College Mwiri as you have heard and the leadership and patroniship of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda - the old boys of Mwiri have done a lot of work to transform Mwiri and get it back to the days when everybody wanted to go to Busoga College Mwiri. 

He always spared time to attend meetings of the old boys to make contributions to the various projects that the old boys have started. In this quest he worked very closely with the Prime Minister, hon. Okello-Oryem and our brother hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I must say that him and those I have mentioned have set a very good example in regard to how to relate to our old schools by way of continuing to make a contribution to those schools. I would like to thank him for that contribution.

Madam Speaker, the issue of industrial parks has been raised. He had a concern about unemployment and youth in the country and worked, day and night, to ensure these industrial parks are established; so solve this problem on top of turning our towns into a position where they could naturally graduate into cities without us having to debate a lot about their status.

The issue of Uganda’s position in the great lakes region is something that occupied Dr Mutende’s mind. In his view, the NRA and UPDF had a lot of work, in terms of ensuring the region was very well pacified, but he wanted the civilian  population and in particular the business community to – (Member timed out_)

3.07
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my friends to pay tribute to our dear one, the late hon. Dr James Mutende. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, today is another sad moment for us as Parliament. Just three weeks ago, there was somebody here for us and today, there is another. I am really wondering what could be happening. 

Gen. Aronda Nyakairima died in his sleep and also Dr Mutende died in his sleep. They have something similar – they are in their 50s and in both circumstances, nobody is able to explain to us well.  

I do know what is running in everybody’s mind. It is panic. We are all panicking and the question is: “Who is next?” But the good Lord will keep us safe.

In Western Uganda, the soils received the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima and now in Eastern Uganda, the soils are going to receive Dr Mutende. Is this regional balance? Who is balancing the equation for us? It is so sad!

Back to our friend resting here and listening to us silently. I knew Dr Mutende as a cool, calm and very collected gentleman. He did not have those vulgar words and even during the campaigns, you would never hear him say things that some of us would say. He would never abuse, complain or put his opponent on task to explain things that do not matter. All that he wanted was to have a clear, fair and free election.

We appreciate his services and we know that the people of Mbale have lost him and more so the people of Mafudu in Sironko District. He was such a lovely man.

Honourable Members, I have a lesson to learn today that we should appreciate others while they are still alive so that they can respond and not wait for them to die and we begin rumbling about what they have done and appreciate them. There is no way  he can show us that he really appreciates what we are saying.

I would like to ask the good Lord today to give courage to the two families of Dr Mutende and Gen. Aronda Nyakairima to move on and also to give us courage and strength – (Member timed out_)   

3.11
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I am speaking with a heavy heart. The late Dr James Mutende was my student at the Master’s degree programme at Makerere University doing Quantitative Analysis. This course applies mathematical models to managerial decision making aimed at developing the capacity of the student to think rationally, objectively and apply solutions to managerial problems and the late Dr Mutende excelled in this course. I can confirm to this House that it reflected in his presentations very analytical and objective – this is what I saw at the time he was a student. 

Now if you were in my shoes as a teacher with student who is succeeding but passes on so young, like it has happened to Dr Mutende, you really get shocked and this is the shock that I am experiencing; it is terrible. It came so sudden and so early in his life. 

In 2011 – and I am pleased that hon. Wamanga-Wamai – when I was on the presidential campaign team and we camped in Mbale with Dr James Mutende and we found formidable opponents including hon. Wamanga-Wamai and hon. Nandala-Mafabi whom I wish was here. 

These members would accuse us all the time of the things we had not committed but Dr James Mutende would not be provoked into anger. He would maintain that soberness you are referring to; that balance that is so rare in the political heat; we miss him. We miss a patriot who looked beyond small issues and focused on the larger picture; that was the late Dr James Mutende.

It is sad because two weeks ago, I was with him in my own district of Sheema commissioning a coffee factory and we had a conversation. There is no question or doubt of Dr Mutende’s commitment to Vision 2040 because for him, the commitment to transform peasant economies was very clear. 

As he was commissioning that coffee factory, you could see through the value addition that Dr Mutende had in the coffee industry; you could not doubt that with him, as a Cabinet colleague, in charge of the industry, we had a pillar of strength in achieving the vision we have for the country; we miss Dr Mutende. 

As a colleague - you know I was the Minister of State for Industry and Technology where he has been as a State minister and we had a project that is still an unfinished agenda of transforming banana stock stems into fibre to make cloth. 

Recently when I was in New York - you can turn this banana stock into a wall carpets - I came with the literature for Dr Mutende. Can you imagine? I have just returned from New York where the President was attending the General Assembly. I came with this book to give to Dr Mutende and I have not done it because the man has died. It is terrible; it is really terrible. Dr Mutende, we shall miss you. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. I thank you.

3.14
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion in respect of Dr Mutende. We are gathered here today to pay our respect and tribute to one of our most distinguished colleague, hon. Dr James Shinyabulo Mutende. 

As a member of the top management in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, he made invaluable contribution to the management of the affairs of the ministry, especially in the development and implementation of Government policies and programmes.

As the Minister of State for Industry, he was committed to promoting the development of industrial parks in all parts of the country and to support industries to address the challenges they face. In this regard, he visited almost 70 per cent of the industries in the country. I salute him for that. 

Dr Mutende had a pending project that he was very passionate about – the industrial park in Mbale. I would like to thank the finance ministry for releasing the funds for that project and we must follow up and conclude it.

In conjunction with the National Environment Management Authority, he was really committed to addressing challenges of industrial pollution. 

He also advanced the development of the iron and steel industry by promoting the use of iron ore to produce steel. He was very keen in the packaging, plastics and distilleries industries where he established a strong link between the ministry and UNIDO. He was always available to stand in during any impromptu programme that required the presence of a minister.

As far as Mbale is concerned, he was passionate about the socio-economic transformation of that area. He was keen on the industrial park and job creation was key for him. He was training the youth, through Uganda Investment Authority and UNIDO. He would share with us fellow politicians whatever programmes he would come across. He was a believer in team work, which not many people do.

Dr Mutende was keen on the project of “One Village, One Product” value addition machinery in Mbale and we shall help to follow it up for him because we had allocated machinery.

The Parliament of Uganda, Cabinet, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the people of Uganda will, forever remain grateful to Dr Mutende for the distinguished services to this country; we shall miss him.

Dr Mutende was truly loved for his intelligence and his dedication to work and to the country. He was truly loved for his zeal and teamwork. He never did anything alone and we worked as a team; we were actually a family.

We have received a lot of messages and on behalf of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, I wish to extend our sincere condolences to Lydia, Junior and Lindsey and other members of the familiar.

Madam Speaker, I hereby wish to lay the list of condolence messages we received before Parliament for the record. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I speak in favour of this motion. I came to know Mukwasi Mutende very closely during the campaigns of 2011/2012.

I have seen very few people who are as dutiful as Mutende. I have in my ministry, the department of Asian Property Custodian Board, which we are trying to wind up. This board is composed of ministers. His senior colleague is a very busy person as you know, so it was Mutende who would come to attend those meetings. And at no single time did I call for meeting and he did not attend and at times he came earlier than most of his colleagues. He wanted us to wind up that business very passionately but unfortunately he has passed away before that has been achieved.

I wish to take this opportunity to recorganise his dutifulness and zeal in getting things completed on time.

Two, I have seen very few humble people. The Mbale industrial park we are talking about is something that he had taken on very passionately. One day he walked in my office literally almost kneeling down and said honourable minister, we must get that park sorted out. I think there was compensation problem for the land and they required about Shs 4 billion and he almost knelt  asking me  to advance some money to sort out that problem. Because to that humility I had to call my permanent secretary and instructed him to release  Shs 4 billion for the Mbale industrial park and I would like to take this opportunity to assure the people of Mbale and this country that, as a long as I am in charge of Finance, that park will be completed. (Applause)

Lastly, what a jovial and respectable man! Every time we met - you know Lumasaba and my language have similar words but meaning different things –(Interjection)– no, I will not say that on a microphone but he always addressed me as Oworugosi. Now in Western Uganda, that is not a very beautiful word but we used to address each other that way. He never called me mister; he always called me Mukhwasi. So, we shall really miss James very dearly. I particularly will miss him of on those two aspects of the industrial park. 

On the question of Custodian board, what can we do? The Lord gives us and the Lord takes away. Lydia, my deepest condolences to you, sorry I have not been able to reach you in time because your telephone was not on. I learnt of the sudden news when I was deep in the trenches of political campaigns and I could not reach you quickly; our condolences to you and the children.  We shall try to do whatever we can to comfort you after the burial. May the good Lord rest James’ soul in eternal peace.

3.23
MS CECELIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion and I want to declare my interest that I am mourning the late Dr James Mutende as my son in law. He married my daughter, Lydia and I feel very sad that he has left my daughter young the way you see her. It is very painful for the mother; I will miss him. I have always told him that I wish you could talk to your brother, Frank Tumwebaze to be as humble as you are but he is also learning to be. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, when somebody dies, we mourn the good things he should have done. I think as Ugandans, we are mourning Dr James Mutende for two things he should have done, which he left undone. First of all, as Parliament we are very upset and disappointed that although we passed a law against the importation and the use of Buveras, they have continued to be imported and used. We know that the late Dr James Mutende was very committed - and he told me personally that he would do everything possible to make sure that that law is implemented. We miss him for that.

The second thing that, as Parliament and as Ugandans will miss him for is that he was committed to reviving the Cooperative Bank. Many of us have been left crying up to now for the death of UCB and Cooperative Bank. I had hoped that James would dry my tears. Now that he is gone I hope that those of you who are there will know that some of us, although we have forgiven, because it is God’s  command, we have not forgotten the way Uganda Commercial Bank and Cooperative Bank were forced to die. We would want somebody to take up that matter seriously.

Finally, I want to say that this is the time that Members of Parliament have to take the issue of their health seriously. Like any other activity, there is the peak season and the low season. This is the peak season of Parliament. There is too much pressure on Members of Parliament; Pressure from the voters, family, Community and even from Parliament because even when we are on leave, we are called to do some work and when we are here the voters are disturbing us in our constituencies. So, what I can only tell you, Madam Speaker and Member, is that as parliamentarians and politicians we should learn to balance the pressure.

3.27
CAPT. MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I stand to support this motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. 

The late Dr James Mutende was an epitome of humility. This was a man who would not even pass as a politician because some politicians are extremely cantankerous. Obviously, I have heard and listed to my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, talking about my brother, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, and obviously there is no doubt –(Laughter) 

It is important to note that this was a man who was committed to this country. I am happy that colleagues have said very nice things about him. This man loved his community very much. Now that the ministers of finance and that of trade and industry have committed to having the industrial park in Mbale completed, I would like this to go as a tribute and a follow-up of the good works of the late James Mutende. (Applause)

To the people of Mbale and Bugisu in general, it will be an honour to have that park named after James Mutende. It will definitely be an honour because we have seen most of our urban centres named after Europeans such as Mackenzie and so on. This is the time for us, Africans, to recognise those who have served this country diligently during our time like the late Mutende. He parts with life at a time when our nation is embracing the establishment of more cities in the country. It comes in at a time when Mbale Municipality really needs to be upgraded to a city status.

I would like to say to the children who are here that your father was a man who was committed and diligent. He was a patriot, nationalist and a great Pan-Africanist. We would like you to follow the good works and deeds that your father was able to evolve and bring out while he was still alive.

My brother, the late James Mutende, wanyala naabi. May God bless your soul and may your soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

3.31
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just like the Leader of the Opposition and spokesperson of TDA has said, Dr Mutende was a free and jolly man. The late Dr James Mutende was a minister who you would find in the corridors and he would stop for at least one minute to chat with you about things concerning your life. 

Dr Mutende and I used to call each other muko. I do not know how the relation came about because Lydia is not a Musoga but somehow that was the relation; he was very free with us. He was a man whom you would find in his vehicle and he would lower his windscreen just to shout and say, “Majegere, how are you?” When a minister shouts out your name, you feel you are also part of the Government. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I have had problems with sugar cane farmers in Mayuge. Every time these farmers called me, I called Dr Mutende directly and he would handle my problems. Even if he got a missed call, he would call back. It is very rare for ministers to do that. As the people of Mbale, Members of Parliament and Ugandans, we are going to miss Dr Mutende.

3.33
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and convey the heartfelt condolences of the people of Igara West to you, my dear sister, hon. Lydia Wanyoto, to the children and to rest of the family on this tragic loss. It is very sad. 

For us in the tea-growing areas, we found the late very approachable and easily accessible. I remember during our last discussions with the tea factories and companies and other Members of Parliament, we invited him at a very short notice and he said, “Raphael, just tell me the date and venue; I will be there.” I can assure you, he was there and we were amazed at the depth of knowledge he had about the tea industry. We shall certainly miss him a lot.

The Leader of the Opposition pointed out that the Ninth Parliament could actually be a parliament that has lost most among the Members. Mama Cecilia Ogwal pointed out that it could also be a result of pressures that we undergo. Madam Speaker, I have a question to our Prime Minister. Mr Prime Minister, when you laid the post-mortem report from the pathologists on the Table, I think I picked three things: the enlargement of the right lung, the shrinking of the liver, and the chronic infection of the liver.

Mr Prime minister, I thought that when something like this happens to a person of this calibre, the Government carries out detailed investigations on the social circumstances that could have led to some of these medical complications and deaths. The question I have is – and good enough you are a medical doctor – when we talk of the expansion of the lung, what could have caused it? We are talking about the shrinking of the liver; what could have caused this, including the infection? When should this country expect a full report on the cause of death of the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima and now hon. Mutende? 

Apart from the fact that we are grieving and mourning our colleague, I think it is important that we look at the causes and you advise Members of Parliament on what they need to do. May the Lord rest his soul in eternal peace and may God give the family strength to go through this trying moment.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, Dr Mutende had special qualities, which I admired very much. One has already been mentioned – his intellectual capacity. His contributions in Cabinet, here in Parliament and wherever he performed were of the highest quality.  That intellectual capacity was used to address challenges society faced as well as common problems that we faced. I think hon. James Mutende made a lot of contributions to this country in that regard.

Secondly, I would like to appreciate him for his love for his family, especially his father. Dr Mutende would always drive to Mbale to check on his father. Whenever the father complained, Mutende would be on the road to go and check on him. You know, his father lost his wife, James’ mother, some time back and one time he convinced his father to bring another woman to help him in his old age– wash for him, give him warm water and prepare food for him. This was responsibility at the highest level. The lady he got was the sister of James Mutende’s late mother from Butaleja. Those from Butaleja can confirm this. The other day when hon. James Mutende died, the father was saying, “Now, what shall I do; Dr Mutende who used to look after me is now gone?” Therefore, you can appreciate that.

Thirdly, hon. Mutende cared deeply about his children. One of his children, his daughter, studied in Kenya and almost every month he would hit the road to go and check on the child in Nairobi. Again, this is a high level of responsibility.

However, hon. Mutende also had a funny side. He enjoyed friendship. He had friends all over the place and I can count myself as one of them. Fr Lokodo was one of his friends although he kept harassing him: “You, Fr Lokodo, I will get you a wife.” (Laughter) Fr Lokodo would say, “I am now for the Lord; you leave me alone.” I am sorry I am saying this when Fr Lokodo is not here, but this was James’ way of life.

I remember during our days in Kyankwanzi, we would retire in the evening over some malt stuff and James Mutende together with hon. Muruli Mukasa would speak some special Lusoga I have never heard –(Laughter)– but everybody would –(Member timed out.)

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (LUWERO TRIANGLE) (Ms Sarah Ndoboli): Madam Speaker, I join this House to convey condolences to our sister, hon. Lydia Mutende, and the children. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Budaka, we really share this great loss. I say he is our own because the Mbale park is going to benefit the people of Budaka greatly. The park is at the border of Mbale and Budaka. Therefore, I would like to salute our brother for the great contribution he made in such a short time.

I also want to confirm what hon. Baba said; for us in Cabinet, as backbenchers we had our own world with James Mutende. He was a person of great humility, simplicity and yet when it came to discussing issues, he would lead the debate and all of us would feel the confidence of intellectuals when we joined Parliament.

On a personal note, I got to know Dr Mutende in 2000 before I ever dreamt of joining Parliament. That is the time I was a country director. I was introduced to him by my cousin. Despite the fact that he was such a high-profile person, he used to pick me from the airport for three continuous years. Even when we got to Parliament, he always referred to me as his sister. Therefore, I have lost a young brother and a person who contributed to my life. May the Lord rest his soul in eternal peace.

3.41
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues here in Parliament to mourn my brother, Dr Mutende. Sister Lydia, we bring you condolences from Bugisu, Masabaland. They are mourning together with you and they are waiting for their son back at home.

Madam Speaker, Dr Mutende was one brother we had in Bugisu who respected everyone irrespective of their status. He loved addressing all of us, the daughters of Masabaland, as “mukoko”, which simply means sister. Therefore, for us if a brother addresses you like that, it shows a lot of love and respect.

We miss Mutende for being so humble and loving and that affected his political career in Mbale. People in Mbale always looked at Dr Mutende as more of a technical person than a politician. It is because every time he spoke to voters, he used to put issues of development ahead of others things. You know, sometimes in some areas when you bring development ahead of anything else, they will look at you as an office person and not a politician. That affected Mutende’s political career so that every time he contested, people said he was good at working in office. 

We loved him for one thing: every time he lost to hon. Wamanga-Wamai, they would hug each other, laugh and even eat together. To some of us, we saw that as respect and dignity that Dr Mutende gave to the people he competed with. We shall miss him in the cultural institution of Masabaland. He loved the cultural institution so much. No wonder, the day of his death, the Umukuka elect of Masabaland had spent a night in his house. We shall miss him. As your sister, Dr Mutende, we miss you so much, but we ask God to place your soul in eternal peace. 

The Anglican Church cathedral in Mbale is the church where Lydia and her husband would pray and support the church in Mbale. May your soul rest in eternal peace. Lydia and the family, we shall stand with you but it is the Almighty to strengthen you and bridge the gap that my brother has left in your life.

3.44
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues in supporting the motion. 

Last week, the late James Mutende - you know he was a very good joker - came and asked me, “Now, Hellen, when are we launching the campaigns?” I said I did not know when he planned to launch them. He then asked me, “Have you seen the office?” I said, “Yes, I have seen the office.” He asked me where the office was and I said it was around Namugweke after the market. He then said, “Then, you must come to that office and see what is happening so that I get the support of the people we represent in Mbale.” I told him once he was ready, we would go down and play this role.

He came again the second time last Wednesday - we were here until almost 8.00 p.m. - and he said, “Today, I do not know when I will go to the social class.” I asked, “How do you go to the social class when the Speaker is still in the House?” He said, “You know, in the other class we also need to register and of course you know what I am talking about.” Then he said that he needed to register, otherwise his members were going to count him late. He looked jolly and kept passing here. 

I was surprised on Saturday morning to hear that he had died. In fact, I was listening to Capital Gang. At first they said that hon. Lydia Wanyoto was on her way coming to Capital Gang and then later, they said she had an emergency; shortly after, we heard about the death. It was the shock of my life.

I would like to say that whereas the body appreciates the post-mortem, sometimes we have questions that are unanswered. As human beings, we think otherwise and say this was a man who was full of life, he was in this Parliament last Wednesday and he was very active moving in and out and talking. I would like to call upon hon. Lydia Wanyoto to take heart and be firm. You are not the first to be in this situation. Take care of the children. Out there, you will get a lot of stories but you need to be firm and comforted; God has done what he has done. May the soul of James rest in peace. Amen.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome hon. Henry Kyemba. He is a former minister and Member of Parliament and a very senior Rotarian. He has come to attend the proceedings.

3.47
PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for this opportunity to say something as we bid farewell to Dr James Mutende. Allow me to deliver my condolences to Madam Lydia Wanyoto Mutende, to the children, the entire family, the Government and this Parliament on this day. 

I have five points to make and I will make them very briefly. First of all, I have heard that our colleague received death threats and other threats before he died. Some of these came from his political opponents. Politics is not war. It is about strategies for improving the human condition. This is an intra-party thing. We are in primaries and people are sending death threats to colleagues in the same party. Therefore, I really think that we need to develop a regime to avoid throwing mud like hon. Wamanga-Wamai said. If hon. James Mutende did not throw mud, why would people in the same party throw mud at him? 

I can assure you that the late James Mutende was committed to the industrialisation of not only Mbale but the whole country. I was called to several meetings in the Ministry of Trade and Industry where he was instrumental. He was keen on the industrialisation of Luweero. He said that there is a price to pay for ignoring Luweero, the cradle of the NRM revolution. In his ministry, therefore, if they could do something about it, let them do it. He was committed to industrialising –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the senior leader from Luweero to conclude.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity whether it is half a minute or a quarter. (Laughter) 

I saw the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition standing up here and speaking almost the same language. I urge both sides to not only speak this same language when somebody is lying here in a coffin, but let us speak it always.  

Before you cut me off a second time and I may not have a third chance, Madam Speaker, I urge honourable colleagues to be good people, live honestly, love your neighbour as you love yourself and finally, seek first the political Kingdom so that the rest can be added unto us. May the late James Mutende rest in eternal peace. I support the motion. 

3.53
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to convey my condolences to the entire Bugisu land and to you, dear Lydia; our hearts go out to you and we pray that the Good Lord keeps you strong and gives you the strength to carry on. 

Madam Speaker, as I pay tribute to Dr Mutende, that jolly gentleman lying before us, I would like to send out a word of caution to the media and the people outside there. I would like them to spare our widows. Just last week, the media was awash with stories of Aronda’s widow already preparing to get married. That widow you are mistreating out there is grieving painfully. That widow outside there could be your sister, daughter or even niece.

We have had cases were men lose their wives and in two weeks, they are already getting married. We do not climb on top of mountains because of that. Why should society be so negative about a woman? It is the same woman that bore this world and gives this world life.

Tomorrow, next week or the other month, you will hear all sorts of stories about Lydia preparing probably to take another man to church. All those stories will be very negative, misleading and misguided information. I am really very passionate about this. I pray that this is something we all do not support; we should shun this in the highest way possible.

Madam Speaker, I do not know what we are going to do about this politics that we are in. Come the Tenth Parliament, by the grace of God if I make it back, I am going to follow up on the issue of the Constituency Development Fund (CDF). Give it Shs 1 billion not the paltry Shs 10 million that we are giving to Members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, these members before you, including that Cabinet you see, are worried. They do not know who is next. Politics has become so stressing. We are leading a terrible life. You are even lucky that another day breaks. This business of putting politicians on tenterhooks should stop. Where we are heading to is untenable. The life we lead as Members of Parliament is not tenable. We should get a way out of it if we are to protect and defend our integrity and give continuity to the lives of politicians in this country. 

This business of people holding us at ransom - You are supposed to be a solution even – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the House for supporting this. I am talking about where we are heading. The life of a politician is definitely something of a different chapter. I pray that since we are part of the society, we should give it our best. At times we contribute what we do not have but we try to make sure that we change the lives of the people we are with. The only issue is that the challenges are enormous. Therefore, I pray that Ugandans kindly accept to make the lives of politicians a little different. 

Lydia and the children, I pray that God gives you the comfort and the peace to carry on. To all of us, colleagues, let us keep on being good to each other so that we leave the stress to come from people outside but not from us here. We know what we are going through, why should we fuel it more to make sure we have hard lives? May the Good Lord protect Dr James Mutende and give him eternal rest. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now have to bring a new guillotine of two minutes. I do not know what to do because I want as many people as possible to use the time left. 

MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to send my condolences to Lydia and the entire NRM party including the President.  

Dr Mutende’s family has ever given me a rosary, by the way. I had always talked with Dr Mutende and asked him about his wife in Somalia. He would tell me that Lydia was okay and I would jokingly say that my rosary is working for him so she must be fine.

How did I become Dr Mutende’s friend? Do you remember the problems we had with the death of Nebanda here? There is a police post at Kireka where Members of Parliament who were arrested were taken. When we went there, we were denied access to the police post. Dr Mutende came in his vehicle and was also stopped and yet he was a Minister. As you know, I am also a tough man. I quarrelled with the police demanding to know how they could stop a minister from accessing a police station. However, Dr Mutende just drove back and left me quarrelling with police on his behalf. (Laughter)  

That aside, when the NRM Electoral Commission declared that all ministers should stop using government vehicles for campaigns, Dr Mutende brought out his green vehicle. I told him, “It seems that you are going to get votes from DP and NRM because the vehicle is green and you have painted it yellow.” That is the Mutende I knew for the time I have been in Parliament.

I cannot forget the gap in his teeth as he smiled. This is very painful. However, Madam Speaker, let this go on record. Walls have ears and what we hear, we sometimes internalise. Words are said outside there; let us not have another death of this kind, because we have questions. Some of us who do not fear to say the truth that we go out to drink, - I take some beer - they tell us, “You who drink should stop drinking from this day or else you will be poisoned.” Why should I be poisoned? I go out with my friends and I know where I am supposed to be –(Member timed out.)

4.00
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay respect to our colleague, the late Dr Mutende. 

Dr Mutende was a friend of mine. In fact, during his time in America, he heard about– Many of you have been talking about his humility, among other things. I would like to point out that he was a member of the DP chapter when he was in America. Unlike some people who deny when told that they were once in DP, Dr Mutende would not do that. 

I used to share with him whenever we were in the Parliamentary canteen, unlike some ministers. Very few ministers come to the canteen and yet this is where we share our collegiality. You would sit with Dr Mutende and l used to call him Mukwasi and also Muko for one reason - his wife, hon. Lydia Wanyoto, was given a Kiganda name by the Katikiro of Buganda. She is called Nalukenge. She was given the name by Katikiro Mulwanyamuli Ssemwogerere. We would therefore call him Muko and he would willingly accept and he would also call me Muko. 

The late Dr Mutende was a humble person with a rare character. As you have heard many of us say, when we have a political opponent, we rarely greet them. This was not him. I have seen Dr Kisamba here; when he was in Parliament here from 1980 to 1985 –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute to conclude.

MR BIREKERAAWO: I am a party leader. As a party leader, during that time the Democratic Party lost four Members of Parliament, from 1980 to 1985. In this Parliament, we have lost four members of Parliament, dying mysteriously. It is just like in 1980 when Africano Sembatya passed on, Sebastian Ssebugwawo passed on, Francis Kasula passed on, and Bernard Buzebu passed on. They all died between 1980 and 1985. Are we going through the same period now? Who would like to go back to that era? (Member timed out)

4.03
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late Dr Mutende in my capacity as a Member of Parliament for Rubaga South Constituency and the President of the Conservative Party.

Madam Speaker, many things have been said. Nobody has said what I am going to say. Dr Mutende was a unique human species –(Laughter)– and that in science means a great deal. I admired him because of his sense of humour and character. 

I must say that he was not only a naturalist but without him, I possibly would have not been able to generate a private Member’s Bill, the anti-kavera Bill, which is now ready for presentation to Parliament. I, therefore, would like to pay tribute to him in the company of the family that assisted him. 

I rise to pay tribute to Dr Mutende because of the wisdom he portrayed by the way he tackled issues intellectually. He was a rare occurrence among many people who are public servants. In light of that, I would like to commend all those that assisted him wherever he was.  

In terms of humanity, he was also very rare because he easily connected with people, for example, me. Being a cadre of NRM, people would mistakenly think that he was a Conservative Party supporter.

In conclusion, therefore, I would like to borrow from some of the words of Bernard Shaw, one of the most fascinating writers of our time, when he talked about the phenomenon of death and I would like to reckon the same in honour of Dr Mutende: “Death is beyond doubt; when it comes, do not outlive it. Even those we like best will die. When the violet coffin moved, the feet of my mother burst and miraculously moved into a streaming ribbon. When my mother disappeared, the flames emerged like Pentecostal tongues. The whole coffin burst into flames as my mother became a beautiful rose.” Through our prayers, Madam Speaker, Mutende can become the beautiful rose. God bless him. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I would like to welcome hon. Salam Musumba, Chairperson of Kamuli District and former Member of Parliament. She is here to observe the proceedings. 

We have a condolence message from the Catholic Chaplaincy and a contribution of Shs 200,000. We also have a message from the Buganda Caucus; they will also give us Shs 1,000,000. It will be handed over to Lydia. Thank you Buganda Caucus.

4.06
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and also to extend my condolences, on behalf of the people of Ayivu County and also on behalf of the West Nile Parliamentary Group, to the family.

We were all saddened and shocked on Saturday morning, when we got this sad news about the passing on of our colleague. Madam Speaker, we had been in Entebbe trying to finalise a report on the Children’s (Amendment) Bill that you directed the Committee to expedite. Shortly after that, I think we again got the sad news of the passing on of Maj. Gen. Ali Bamuze. That is why you do not see the majority of Members from West Nile here. This is because we are laying him to rest today in Yumbe.

All good things have been said about the late. He was one of the few friends that I had in Cabinet. He was one of those first friends that I made from the other side, the Government side. Every time we went to the canteen, we sat together and we shared jokes. 

He was one of those who thought of regional balance in this country - the issue of regional cities that the Cabinet adopted in 2007 that you heard me championing last week. I asked the Prime Minister when the motion for the cities would come and it is the same thing I discussed with the late hon. James Mutende. He viewed Mbale as one of those places that was prime for a regional city status. This entire advocacy was to take services closer to the people and to ensure that the youth get employment opportunities in what we call a city.

Madam Speaker, we will remember hon. James Mutende for having a big heart –(Member timed out.)

4.08
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Budadiri East Constituency, the people of Sironko District and the farmers in Bugisu Cooperative Union, I also do second the motion and extend our condolences to the late hon. James Mutende’s family. 

First of all, when we had the struggle and challenges at the Bugisu Cooperative Union, in which I am one of the board members, we had thought of taking Government to court but he kept on saying, “Court processes will take long; why don’t we go for dialogue?” Indeed, we had to go for dialogue with Government and Government accepted to compensate the union with Shs 9 billion.

With his effort, together with hon. Wakikona and hon. Amelia Kyambadde, we were able to get half of the money. He was always assuring us - “Any time, Mr Chairman, small brother…” They called one another big boy and small boy. In the corridors of Parliament, we knew him as big boy whenever we would look for him. He kept assuring us that the balance of the money would come. I, therefore, call upon Government to respect the late Mutende and honour the struggle he put up together with us so that the farmers are able to remember him in that regard.

Secondly, we always joked with him. On Wednesday, he sat with the Attorney-General and with hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai and they were having a conversation. I came, interjected and I asked, “What deal are you cutting? Is no one signing? Are you making agreements?” The Attorney–General then said, “You come and witness and they should give us our commission if they have…” - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you half a minute to conclude. You know, these are Sironko people and they are his people.

MR SSASAGA: They have been so together even if they were political opponents and that has been very good.

During talk shows where we would be invited, he would assure his colleagues, especially those in the NRM, and say, “Be patient; how many times did I contest and lose? Of course, Government kept on promising me an appointment but later on they remembered me.” That was a very good inspiration especially to the colleagues who are going to lose in the primaries, God forbid. I know his words could be inspirational to them –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest in supporting the motion and also paying tribute on behalf of the people of Samia Bugwe County South, Busia District, to our brother, Dr Mutende.

I came to know Dr Mutende in 1994 while I was a student in Mbale Secondary School. At that time, Dr Mutende had joined the team recruiting youth who were supposed to be at the campaign rallies of Dr James Wapakhabulo. I was a youth and at that time they used to call us “the uncircumcised”. They have their names in the Gishu culture. We also could joke and say, “You people run to the mountains because you feared the waters” - we come from the banks of Lake Victoria. From that time, we became friends even up to the time I completed school.

However, the time I became close to Dr Mutende was in 2010 when there were some issues in Mbale concerning camps which had emerged. I was invited because I could speak to both parties. There was the Mujasi and the Mutende camp and there was another team of the NRM Chairperson of Masaba and Werikhe. I found myself solving issues even though I was young.

This is a person with whom we had some good relations. The people of Busia and I have been close to Dr Mutende. Even when he became a minister, it was easy to meet him. He was one of the ministers who you did not need to write a letter of invitation to. You would invite him even from the corridors and he would come and preside over a function in your constituency. This is the person we have lying here.

On many occasions, I had issues with the hides manufacturing centre in Busia, which polluted the whole town. When we made complaints, Dr Mutende came and presided over the issue and this made the people in the hides manufacturing centre reduce on the fumes which were affecting the town. This is again the nature of person that we have lost. (Member timed out.)

4.14
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Women Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to convey my condolences to the family and the entire Bugisu area for having lost a humble man that was down to earth.

Dr Mutende was a close friend to the people of Sheema. I remember one time my people from Kigarama were opening their SACCO and I did not have anyone to invite. I invited him and he accepted my invitation. This was very rare. You know how busy these ministers are but I told him that, “You know, we have this function, people are waiting and we do not have any one” and he obliged and came.

Recently, when we were opening the Ankole Coffee Union farmer’s coffee factory, he came and yet the President was coming to open it. We spent about five hours waiting for the President. As we waited for the President, he addressed us about politics and he counselled some of us who are new in politics. He said it is not good for new politicians to fight; he said that they needed grooming. He never wanted to see people fight even if they were competing for political positions. 

The challenge I have now is that I would like to request hon. Kyambadde to take this up. He had committed himself to help Ankole Coffee Union with their issues with URA. He understood their issues and he said he was going to help them so that those issues are resolved. The fact that he had taken it up, I was already boasting to the people in Sheema, telling them that I had connected them to the minister who was going to help them solve this problem. When I heard about his death, I lamented, “What do I tell these people?”

Since hon. Kyambadde is around, I wish that she could take it up and help these people. This is a new factory and it has very simple issues with URA. I believe when we bring these issues –(Member timed out.) 

4.16
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Women Representative Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to add my voice to my colleagues to pay tribute to our fallen colleague.

Madam Speaker, it is very sad to lose a person who gives you a vote and more especially if that person has a following. I have lost a voter and he also mobilized votes for me. That is why I am here. Therefore, having been caught in such a situation, I feel very sad. I have lost a brother – that is how we referred to each other.  

Dr Mutende was one of the most humble people I had met, given his educational background and his status as a minister. Whenever he met me, he would not say anything else but first hug me and this was humbling to me.

Dr Mutende was one person, among many others, who was so special that when he would get to Mbale and there was a meeting, he would call and say, “Connie, are you in Mbale? There is a meeting, are you aware?” I am going to miss Dr Mutende greatly. Many ministers get to Mbale aand they do not call but Dr Mutende used to.

Politically, I have been always challenged by Dr Mutende. He was a man who plays the cleanest politics I have ever seen in this face of the world.  (Applause) He was so calm –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for Mbale.

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If all of us would play politics the way Dr Mutende did, Uganda would be the most peaceful country.

Dr Mutende was so humble, joyous and calm with a sense of humour; he was a listener. Whether you were going to tell him something that he would like or not, he would listen to you.

Therefore, my prayer is, given the fact that he has been taking care of his ailing father, I would request that Government takes over the treatment of the old man –(Member timed out.)

4.19
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I would like to talk about the Industrial Park of Mbale. It is on record that the Minister of Trade and Minister of Finance have both committed themselves to complete Dr Mutende’s unfinished work.

Madam Speaker, allow me to bring out one attribute that has not been brought out about the late Dr Mutende, which was the love for his wife. The commitment he had towards his wife and the liberty he gave her. Many men, apart from those who are in this room today, will ring-fence their wives. They will not let go, they will not allow them to move but Dr Mutende was not the type. He allowed his wife to fight for her rights and the rights of others to the extent that he allowed her to go to Somalia, which was a very dangerous place. For that I would like to pay tribute to Dr Mutende and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

Lydia, please take heart, you had a lover but he is gone. Look after your children and bring them up with the same type of heart of Dr Mutende. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As Gen. Angina comes, I hope Lydia will not mind; I would like to complement what hon. Mutonyi has said and the Clerk is also a witness that every month, there is a certain amount of money he directed the Clerk to officially give to his wife; so, the commitment was real.

4.21
GEN. CHARLES ANGINA (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion and to say that Dr James Mutende, who is my in-law, is one person that we should celebrate because all that he has done for the time God has given him on this earth has all been very positive; all the tributes have been very objective.

For my beloved sister, hon. Lydia Wanyoto and the children, I would say that it is important for us to realise that God gives us and God takes away. He did not give and take him early before leaving us with children that we can always look at and realise his greatness.

I, therefore, support that we make sure one of his efforts to make the national industrial park be named after him, so that it rekindles our good memories of his contribution.

With your permission, Madam Speaker, since I have not finished my time, I pass it on to my senior General, to enable him make his tribute. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think the military have shared their three minutes. 

4.23
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, Gen. Angina. That is true brotherhood. 

I stand to support the motion and to extend my condolences to Lydia and the family, the President, the Government, Parliament and all friends and relatives and to say that we are here to share the great moments we have had with James.

I knew him when he was still in Uganda Investment Authority, as a young and enthusiastic jolly person and when he joined Parliament, we shared great moments. As hon. Kasaija was saying, he was always teaching me Lumasaba and I was teaching him Runyankore. I would like to say that he was a humble, very simple - that quality of simplicity is not common - and free with everybody. 

I would like to share with you first what the Umukukha told me on Saturday about his commitment to his culture and to his people. On the last evening of his life, he was hosting the Umukukha. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

GEN. TUMWINE:  He said how much the Bamasaba have lost in the loss of James. I would like to share with you the last joke I shared with him the last time we were here, which I am sharing with everybody since the death of Gen. Aronda.

I was asking other Members of Parliament and I asked him, “Are you ready to die?” And he said, “I am ever ready.” And we laughed off with hon. Mulongo and others who were there.

I am asking everybody the same, because death is a constant and life is a changeable. This might seem a bit tough around this time when we are losing very many people.

Since Saturday, Sunday and even today, I have been involved in burials and asked this question, “Are we prepared” because it means more than just burying people? (Member timed out.)

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and extend condolences to the President, the family and the people of Masaba.

I met Dr Mutende in Makerere Postgraduate School doing MBA. We became friends and later on, I discovered that his wife hon. Lydia Wanyoto was also a friend to my sister. So, we have been very close friends. 

Madam Speaker, as a cadre, Dr Mutende worked unreservedly. His contribution in Parliament, Cabinet and other fora were very polished; he never waffled.

Dr Mutende was full of jokes. One day, we were together in a workshop in Kenya and he found me in the restaurant alone. He said, “I have found a name for you.” I asked, “What is it?” He said, “From now onwards, I will call you Golola.” When I asked why, he said the way I looked to be there alone, I was just like Golola who lost in the ring in the first two minutes. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, what do we learn from late Mutende’s sudden death? First of all, is that we should be ready because anytime we can die. Secondly, is that we need to check ourselves regularly. Thirdly, we need to prepare for our medical insurance. In all what has been said, if he had died in hospital - whatever they are saying - I think the story would be different. Because of time, I should have said much more. Dr Mutende was a nationalist.

He has been to my home many times. His wife used to come to see my late mother. We owe him a lot as Parliament and as Cabinet. May his soul rest in perfect peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris Aimat): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support the motion and to convey my condolences and those of the people of Karamoja to the family of the late hon. Mutende.

Hon. Mutende is my neighbour at home; Bugisu borders Karamoja and indeed, my constituency. We developed friendship, which we could not describe. Because of his being jolly, he used to call me Maata. Whenever he would ring, he would say, “Maata where are you? I have something to discuss with you.” Then I would ask, “Do I come to you or you come to me?” One day I would go to him and another, he would come to me.

One time I accompanied him to go and survey where we wanted to build a cement factory in Karamoja. We talked so many issues of development and he was all the time jolly. On returning, I wanted to proceed to Kampala. When we reached Mbale, he said, “You cannot go; how can a friend go like this? Let us stay and chat.” We had very nice moments with him.

On the day we passed the money for the industrial park in Mbale, he rang me, “Maata, you come; do not miss Cabinet. There is something important, which I have been telling you. I want to see this industrial park built and that will be my contribution to the people of Mbale and the nation.” I said I would be there and indeed, I was there to back him up and the whole Cabinet passed a motion without a lot of discussion.

Therefore, this great son of Africa was very good and friendly. At times I would joke and go to Lydia and tell her, “James would like to talk to you.” Then I would run to him and say, “Lydia wants to talk to you.” Then I would laugh when the two meet each other. (Laughter) May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.31
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to convey my condolences and of the people of Ibanda South and may be Ibanda at large because my brother here has given me permission to represent him to my good friend hon. Wanyoto, NRM party and His Excellency the President.

I know the capacity of hon. Wanyoto. I know these children will miss the love of the father but you children with all the capacity of hon. Wanyoto, she will take care of you. I know that very well. (Applause)

Hon. Wanyoto was part of our group called Rapid Response Unit in the Seventh Parliament. The members were hon. Mukabeera and I can see you seated next to hon. Wanyoto, hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Byabagambi, hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba and hon. Twarebireho who is not with us here. We traversed the whole of this country fundraising, attending churches and I was really seeing a woman who is liberated. No wonder, she had a man behind her who supported her to be a true woman.

I first met James when he came to my factory in Nalukolongo on his normal duties; a young man and he was fascinated by the automated disposable syringe-making plant. He was supposed to spend there about 20 minutes but he ended up spending about three hours with me looking at all the systems and how they were working. He engaged me in an intellectual talk, engineering actually, what shows that hon. Mutende was interested in seeing the industrialisation of this country.

He helped us to solve a lot of problems, which we had with Uganda Revenue Authority when the finished disposable syringes were being imported in the country tax free but those which were manufactured here were being taxed. I remember going with him to Uganda Revenue Authority and by that time, it was not Uganda Revenue Authority as such but the taxation department was in the present building of Ministry of Finance. He articulated this issue to the then the Director of Budget and they managed to waive those taxes and that is how I survived. May his soul rest in eternal peace. We shall miss you hon. James Mutende.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you minister. Can I now invite hon. Muloni and also ask her to issue the programme for the remaining three days.

4.34
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to a colleague and family friend. I wish to express my deepest sympathies to Lydia and the family upon this great loss, a loss that has left a big gap to the family because James was a loving husband and father; a loss to this nation because he was a patriotic servant; a loss to this Parliament because he was an ardent member; a loss to the bamasaba community because he cherished our cultural heritage and a loss to the Elgon zone because of the development in the region.

James was a down-to-earth person, very humble, friendly, development minded and easy to get on with. I worked closely with him in the petroleum cabinet subcommittee and also towards the industrial park in Mbale, on issues of Bugisu Cooperative Union. 

I was very devastated when I heard the announcement that James had died. I paused a moment to recollect that it was only on the 5th September while James, the late Aronda and I were at Mbale at the Cricket Ground issuing the national identity cards to the people of Bugisu and Sebei region. We took photo moments with the recipients of the identity cards and I looked at one of the photos where I was seated between them.

On the 12 September, we heard the shocking news Gen. Aronda had died and that was just one week after Mbale; exactly after three weeks, we hear that James has died. So, you can imagine the shock that I went through. I prayed to God to give me comfort and to continue blessing me. 

Following the untimely death of hon. James Shinyabulo Mutende, the Rt hon. Prime Minister constituted a committee to coordinate arrangements for conducting a post-mortem and funeral. The committee that I co-chair with hon. Amelia Kyambadde has hon. David Wakikona as the vice chairperson and members include hon. Daudi Migereko, hon. James Baba, hon. Fr Simon Lokodo, hon. David Bahati, hon. Dr Stephen Chebrot, hon. Barbra Nekesa Oundo, hon. Rose Namayanja, hon. Simon Mulongo, hon. Rose Mutonyi, hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, hon. Michael Werikhe, hon. Mudimi Wamakuyu, hon. Sarah Wenene Mwebaza and a technical team from the Ministry of Trade, Cooperatives and Industry.

We also co-opted the LC V chairpersons of Mbale and Sironko districts with their respective RDCs. We have been meeting and arranging for the funeral. After here, the body is being flown to Mbale where it will stay at St Andrew’s Cathedral for overnight prayers. 

Tomorrow, at 10.00 a.m. there will be an ecumenical funeral service led by the Mbale Church of Uganda Diocese at the Cricket Ground. At 12.30 p.m. the District Council will pass a resolution and also pay tribute at the same place. 

At 5.00 p.m. the body will be taken to the family residence at Nkokonjeru Terrace for a night vigil. On Friday, the body will be transferred to the ancestral home in Mafudu Buhugu Sub County in Sironko District. 

On Saturday, at 10.00 a.m. the body will be laid at Mafudu Primary School ground for public viewing and at 12.00 noon the church funeral service will begin and the burial will be at 2.00 p.m. at Mafudu Buhugu sub county, Sironko District. We expect His Excellency, the President as the chief mourner on Saturday for a send-off.

I would like to thank His Excellency the President and the Government of Uganda through Parliament for honouring Dr James Mutende and giving him a befitting send-off. I would like to thank members of the committee for the various roles and the commitment they have played. Many of them are not here because they are at various venues making the necessary arrangements for us to give Dr Mutende a befitting send-off.

I invite all colleagues on Saturday to spare time and come to join us at Mafudu Buhugu Sub County in Sironko District to say farewell to our brother James.  May his soul rest in peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Muloni. Distinguished colleagues, about 35 members have contributed to this motion. I know that many members wanted to contribute but as I have already exceeded the time we had planned, I would like to first thank members. Yesterday, I was so worried that because members are busy with primaries, this Chamber would be empty. I would like to thank you very much for leaving your work there and voters to come and pay tribute to Dr Mutende. I think that even Lydia must be happy that several members have come.

I would also like to thank the Clerk and her team for all the work done, to thank the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons and all those who have been involved in this funeral and those who are continuing, we would like to thank you very much. 

Just may be three things: First, Lydia, we the Basoga call her Nangobi; we also consider her part of us and I have been working with Dr Mutende to establish industries in the country. My part of the country, North of Busoga, does not have industries. So, I have been working with him together with hon. Bagoole there of the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) to establish a pina cloth weaving industry where we can use the waste of a pineapple and also the waste of bananas. Madam Minister, I hope that you will assist me to fulfil that. I was also working with him to get some coffee haulers, rice mills and maize mills for that part of the country. I do hope that you will assist me to complete it.

The question I have for the Prime Minister; when Gen. Aronda died, we heard he had a heart problem and cholesterol. I have been asking myself did he know that he had this problem? Now, when we hear that Dr James Mutende had an enlarged lung, shrunken liver - again, I was asking myself did he know or he did not know? This brings us to the question of the health insurance. I think that if we had health insurance and people in this country had access to services, maybe members would be more prepared and know. 

I really would like to appeal to the Prime Minister; we have talked too long about health insurance, can we do something about it so that - because it is expensive to get these check-ups. I appeal to you Prime Minister to do something about it so that people in this country can know about their health and plan accordingly.

I would also like us to stand up for a minute of silence. There is a senior army officer, late Gen. Ali Bamuze, who is being buried today and we would like to thank the Vice-President for representing us there; he is in Yumbe right now for that purpose. I would like you to stand up first for a minute of silence in respect of Gen. Bamuze then we can complete the process. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

The East African Community Anthem.

The National Anthem.

Exit of the late hon. James Shinyabulo Mutende.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late hon. James Shinyabulo Mutende. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now direct the Clerk to extract the text of the Hansard and send it to Lydia and the children together with the tribute.

Honourable members, the last time we were here, I said that I would not disturb your recess but many things have happened and I do not want to say it again. I am going to adjourn the House sine die. 

However, I will be calling the Business Committee on a date to be announced so that we can chart out the programme for the remainder of this sitting. The House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)





