
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Tuesday, 1 October 2019

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I would like to first congratulate our daughter, Halimah Nakaayi, who has got us a gold medal in the International Amateur Athletics Federation Championships in Doha. We wish her well. We wish the other Ugandans would bring us more medals. Congratulations to Halimah. (Applause)

I would like to thank God and all of you for having enabled us host the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference last week. I thank the Clerk and her team, all the permanent secretaries who supported us in the different activities, the ministries of foreign affairs and works, the Head of Civil Service, the Inspector General of Police, the Commander of Defense Forces and of course the big army of the members of Parliament who were on duty for almost 10 days. The organising committee did a good job for this country; it is now up to the ministers of tourism and others to continue with the marketing. I think Parliament has done its work. 

This is also to remind us that we shall be going for the independence recess at the end of this week, so if there are some urgent issues, we should handle them quickly. 

3.00
MR FRED TUMUHEIRWE (FDC, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the construction of a tarmac road - the Rukungiri-Kanungu Road, which has started. If I may remind you, Madam Speaker, it was through your intervention after a very long time that this project started. 

I would like to thank the Government for that project. However, the project is likely to run into problems soon because of lack of compensation on some sections on the road. The problem is that citizens have failed to get land titles through which UNRA is supposed to compensate them after evaluation of their property. 

The real issue is that Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development created a zonal office in Rukungiri to issue the land titles but is not been manned. I was told by the officers in Rukungiri that they lack senior officers who will do the coordination so that the titles are issued.

My prayer is that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development urgently appoints the required staff to the zonal office so that titles can be issued and compensation effected. Short of that, there will be demonstrations which will halt the project and cause financial loss to Government. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I wish the Minister Lands, Housing and Urban Development could address that issue. 

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (MR Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, congratulations, Madam Speaker, on an event very well held. 

In response to the honourable member, we have taken note and we are going to man that office soon. We appreciate the urgency and we are going to find a solution to the manpower problem. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, join me in welcoming two delegations which are in the public gallery. There are some students studying political science, public administration and governance from the USA; they are here under the umbrella of the Uganda Christian University. They are here to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have a number of young people, the executive members of the federation of Uganda Medical Interns, posted to different hospitals in the country. They are here to observe the proceedings. They are also interested in a matter, which they delivered yesterday. I will be asking the Clerk to alter the Order Paper briefly to allow the presentation of the petition by hon. Ssenyonga. 

3.04
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. Recently, the country is faced with increased cases of electrocution. 

Last night, we lost a man, Mr Robert Kiwanuka aged 28 years, due to fallen electricity wires that were unattended to for five days. The residents called the toll-free numbers and they were given a reference number but there was no response on the ground. 

I called those numbers last month – we had a fallen electric pole in Ssemuto. I called for four days and each time I called, I was given a different reference number but there was nothing done on the ground. When I called the manager in Mityana, she had no knowledge of the incident but she came to our rescue. 

I, therefore, request you, Madam Speaker, to direct the line ministry to improve their information flow. This morning, I called the manager of Bombo and he was not aware of the incident in Kasango where we lost a resident. 

Secondly, some of the poles have over-stayed and have been attacked by termites; they need to be replaced. I request the ministry to take care of that.

Lastly, I request that you direct the ministry to do more sensitisation of the masses where power has been extended by the Uganda Electricity Regulatory Authority, concerning the issue of managing electrocutions. 

THE SPEAKER: Since we are going for recess, the minister is required to come and advise on what he is going to do on this issue on Thursday this week. 

3.07
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the aftermath of the Hoima elections, there is a video that has been making rounds on WhatsApp which is of great concern to us as elected representatives. 

In that video, the Resident District Commissioner, Mr Richard Tabaro, is shown flogging a woman identified as Ms Elizabeth Katunzi. I did my homework and found out that she was actually accredited to cover Kapapi Subcounty in Hoima. If you view the video – which I know many Members have had the opportunity to view – it is terrible.

The way he flogged her was like he was beating an animal and this was happening in the same country which was hosting the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference and speaking about the safeguards of democracy.

Madam Speaker, we are just a year shy of a general election where there will be elections in every corner of the country. We need assurance and action towards such officials who have already begun to flagrantly abuse the rights of citizens.

In particular, the Ministry of the Presidency which is in charge of the Resident District Commissioners should take action in this particular regard because as the women of Uganda, we do not feel safe. Women suffer most –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister for the Presidency. Does the -

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, that WhatsApp video was a bit disturbing and the police are already investigating the matter. The Minister of Internal Affairs will come and inform the House on how far the investigation has gone.

Regarding the assurance for free and peaceful elections, honourable member from the Forum for Democratic Change, I would like to assure you that we shall have free and peaceful elections and the NRM will win. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs should come and give us an update on Thursday about how far they have gone with the investigations into that issue of the flogging.

3.30
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. My constituency and the entire district of Namutumba was blessed with heavy and unprecedented rains that were characterized by hailstorms that destroyed many people’s houses, crops, killed animals and left many people injured and hospitalised. 

The situation is very worrying that as we talk, even food for these people is a problem because the rains virtually destroyed everything. The destructions happened on the 20th and the 29th of September.

In the circumstances, Madam Speaker, I pray that the ministry responsible for disaster preparedness and refugees urgently attends to this situation by providing food and other relief items. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister in charge of disaster preparedness is advised to quickly proceed to Busiki County and address the issue of disaster there and give the people food and other requirements.

3.12
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national concern. The Government is supposed to be exemplary in whatever they do in order to enforce the rules they set. We have had scenarios where the police are arresting or penalising drivers of vehicles under bad conditions yet they themselves are using vehicles which are beyond damaged. You will find the police arresting a driver because of a faulty indicator yet their vehicles do not have indicators. 

The worst case was during the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) when I found the Leader of the Opposition’s (LOP) vehicle had collapsed and I had to give her a lift. I asked her: “Is this the reason you failed to go and rescue Bobi Wine in Gulu?” (Laughter)

Can the Prime Minister and Government come in and give public officers – police and others – good vehicles such that we are exemplary? Furthermore, the shaming of the LOP during CPC was not called for.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that the Government should give the police officers vehicles which are in good mechanical condition. Secondly, the LOP should be given a fairly good vehicle now that even the CPC is over because her vehicle embarrassed us during the CPC. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and explain to us the state of his motor vehicles countrywide so that we know the capacity of the police. He can do that after the recess. The other matter is an issue for the Parliamentary Commission and I do not need to make a ruling about it here.

3.15
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public concern. The issue is about the non-payment of gratuity and pension for the retirees from Ngora. I remember I raised this matter here a few months ago and the minister told us that the money had been sent to the district. Unfortunately, the Chief Administrative Officer’s office has said they do not have money for those who retired before June 2019. 

The district says they are not responsible for that category, yet that category has many people who have not been paid their gratuity and pension to date. They include people who retired as far back as 2016, 2015, 2014 and 2013, etc. As we talk, most of these retirees’ children are at home because they cannot afford school fees or even pay their medical bills.

My appeal is on two grounds: one, I would like the Minister of Public Service to come and tell my retirees from Ngora why they are not being paid their pension. Secondly, I want the Government to tell us why it is specifically people who retired before June this year that are not being paid their pension countrywide.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Public Service should come and advise the House on the status of payment of gratuity for people who retired in 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016 and those who retired recently. I think the minister should come after the recess.

3.17
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This morning, Total and its partners – Atacama Consulting – were packing all their equipment in Buliisa, which caused a riot among the workers who have not been paid for long. Even those who gave out their land but have not been paid to carry out oil related developments were rioting.

Madam Speaker, this raises two concerns; how will the unpaid workers and land claimants be paid when Total goes? Secondly, what is happening in the oil industry now that key developers are packing their tools - because we have heard that all the other developers are also preparing to pack up?

Can the ministry responsible inform this House what is happening to the long awaited black gold, when and how they will pay people who are demanding some of these developers? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a long time since we had any update on the oil industry; all we know is what we read in the press. The minister should come here tomorrow to update the country on what is happening about the project and also to tell us how these people are going to be paid. It is very important because we are going on recess and we must go with the information to our villages. Thank you.

3.19
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter concerning the recent law that we passed and was assented to by the President; about the relationship between the wildlife and the people. 

Kinkizi West, which I represent, is blessed with Queen Elizabeth National Park and Bwindi Impenetrable National Park. People in Queen Elizabeth are suffering because elephants have been destroying their crops and they have not been compensated and they do not know where to go.

I would like the minister to come here and explain how the affected persons will receive compensation and how they are to popularise this law so that it can effectively help the people. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: The minister responsible for tourism should come tomorrow to tell us the impact of the assented Bill and also when he intends to implement it. Since we are going on recess, Members will have to go back with information to the electorate; so, let him come tomorrow to address us on that issue.

3.21
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I am sorry I forgot to switch on the microphone because hon. Abala called me a smuggler. I am not; my people do cross-border trade; they do not smuggle at all.

I would like to appreciate the history you made for our country. I was in Kenya on Monday and everybody wanted to shake my hand because of the Commonwealth conference. 

I have a matter of national importance concerning the education sector in this country. The Uganda National Examinations Board is withholding examination material for almost 1,500 students for non-payment of the secondary science and mathematics teachers’ fees to UNEB.

We see that SESEMAT payment is bringing conflict of interest between the Uganda National Examinations Board and the ministry. It has caused fear in the candidates not only of Busia Municipality but the whole country.

The Uganda National Examinations Board is mandated to give out exams to all educational sectors of this country but not collect money for SESEMAT. I, therefore, pray that the ministry should let UNEB do its work. 

Secondly, we have two weeks left to examinations but almost only - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR MACHO: Therefore, it is my prayer that the ministry should, as quickly as possible, give the examination material to the school to prepare early because early preparation determines the success of that exam.

Lastly, the private school owners need to be involved in the SESEMAT programme and payment should be done to SESEMAT and the full examination papers be given during interviews but not one paper, which is photocopied by the secondary school. I thank you.
	
THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports has come; we require them to respond to this issue of the SESEMAT fees on Thursday because members should have information before we go for recess. We also are soon going for the national exams so the country needs to know how this is going to be handled. Next item.

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. During our last sitting I raised a matter of national concern relating to the non-payment of honoraria for the LCI chairpersons. There was a commitment from the minister of finance and I remember -

THE SPEAKER: It is on the Order Paper.

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, you can ask your issue but next time do not come late.

3.25
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of urgent national importance concerning Obongi and the members of Parliament in terms of security - it affects the police.

On 27th July, I raised a matter about something which happened to me in my area. I was attacked and stopped from going to part of my constituency but the answer given here by the minister was that action would be taken by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

The Minister of Internal Affairs invited me to go to the ministry headquarters which I did. A letter here dated 7th August 2019 written to the Inspector General of Police about this matter asked the police to handle the matter. However, up now, no action has been taken and the threat is ongoing.

I would like to speak to you when I am still alive because what is going on there will shock you. The police seem to be in connivance with the organisers; that I should be killed in my own constituency because of party politics. When I report to the police at the local level, no action is taken. 

I went to Arua after leaving Moyo Police. It was at least Arua which gave me the – I came to national level. The IGP was ordered here by the minister but the IGP has not acted.

The information I got yesterday after working with you, Madam Speaker, in the CPC meeting was that pangas, knives and arrows were organised and put there. It is like I should not go to part of my constituency. How would you feel, honourable members, including the Rt Hon. Speaker, if some people gang up and organise that you should not go to your constituency?

Honourable members –

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MR FUNGAROO: My prayers are:
    1. Government should do its work of security. Members of Parliament, including myself, should not cry here again and again. There were members of Parliament who came here about security threats but no action has been taken by the police. What is the policy of VIP protection under which members of Parliament are covered?

    2. I pray that let this not be a trap that a Member of Parliament is attacked and his people act to defend themselves or their Member of Parliament and at the end of the day, you come and say, “Fungaroo has incited violence”. 

Of course, it is very bad to kill Fungaroo. It is not cheap; it is going to cause other things from other people who love him. However, I do not want to take the law into my hands because we have a country, a state and a system to protect everybody, including myself. Why is the police not acting? Do they want me to take charge of my own security and discipline those people myself? I pray that you protect me or allow me to protect myself. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is asked to respond to the complaints raised by hon. Fungaroo and brief us on Thursday before we go for recess. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the first time.

The Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) (Amendment) Bill, 2019 is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implication, which I beg to lay on the Table. I also request to lay on the Table the Bill. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF THE GENETIC ENGINEERING REGULATORY BILL, 2012  AS RETURNED BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT FOR RECONSIDERATION BY THE HOUSE IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91 OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 (2) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

3.31
THE MINISTER OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the Genetic Engineering Regulatory Bill, 2012, as returned by His Excellency the President for reconsideration by the House, in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution and rule 142 (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Also, in line with rule 142 (1); at the 27th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker read the message of the President, stating the reasons he could not assent to the Bill and I do not have to repeat them.

I wish, therefore, to lay on the Table the Bill, as returned by His Excellency the President.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is laid before this House. I will appoint a date for voting on it; it will not go back to the committee. So, I will let you know when we are going to vote on it and we need two thirds to pass it and it becomes law.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. ALUM SANTA OGWANG ON THE INCURSION OF ELEPHANTS INTO OYAM DISTRICT AND THE SUBSEQUENT DISRUPTION OF LIVELIHOODS, DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND LOSS OF LIVES

THE SPEAKER: Again, are those ministers still in this country? (Laughter) This is the third week that both of the ministers are not here. It is deferred. Clerk, let us receive the petition before we go to item 5 (2). There is a petition from the medical interns.

THE PETITION OF THE FEDERATION OF UGANDA MEDICAL INTERNS CONCERNING TRAINING, SERVICE DELIVERY AND WELFARE OF UGANDA JUNIOR HEALTH WORKERS
3.33
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand before you to present a petition of your humble petitioners, who are the medical interns in this country. They approached your office and all offices of RDCs in Uganda because of their complaints as mentioned.

Before I read their petition, allow me to also lay on the Table the court order that temporarily stopped the plan of the Minister of Health as the rotation of these interns was supposed to be. I lay it on the Table.

Madam Speaker, allow me to also lay the petition because all Ugandans saw the permanent secretary trying to deny that the ministry has not received any concern from the interns, yet the document was well received by the ministry. I beg to lay.

Allow me also to lay on the Table the appointment that is given to every medical intern in this country before they are assigned any duty. However, for your interest, Members would like to know the contents –

THE SPEAKER: Are you reading a letter? State the subject and prayers.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners - the medical interns in this country - are being paid little money, Shs 780,000 per month which includes housing, transport and feeding. They compare themselves to other civil servants on U4 salary scale who are getting Shs 3 million shillings and other interns in Kenya and Tanzania, who are getting Shs 6.9 million and Shs 5.2 million shillings respectively.

On top of that, the medical doctors and all interns are not supposed to go for their master’s degree after their one-year internship. They are supposed to serve for another two years before they go for a master’s degree. Therefore, that was also one of the concerns in the petition. 

Another concern is about the rotation that allows the intern to have equal competence as doctors. They are supposed to cover all the four disciplines but now, the circular which took them to court was changed by the Permanent Secretary; that they are supposed to only cover two disciplines, not even of their choice but selected by the ministry, which they have petitioned against. 

They are saying that if they are to be capable, they should cover all the four because when you are in a hospital and somebody comes across you, you must be in position to give assistance and save lives. Therefore, their request is that the ministry maintains the first order of their rotation that covers three months per discipline, which also takes them to a year. 

Secondly, let them be considered for accommodation and at least a little increment. They are saving lives and yet they cannot even manage to transport themselves. Sometimes, some of them work full days and over the weekend in those hospitals.

I know, Madam Speaker, they have sent the other contents and documents. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Because of the urgency involved, that petition should immediately be sent to the Ministry of Health so that we get an answer before Thursday. 

Honourable minister, do you have something to say now? 

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to confirm that the petition was received in the Ministry of Health. I was holding the portfolio and I received the petition. I also know that there has been a press statement regarding the petition. 

Therefore, allow us to come formally and respond to the issue on Thursday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to Item 5(ii). (Hon. Santa Alum rose-) Honourable member, the minister is not here to respond to 5(i).

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, Item 5(i) has been on the Floor of this House for quite some time. We have a very serious problem relating to human-wildlife conflict and every time we raise issues here, the ministry in charge of this sector is not here to answer us. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to direct that the minister concerned comes and answers some of these questions? We are soon going into recess and yet there is a serious problem threatening the lives of the people we represent?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I do not see the – I know the Prime Minister is somewhere. I do not know where the Deputy Prime Ministers are. Can the minister come tomorrow? This matter has been on the Order Paper for so long.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we will ensure that the minister for tourism comes to the House tomorrow to answer this question. 

THE DESTRUCTION OF OVER 40 GRASSTHATCHED HUTS AND BUILDINGS AT ORISAI PRIMARY SCHOOL BY HAILSTORMS

THE SPEAKER: The minister responsible is not here. This item is deferred.

THE TOTAL ELECTRICITY BLACKOUT AT NAKASEKE HOSPITAL WHICH HAD CURTAILED THE ABILITY OF THE HOSPITAL TO DELIVER HEALTHCARE SERVICES

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I extend my apology for not being in the House last week when hon. Luttamaguzi raised this matter. I was away on official duty but I made a follow up and got information from Nakaseke Hospital. 

The hospital does not have electricity arrears and therefore, the matter was just a technical problem that affected not only Nakaseke Hospital but also the town council as a whole. 

I would like to confirm that the following day, electricity was restored and there is electricity in Nakaseke Hospital as we speak now. So, it was just a general problem.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

THE DELAYED CONSTRUCTION OF A SEWERAGE LINE AT KIRUDDU HOSPITAL AND CONTINUED EXPOSURE OF THE HOSPITAL NEIGHBORHOOD TO THE ENDEMIC PROBLEM OF SEWERAGE SEEPAGE

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to inform the House. We had issues concerning the sewerage spillover from Kiruddu Hospital that was affecting the community around there. We did procure, as a temporary measure, the truck, which on a daily basis helps in removing the excess water and sewerage.

However, as a permanent measure, we also engaged the National Water and Sewerage Corporation so that we can be able to have a permanent lagoon in the area. We procured land, which has already been given to Government at a fee of Shs 500 million from the Buganda Land Board. Government has already paid the land title transfer to Kampala Capital City Authority.

As we speak, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation had actually advertised a bid. We hope by mid-November, they will be able to complete the bidding process and award the contract. Maybe by June next year, they will have completed the construction of this lagoon. 

However, we have trucks that take sewage from the septic tanks because the septic tank that was constructed is not adequate to deal with the sewerage flow from the hospital building. 

Therefore, it is a matter that is in progress and I would like to assure – I have been in touch with hon. Ssewanyana. The situation is not as it was before because previously, we did not have our own truck and we relied on private people to empty those septic tanks. Now, they have a standby vehicle. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think Item 5(v) on the issue of Gen. Kayihura was partially handled. 

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance because His Excellency the President has informed everybody, including Parliament, on this matter. If the Members still need this message to come directly to the House, the Prime Minister will relay it on Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: Will the Prime Minister be here on Thursday? 

MR BAHATI: The Prime Minister is always around. We will have the First Deputy Prime Minister come.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you bring it so that it is laid before the House and if it is not satisfactory, we shall see? I think something has been said about it.

THE FAILURE OF THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS FINANCING BOARD TO ABSORB OVER 4,000 APPLICANTS FOR THE STUDENTS’ LOAN SCHEME WHO HAD BEEN DULY ADMITTED IN VARIOUS PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you and the entire House upon the successful completion of the 64th Commonwealth Parliament Conference (CPC). (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in response to hon. Ssewungu’s concern on the issue of the loan scheme and those students that did not get an opportunity, allow me to inform this House that the board received a total of 7,310 students that applied for this loan scheme compared to the 4,603 that applied last year. This signifies a growth of 37 per cent in the number of applications received.

Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that Government over the years has been increasing the budget of the board. In the financial year 2019/2020, Parliament appropriated additional resource of Shs 2.4 billion, bringing the total budget to Shs 30.182 billion. 

As we speak, out of the 4,000 students about 1,000 have already appealed. Unfortunately, there are no resources at the moment to sort the challenges of those students.

I remember sometime back, I came to this Floor - we were asked as Ministry Education and Sports to request for a supplementary. Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on Table the letter that we wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for supplementary. Allow me to assure this House that we did the needful and wrote a request; I lay on Table, the letter we wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, on the 4 December 2019, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development responded to our request and clearly indicated that - if I can just quote a paragraph “… nevertheless, given that the budget preparation process for financial year 2020/2021 is already underway, I would like to propose that the financing of students under the loan scheme be addressed in the Financial Year 2020/2021.”

Madam Speaker, allow me also to lay on the Table, a letter that was written to us by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I am glad my colleague the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here to confirm this.

We do appreciate as a ministry the concerns and we would love to support as many students as possible but the only challenge is that we are constrained by resources. However, I would like to confirm that definitely, we are going to ensure that we raise our budget for the next financial year. I am sure that Parliament will help and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is going to sort this out.

However, now that my colleague is here, maybe he can help to clarify on this letter. Otherwise, as a ministry, we are ready. What we need right now to sort out are all the numbers that are remaining only about Shs 5.1 billion.

THE SPEAKER: It is interesting that for many other things, the Government comes for supplementary but if it comes to educating the children of Uganda, it is too expensive! When will education take priority in this country? They come here for supplementary for other things but when it comes to education, it is not important.

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you were here when we were debating that issue. If you knew the number of letters I have as me, from children who thought they ought to be, with their good marks and are asking me to pay - it is a serious issue!

3.51
MR IBRAHIM SUMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. You see in this matter, the moment you have a policy that students who have passed and have been admitted should apply - they apply and then you give a quarter of them, it means even the policy itself is under stress. Do you still want to go ahead with a policy of providing loans to students in tertiary institutions? If yes, then you must accommodate everybody because that is what a loan means. You cannot choose and tell others that there is no money. Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister should explain.

THE SPEAKER: You are acting Prime Minister; you explain this. (Laughter) 

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we do appreciate the situation we are in and the need is very urgent. However, when we look at the situation we are in at the moment, we could not afford a supplementary of Shs 5 billion because we are already experiencing some difficulties - you will recall the budget that we passed has expectations that we will have concluded the licences with MTN but this process is still on going. We also expected that we will have resources from the capital gains in the negotiations of oil but those too, have not been finalised.

Therefore, in the circumstances, we are proposing that you allow us to plan it properly in next financial year. We will all be here and see how best, how much we can put in so that we address this issue properly. We do not only need Shs 5.1 billion but more than that to cover the entire country.

Therefore, I am requesting that you allow us to budget for this matter properly in next financial year; a supplementary is a bit difficult for now.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Chairman of the Budget Committee? Honourable minister, this is a serious issue. You try to find a solution before the new financial year.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, can you allow us to again have a meeting with the Ministry of Education and Sports tomorrow and we brief the House on Thursday?

THE SPEAKER: Give us an update on Thursday but try because these are human resource of Uganda.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. KAFUUZI JACKSON KARUGABA, KYAKA SOUTH
ON THE NON-PAYMENT OF HONORARIA FOR LOCAL COUNCIL I CHAIRPERSONS 

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, we were supposed to have had an inter-ministerial meeting with Ministry of Local Government. However, we have not had it and I would like to request that we report on this matter on Thursday. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have an update on this issue on Thursday including the issue on the taxing of that little money.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of tax, you directed that we should handle this matter either by proposal by private member or next financial year we handle it during the debate on the tax Bills. At the moment, there is no way because our hands are tied.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should address it early enough in the new financial year because those Bills come early.

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. ANYWARACH JOSHUA CARTER, PADYERE COUNTY ON THE PRECARIOUS SITUATION OF NEWLY CREATED SUB COUNTIES WHOSE OPERATIONALISATION HAD BEEN DEFERRED TO NEXT FINANCIAL YEAR 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Local Government is not there.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My procedural matter concerns the question that I raised the last time we were here, regarding the Foot and Mouth Disease, which you said you would ask the Clerk to look at and put back on the Order Paper. This was because I had said that the honourable minister had not answered it satisfactorily. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Clerk, take note and let us address it before Thursday.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, we had debated this item for some time and the minister reported that they had come to – Is there anything further to report, minister, on the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018, before we start? Is there anything else to report apart from what you reported last time? 

Okay. Honourable members, let us go to the Committee Stage. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

3.59
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we should leave the definition for now and go to clause 3. 

Clause 3

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Chairperson, clause 3, section 4 is on “Establishment of a National Physical Planning Board.”

(1) There is established the National Physical Planning Board and we propose to add, “… which shall be the highest body responsible for physical planning in Uganda.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that all? 

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, that is all.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr George Wilson Kumama): Clause 6 is amended in the proposed section 6A (1) (d) by substituting for the word “order”, the word “cause.”

The justification is to avoid contradiction since enforcement of demolition of buildings or structures is the mandate of the National Building Review Board through the Building Control Officer under the Building Control Act, 2013.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you introducing a new section? 

MR KUMAMA: It is an insertion of a new section 6A in the principal Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read your new section. 

MR KUMAMA: Clause 6 is amended in the proposed section 6A (1) (d) by substituting for the word “order”, the word “cause.”

The justification is to avoid contradiction since enforcement of demolition of buildings or structures is the mandate of the National Building Review Board through the Building Control Officer under the Building Control Act, 2013.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose the board is satisfied that the building should be demolished, can’t they order the officers to do it? I do not think there is a problem with it because if they are satisfied after a hearing, they can send the building inspector to go and demolish the building.  

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I find the word “order” properly used in this section. They would give an order but they would not be executing their own order. Therefore, it would be the organ, which the chairperson is talking about, to do the execution. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think there is a problem with 6A. 

MR KUMAMA: I withdraw, Madam Chairperson. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose an amendment on 6A. We have (a), (b), (c), (d), 6A (1) (a), (b), (c), (d) and we want to introduce a new (e) that reads as follows: “The planned areas by pegs or any other appropriate form of visible delineation.” 

Madam Chairperson, once a physical plan is made and they say that a certain area should be a path way, there should be visible signs that it is a path way. Otherwise, if there are plans on paper and there is nothing on the ground to demonstrate the position, transgressions may occur. 

Therefore, the amendment here is to authorise the use of delineation marks in determining what the physical plan that has been agreed upon is going to look like.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have not written it. Can you speak read out the entire amendment so that we can write it down?

MR MUSUMBA: Okay. “Delineate the planned area by pegs or any other appropriate form of visible delineation”. Paragraph (f), states that, “The board should have powers to prosecute in courts of law offenders of physical planning.” Those are the ones, Madam Chairperson. 

MR MWIRU: I would like to get some clarification from the minister. Madam Chairperson, under normal circumstances, the minister should have submitted his views to the committee. However, he has come with a proposal, which ordinarily, I would have no problem with but what he calls delineation of the visible areas, I do not know whether these would come in after. I have seen Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) putting some of them even before compensation. When they go to people like the way they are doing in Mayuge - when we intervened, they had not compensated people but gone ahead to take effect. I do not know whether this may not be abused since you are introducing them at this stage? 

The board may order for the delineation of particular places and just come to take effect before the necessary processes. This is a matter, which could have been processed at a committee stage. UNRA has been putting those beckons to show that this is a road reserve. However, under normal circumstances, they are only supposed to put them there after compensating people.

Instead, they put beckons and when we intervene, they say: “We have not compensated these people. Let us start on the process of compensation and we will evict them.” The board also needs to issue orders of demolition before compensation.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, these amendments were submitted before the committee and the committee debated them in detail. Obviously, the committee could not bring them here and so, I brought them. The essence is who will tell people that according to this plan, the area between this point and the other, is reserved for a public park? There has to be a way of indicating that the area that is under discussion has actually been cordoned off in the plan for a particular purpose; that is the purpose of visible marking of these areas. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you complete the new insertion?

MR MUSUMBA: Paragraph (f), “Prosecute in courts of law, offenders of physical plan”. There is a physical plan that has gone through the process and agreed upon. If you build or go to an area, which has been preserved as a public area and you construct a market there, there should be somebody authorised to prosecute you. In this case, the board should have those powers to do so.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there other sanctions in this Act?

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, there are offences at the end. If you look at page 18 of the Bill, it is there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You say it, I am trying to put it together and see how it will appear.

MR MUSUMBA: Prosecute in courts of law, offenders of physical planning processes. If there is a physical plan and you violate it, you should be prosecuted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe, the language should be refined but – 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, if you offend the physical plan, I think it is good enough.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the problem we are faced with nowadays - I would like to give an example; the planning authority normally designates what should be done in a particular area. However, due to inefficiency, people put something else in an area, which is not supposed to be and it contradicts with the planning authority. Furthermore, where I stay in Jinja, some people built a church, yet there is a designated place for a church. Since I would not complain because they say, I am opposing God and it is contextual, I realised that they were using God in a wrong way. I kept quiet but every Friday, I would not sleep because they would have their overnight. What the minister is saying is that if the place is designated; that this is a residential place, you cannot bring a disco hall in that area. 

Madam Chairperson, like in Kololo, you cannot tell whether that is a residential place or a disco area – what the minister is saying is that if you go and take something wrong there, then you should be prosecuted because you are contravening what the area was planned to do. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I understand what he wants to say but I was just trying to get the right language. I do not know whether to say, “approved physical plan”. However, I would like him to refine it. How do you describe physical plan, which is already done? Is it gazetted or approved? 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, to be a physical plan, it goes through a process of approval. Once it is approved, that is the physical plan of the area. We are saying that if you offend it, you should be prosecuted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How will I know that it is a physical plan? I wanted the qualification; is it approved or gazetted physical plan so that it is a matter, which everybody has noticed.

MR MUSUMBA: As we speak today under the law, the physical plan is approved by the Physical Planning Board. Once that approval is done, it is displayed and known that this is the physical plan of the area.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I wanted the word either “approved” or “gazetted” there too –

MR MUSUMBA: “To prosecute in courts of the law, offenders of an approved physical plan”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR MUSUMBA: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Chairperson, I think we should also add on the “approved and gazetted area” -(Interjection)- no, it is not too much. I would like to justify gazetted. We have been seeing these projects going on. The plan is drawn, approved and is gazetted. The speculators then come to know the gazetted area and all of a sudden, they go and buy that piece of land and build a structure. The board should even have the powers to demolish that structure as long as it comes after gazettement of that area.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How will a person get notice of that plan; that this is a gazetted area? It must be a matter, which you can establish by law from the Uganda Gazette. I was just trying to tie up loose ends.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the minister has failed to remember. We have a national physical plan, which shows what should be where. When you go to particular areas, there is a topology in form of a map, which mirrors the physical plan. That is why there is a physical planning department of every local government. 

When you take your plan for approval, they find out what that place was designated for. That is why there are some plans they reject. That is why there is change of land use through the ministry; you have to apply to the National Physical Planning Board to change the land use. You cannot just construct anything anywhere. It is already established. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What I am looking for is what qualifies as a plan so that the board chairman can confidently say that this is the plan of Kampala. I wanted the qualification. It is not just any plan. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chair, the process is laid out in the current law under section 27. It is mandatory that there is public display of a district, urban and local physical development plan. 

It says in 27(1) that upon the completion or receipt of the draft district, urban or local physical development plan, the committee – that is the physical planning committee – shall publish a notice in the gazette and any other manner as it considers expedient, inviting the public to inspect the draft plan at a place and time specified. The notice published under section (1) shall request interested parties to make their presentations. The committee will then accept or reject those plans and the objections.

The person aggrieved can make an objection under section 28, where, under expiry of 90 days specified in the notice under section 27 and there is no representation against or objection to the plan, or where such presentations have been dealt with, the board shall approve the plan. 

Once that plan has been approved under subsection (2), a physical development plan approved under subsection (1) shall not be altered in any manner without the prior pre-authorisation of the district physical planning committee – and so on. There is an elaborate process in which a plan is arrived at including gazetting, publication and posting. 

In section 29, for example, the board shall, within 14 days after approving a district, urban or local physical development plan, publish a notice in the gazette specifying whether or not the plan has been approved with or without modification. 

Madam Speaker, there is an elaborate provision for recognising that that is the plan as approved and agreed, which includes public notice, gazetting and even under some amendment that is being proposed, there is even a possibility of putting it in the newspapers.

MR MWIRU: If we are reading the same law, if you go to section 33, it seems to cater for what the minister is raising. It says that “A person shall not carry out a development within a planning area without obtaining development permission from a physical planning committee”. It criminalises it. It goes on to say that, “A person who contravenes sub section (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both”. Meaning that by the time you are convicted and sentenced, you must have been prosecuted. 

I think section 33 of the Physical Planning Act covers the amendment being proposed by the minister unless he construes it differently. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what the minister was trying to do was to identify the person who can make the complaint – you were saying that the board has powers to prosecute – 

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, Madam Chair. I wanted to place squarely, on the shoulders of the board, the powers to prosecute or the obligation to prosecute if someone violates the physical development plan of an area. That is all this amendment is to achieve. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think the power to prosecute is with the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP). It is only in exceptional circumstances where it is by question of a statute – that either the IGG or URA – but in circumstances where it is not expressly provided for, then the DPP would be – the police would come in – one would complain to police about the contravention of this - unless you want to specifically make it so that the board would have powers to prosecute. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Chairperson, I would like some clarification. Who actually authorises the plans to be gazetted? This is some form of subsidiary legislation. A plan itself is a form of subsidiary legislation because it is enforceable. 

The most important point now is, who authorises it to be gazetted in order to become a regulation? I want that answer to be clear. 

MR MUSUMBA: The board, Madam Chair, has the legal obligation to approve a plan. 

The national physical development plan is the one that is approved by Cabinet on presentation of the minister, of course, but any other plan that leads to the national physical development plan is approved by the board. 

MR SABIITI: Madam Chair, the normal procedure that I know is that in order for a regulation to be effective, the minister must authorise its gazetting. It is after the gazetting and there is no objection that it becomes a regulation. That is the method that I know. 

This kind of arrangement is now departing from the normal procedure of making a regulation because that plan, as it is, because it is going to be enforced, it becomes a regulation which is a subsidiary law to the Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think the minister is taking away powers from the ministry. He is looking at the powers of the board and what they can do. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chair, I would like to thank you for what you have said. I am concerned; it is a way of cutting and shedding off powers of the ministry. That is how the NGOs work. My problem is that this is something public. 

In my opinion, let the DPP still have their authority. Let us follow the formal arrangement. Let us not create more power centres, which are going to affect the operationalisation of this Act. 

I would like to inquire from the minister because they are talking about advertising in the gazette, putting notices, but less than 70 per cent of Ugandans who own most of this land do not know how to read and write. 

What plans do they have to make sure that every Ugandan participates in this process? At the end of the day, it may not augur well with them when we post a notice on notice boards and advertise in the gazette. Remember the white man said that if you want to hide something from an African, put it in black and white. I would like the minister to help me know whether when this plan is put in place, there will be an arrangement for someone to explain to the people in order for them to understand. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before the minister answers, who prosecutes in the environmental court?

MR MUSUMBA: I believe NEMA has authority to prosecute the offenders of the environment. These organisations have specific or specialised powers in their mandate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will they go to the ordinary civil court here, for example, Buganda Road Magistrates’ Court, to prosecute the offence or breach of the physical development plan? 

MR MUSUMBA: They will go to Buganda Road – the prosecutor will appear before the Buganda Road Magistrates’ Court and say, “This person violated the plan.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means the Board will actually be the plaintiff in a way.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, there are law enforcement officers in the districts who are authenticated to appear and prosecute on behalf of the municipal councils. Even in Jinja, we have a prosecutor in the municipal council and they fall under the local government. I do not know how the minister wants to do this because we are talking about having the prosecutors to appear in court and prosecute a matter, which they are prosecuting as a board. This is what the chairperson is grappling with.

Who is going to be sanctioning these breaches? Are you going to report to police and the police investigate and take action or is it the Board going to have prosecutors?

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, what these people, especially NEMA, do is that they bring people to court and it is the DPP’s office to handle the prosecution. They are like witnesses; they just bring the case but do not prosecute by themselves.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, will the Board come as the complainant?

MR WALUSWAKA: Yes, because some of these are criminal matters and it is the DPP that handles them. For example, when the District Health Inspectors get people without latrines, they take those people to court and say; “This man does not have a latrine,” and the state starts from there.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, it appears there is a real jam on this matter. Since we have legal brains in this House, we should stand over this matter and sort it out tomorrow. At the moment, I see that the minister and the team are not helping us. For example, the way I am seeing it is that the Board is supposed to be a complainant, not a prosecutor. I think the legal gurus would be able to advise us on this matter. Let us stand over it and review it tomorrow.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think there was no difficulty about the insertion of a new subclause (e). Therefore, I put the question that a new subclause (e) be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New subclause (e), agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over subclause (f) – regarding this prosecution. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, this is an important law and the Attorney-General is supposed to be here. For Government to understand the impact, I propose that we end here. The Attorney-General and the Deputy Attorney-General are not here. We do not want a scenario where they say the legal department of Parliament should come when there are people who are paid a salary and given vehicles here. You are doing their work.

I would like to propose – as I support hon. Abala’s proposal – that we stand over this until tomorrow and the Attorney-General comes here. These people are paid but are nowhere, Madam Chairperson. You are working on their behalf. They bother you a lot. Let us stop here and you order the Prime Minister to produce the Attorney-General. Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, this Bill has been with us for a long time, as Parliament and the Executive. If the proposed subclause (f) is going to be a cause of further consultations and delay, I would like to withdraw the subclause for the time being and if I finish consultations, I will inform the committee accordingly. Let us withdraw it and we proceed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The other difficulty is that it is coming now and I do not think the committee has had time to study it. Let us go with the other amendments. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 (a) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6 (a), as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR KUMAMA: Clause 8 is amended in the proposed section 7:

    a) By substituting for subsection (2) the following: “(2) The Executive Director shall be appointed by the Board on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment.”
    b) By substituting for subsection (6)(d)the following; “(d) He or she is removed from office by the Board for -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to remove the minister from the appointment of the Executive Director? You emasculating the minister; what is your rationale for this proposal? 

MR KUMAMA: The justification is the - I hope we are on the same page. Clause 8: Substitution of sub-section 7 of the principal Act - are we there together?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am at page 23 of your report.

MR KUMAMA: Exactly, clause 8 is amended in the proposed subsection 7 as follows: (a) by substituting sub-section 2 with the following: “(ii) the Executive Director shall be appointed by the Board on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of the appointment.” (b) by substituting subsection 6 (d) with the following; -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before you go there, your proposal is weakening the minister and he will have nothing to do with this appointment. 

MR KUMAMA: That was what the committee discussed but it is subject to discussion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want the minister out of it? 

MR KUMAMA: That was what the committee recommended.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale? 

MR KUMAMA: After reading this, I will write the justification. (b) by substituting subsection 6 (d) with the following: “He or she is removed from office by the Board for: (i) inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising from infirmity of body or mind; (ii) abuse of office; (iii) misbehaviour or misconduct; and/or (iv) incompetence.”

The justification is to require the Board to appoint and remove the Executive Director instead of the minister. This is for ease of supervision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, the minister will hang on one side and the Board and the CEO in another corner doing their own things with the minister doing nothing? 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, that was the position of the committee but the people who wrote the minority report held discussions with us at the ministry and I conceded to their view. Their view is that we should not have a stand-alone Executive Director and that we should strengthen the Directorate of Physical Planning, which is already in existence. I agreed with them.

Therefore, the new amendment in 7 (i) is: “The Board shall have a secretariat, which shall be headed by the Director of Physical Planning or any other person within the civil service so appointed.”

Madam Chairperson, remember that there was an involving debate here about another agency. So, to avoid all that controversy, we have agreed that we should strengthen the existing Office of the Director of Physical Planning, who under the current law, serves as the secretary to the current Board.

The amendment, therefore, will read thus: “The Board shall have a secretariat, which shall be headed by the Director of Physical Planning or any other person within the civil service so appointed.” We should then be able to make amendments that refer to the Executive Director to be removed and have the secretary to the Board, who is the Director of Physical Planning to head the secretariat.

MR WALUSWAKA: I would like to thank the minister for conceding but we would not like to say, “…any other person in public service or civil service” they can bring in a UPDF officer or anybody else. Our position is it should be the Head of Department of Physical Planning or any person within the Physical Planning office whom he has delegated such that while the minister commands the Permanent Secretary as the he or she commands the director. So, it should not be that any other person in the Civil Service. We may end getting unwanted choices. That is our proposal. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means the proposal by the chairperson would collapse?

MR KUMAMA: The committee’s position was the one that I communicated to you, which has been captured on the Hansard. However, when the minister met the minority group, I was not there. I just got to know that they agreed on another position, which he communicated on the Floor and I do not know how that will be considered.

It is now at your discretion because the earlier position is the committee’s position, which I cannot just change here unless it is referred back to the whole committee to discuss it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over this as we handle the others.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I did not get the rationale of changing from the Executive Director being appointed by the minister on the recommendation of the Board to what they had changed to.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did the minority report make this proposal? Was that the proposal in your report? Can I have a copy? So, the minority report had proposed that clause 7 be deleted in its entirety? I think this matter is getting complicated.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, we have seen minority reports coming on the Floor of this Parliament and they are usually discussed, voted on and disposed of. With due respect to my colleague here, we discussed restructuring of authorities, depending on the magnitude and quantum of work that those authorities are doing.

In a country where you find toilets facing mansions and roads as narrow as two metres going to the Kabaka’s palace, everything is messed up in the whole country. I think the initial idea and concept of creating a separate body to deal with that big problem that we have in this country was the right choice. I beg that we stand over it but vote on the minority report and dispose of it. However, let us go with what the Executive had decided. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, what the honourable minister is talking about – You know, he was not here when the Prime Minister initially conceded. The minister in charge of the ministry has conceded. Now, the honourable Minister of Karamoja Affairs is dragging us behind. 

We have seen authorities here. How many times, Madam Chairperson, have you talked about degradation of wetlands? However, when you go to those developers, they have clearance from the Executive Director of NEMA. Members, let us consider the people who are working in Public Service.

The Minister in charge of Karamoja Affairs, if you want, simply kill the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development –(Interruption)

MR ABALA: I would like to thank my brother, hon. Waluswaka, very much. In 2017, all authorities in Uganda spent over Shs 90 billion on tea and refreshments. The second piece of information that I would like to give you is that the President was very specific because of that expenditure.

The other week, when the Prime Minister was here, he was very clear that Government is restructuring. Now because Government is restructuring, we do not need to create more entities, which Government is going to throw away. I thank you very much.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to my senior colleague, the minister, we are at Committee Stage and he is aware that he cannot demand for a vote on a report at Committee Stage.

Therefore, I am only wondering whether it is procedurally right for us to even accommodate his argument at Committee Stage or he should fall off the way and we proceed with the Bill, as per the business of Parliament on the Order Paper. He can recommit if he wants. 

MS AMEEDE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose that more consultation be done on this issue. I will give a scenario of the reporting mechanisms. If you have an Executive Director and a Permanent Secretary (PS), the PS of that parent ministry has powers over the entire accounting system.

However, if an Executive Director is appointed, he will definitely need a vote. Therefore, who controls that vote? I will give you an example where a Directorate of Immigration was created in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and yet, we have a PS for the ministry. There was a lot of rope pulling on who controls what. Decisions were brought to a halt and there is a lot of conflict in the working relationships and so, it creates a distortion in reporting mechanisms. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not want to be part of a discordant law. Therefore, I would like to ask that we sleep over this matter because the minority report says something different from what the minister is proposing. The committee is also proposing something different.

Let us sleep over it, review what we have passed and see how to move. Even now, I have this from the minority report and that from the minister. The committee is also saying something different. We can complete it tomorrow. Let us stand over clauses 7, 8 and 9. Let us go to clause 10.

Clause 10

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 agreed to.

MR KUMAMA: Madam Chairperson, we would like to insert a new clause immediately after clause 10 as follows: 

Amendment of section 10 of the principal Act 
The principal Act is amended in section 10:
    (a) By substituting for paragraph (a), the following:
“(a) To prepare district physical development plans through its officers, agents or any qualified physical planners;” 
    (b) By inserting immediately after paragraph(h), the following: 
“(i) To recommend to the district council, district physical development plans for approval by the Board;
(j) To recommend to the district council the approval of sub-county physical development plans;” 

The justification is:

    (i) To clearly define the function of the District Physical Planning Committee in relation to preparation of district physical development plans.
    (ii) To harmonise the provision with section 25 of the principal Act. The responsibility of causing preparation of the local physical development plans lies with the sub-county council and not the District Physical Planning Committee.

I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it seems you have gone out of this law and are now amending the principal Act. You are not amending what was brought but the principal Act. You are supposed to be amending this one. You do not attack the other one because it was not part of this Bill.

Honourable minister –

MR MUSUMBA: This is a new insertion, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you are going into the principal Act directly and not the Bill. Your proposal is outside this Bill and you are supposed to amend this one and not the principal Act. 
Honourable members, I think we need to study what is happening. Can the minister move for the House to resume?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPESON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.58
THE MINISER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, the Committee of the whole House considered the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018 from clause 1 to clause 8 and stood over clauses 8 and 9.

THE SPEAKER: There were no amendments to clause 7? Is it clauses 8 and 9?

MR MUSUMBA: We passed clause 7 and stood over clauses 8 and 9. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I move that clauses 1 to 7 of the Physical (Amendment) Bill, 2018 be adopted by this House.

THE SPEAKER: Clause 7 was where we debated whether it is an Executive Director, a Director or a National Physical Director. That is where there were three different positions. Clauses 7, 8 and 9 were stood over.

MR MUSUMBA: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: So, I really would like to direct that we convene a meeting with the Attorney General. I can see that these people went into the main law. We should have had the proper advice of the Attorney General on the issue. So, we will defer this matter to tomorrow. But I would like a meeting with the Attorney General, the minister and the committee on this issue.

Honourable members, this matter is deferred to tomorrow; let us look at it more closely before we proceed. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $ 456,370,000 FROM THE EXIM BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE UPGRADE AND CONSTRUCTION OF NATIONAL OIL ROADS UNDER PACKAGE 1 (MASINDI-KASANJA/PARK JUNCTION, TANGI (PACKWACH) JUNCTION-PARAA-BULIISA ROAD, WANSEKO-BUGUNGU ROADS), PACKAGE 2 (HOIMA-BUTIBA-WANSEKO) AND PACKAGE 3 (BUHIMBA-BULAMAGI-IGAYAZA-KAKUMIRO)

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson is not here. 

5.02
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, it is good the minister is not here because when Government was borrowing for the oil, we brought the issue of the eastern road. One of the members of Parliament from western Uganda, on a matter of national concern, said Total and other companies are withdrawing. 

Madam Speaker, before the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Minister of Works and Transport and even the Prime Minister come to tell us anything, we do not want to put into oil more money when the people who are supposed to extract the oil are withdrawing and yet, our villagers have not yet been paid.

We also have pending issues on the road, which I requested. You directed that the minister comes here on Tuesday, which is today. Unfortunately, both the Prime Minister and the minister are not here. 

Therefore, since the minister is not here, we pray that they come and explain to us the issue of Kampala-Jinja Expressway. They should also explain why Total is withdrawing. Why are we putting in more money and yet, the people who are building the oil pipelines are packing their machines to leave?  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS ISALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising in response to what hon. Waluswaka said. This loan request was brought before this House and it was referred to the committee. The only thing that is left is for the committee to report. I do not really see where the issue of the withdrawal of Total comes from. I feel the procedure here is to receive the report of the committee. 

Is it, therefore, procedurally right for the honourable member to come up and start talking about other matters that are not related to this item?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were due to consider that matter and then, the minister said he would like to give some information about the Kampala-Jinja Expressway before we could proceed. It was a question of why borrowing is going on for some roads and not for others. This is part of the public purse. 

So, let the minister come and explain to us before we proceed.

5.05
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, when it comes to roads in other areas, they do not even borrow first; for example, for the ones we are talking about, they started using the money before coming for parliamentary approval. Therefore, we would like to understand what is so special that roads in some areas are constructed before Parliament approves but in other areas, you even tell us to engage in a PPP. 

Therefore, it will be important for the minister to explain so that we know how to deal with an illegality. For us to spend public money, even if it is a loan, Parliament must approve. However, we are meant to understand that by the time they brought the request, they had started accessing the money. Maybe they are treating Parliament as a rubber stamp. We need information from the minister.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Waluswaka said is right. I remember three weeks ago, I raised the issue of Kumi-Ngora-Serere-Soroti Road. The minister has never come here to talk about that road. As we speak, it is even worse. Yesterday, a lorry had a very serious accident on the same road from Kumi to Ngora. 

The Minister of Works and Transport should be proactive instead of being selective and discriminative in terms of response and action. These two issues are different and they are causing a lot of jam. That is why the ministry should come out and tell us. I am shocked that out of the three ministers, none of them is available here yet the road sector is key and it calls for proper answers.

As I told you, an accident took place yesterday on that road. You have rightly said that when it comes to our roads from the eastern, part of northeast and northern parts of Uganda, it is very difficult to find work being done. However, when it comes to other roads, the work seems to be very smooth like oil. That becomes a bit of a problem. That is why I would like you to know that it is one of the problems that the Ministry of Works and Transport should tackle now. I thank you.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, you know we come here with a lot of pain. You will remember that I have sung about Busolwe Hospital, which requires only Shs 6 billion. The donors brought money, which is rotting, but the ministry says it does not have money and people are dying. Now we have the road.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was here and went. I would like to request that the minister comes and gives a status report of the Jinja Express Highway and other roads. Also, since the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the one going to borrow, they should consider the issue of Busolwe because they promised that they will work, and donor money is there accruing interest.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to Objective No. XII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. The state is enjoined to take necessary measures to bring about balanced development in the different areas of Uganda, within the rural and urban areas.

Honourable minister, we would like to know whether it is a PPP or loan financing for the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway, before we reconsider this other loan. Last week you had promised to come and update us on where we are, where we are going to get the money, whether it is a PPP or a loan.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, this is an issue we need to look at comprehensively. While some are crying for tea without sugar, some of us do not even have tea. In my constituency, I do not have any single Government road -(Interjection)- No, I am also a national of Uganda and I pay taxes. If we want the minister to tackle just one road – the Kampala-Jinja Express Highway - what about some of us also who are in areas without any single Government road? 

It is more or less becoming the task of a Member of Parliament to maintain roads in the whole constituency. Therefore, I would like to propose that we look at it comprehensively and the minister gives a comprehensive statement on the roads and not only Kampala-Jinja Express Highway. I thank you.

5.11
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): I think my name is not Karamoja but I am the Minister for Karamoja Affairs. Therefore, you can say “Karamoja affairs”. I am an engineer by profession and the subject you are talking about was initiated during my time when I was a minister in the Ministry of Works and Transport. Therefore, I know issues about the Jinja Express Highway very well.

Madam Speaker, as much as I agree with you and the Constitution that there must be balanced development, the oil roads were for a specific purpose and they came on board because of that very purpose. I will not comment on them until the report is presented. I was part of the Cabinet which approved it; therefore, I will not talk much about it.

However, when it comes to the Jinja Express Highway, we need to debate it. This is because there are some issues which were directed by His Excellency the President and the hands of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are tied because of those directives. We need some consultations to help us see how to move this project forward. People like us who initiated it do not want it to die when it is about to be implemented. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, even the trucks which shall go on the oil roads will come through that road. They will come through Mombasa and Malaba. This is not a small matter. I do not know how many people have driven to that side in the last few months.

Honourable members, we want equitable development. We are entitled to get development, so tell us where the money is coming from. To say that we can borrow for others and for the Jinja Express Highway it is a PPP is not right at all. Where are the offers? 

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that last time I stood on this Floor to say that I will come back to give you information. His Excellency the President, as said by hon. Byabagambi, has directed, given our situation, that we do concentrate on a PPP for the Jinja Express Highway. He said that it should be worked on but we use the PPP route and not borrowing. 

Madam Speaker, with your permission, given that the President has written, and I think he copied to you this letter, it will be appropriate that we do consult him again on this matter and then we express what we have found in Parliament and maybe come back. However, at the moment-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish we could be fair to each other in this country. In the recent past, there are other roads which the President has given out on loan basis - less than a month ago.

MR BYABAGAMBI:  There is a misunderstanding here. Madam Speaker, I do not want to speak on behalf of the Minister of Works and Transport but I am speaking as somebody who has got institutional memory concerning that project. I will look at it from that context, not as a minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you talking about the Jinja-Kampala Expressway? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Yes. That project started in 2014. The concept, of course, came from 2009. It started because of the traffic congestion on that road. There is actually no longer traffic congestion on that road; it is what we call “grid lock”, which means that the vehicles may not even move. You can even spend a whole day there. 

Secondly, the axle load design for that road has gone beyond the repairing or any other known design, other than a cement-concrete road. It is the one that can handle those axle loads. Therefore, to ease the movement of the vehicles there, you have to distribute the axle load. How do you do that? You do it by creating a highway so that there are many lanes on which you distribute those axle loads. That is the concept. 

Due to the fact that it is a very expensive road, the proposals came in two forms. One of them was BOT (Build, Operate and Transfer). In this case, it is 100 per cent purely private - without Government injecting in money. The concession for these roads is usually between 20 to 35 years, so that a private sector player can recoup their money through the tolling system. 

The first option has got its own disadvantages and advantages. Whereas the Government is not injecting in money, the private player can hike the fees and the users may not afford to use that road. Once they fail to use that road, it becomes a white elephant and there is a problem there. These private people usually try to avoid that. 

The second one is a public-private partnership. I would like to explain this to you so that when we are going to negotiate or meet the President, you have got the facts in your head –(Interjections)- I am telling you there have been two options on board. There have never been – 

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to explain. He was the minister in charge of that sector.

MR BYABAGAMBI: There have only been two options since inception of this road. 

The second option that we have been pursuing is a public-private partnership whereby the Government borrows money and teams up with a private player. In this case, the user fee will be minimum, affordable and can be recouped through the toll. That is what the system is worldwide, especially on very big infrastructure where Governments do not have that money to invest in that infrastructure. Even in America, they have public-private partnerships and it is the only way to go. That was the best option. 

Nevertheless, as we were discussing, the President told Cabinet members that he thought somebody could construct this road on BOT. He, therefore, directed the minister to first pursue that option in which the private company can inject 100 per cent of the money. That was his directive and I am not mistaken about it. 

However, the President has not said that we should not borrow for this road. He has asked the minister to pursue that option. If that option fails, of course, we are going back to borrowing the money, as it was stated. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the problem with this Government is that even when we raise questions, they do not want to come and explain them. Where do you want us to get information from? Where do you want us to go?

MR STEPHEN MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I was a member of the physical infrastructure committee in 2009 and 2010 when this project was conceived. I was also the chairman of the Committee on National Economy; therefore, I also discussed the financing options.

What is not being brought out here right now, which is causing all the problems, is the contractors and dealers fighting for this project. The financing mechanism is not a problem. From Sebanakitta - UNRA I – to the time of Eng. Nasasira, when Eng. Byandala came in, you know what was in the pipeline and what happened. I do not want to say it here. 

In the UNRA II of Madam Kagina, they have had a lot of debate, including bids. However, even companies which did not bid have gone to State House to say they should be included. The companies that came in when the bid process was closed are saying they can offer a solution. 

It is also not true that a BOT is an expensive option. It is actually the cheapest. A private concessionaire makes a long-lasting road to reduce maintenance costs because he is the one in charge of maintenance. 

Parliament has been kept out of this information. Like the other debate on oil that we had earlier, I think the first problem is these people who are fighting for the tenders. They are working with the contractors and misinforming the President. They are also disturbing UNRA and holding the minister hostage in this process. 

The Chinese companies now are a cartel; they have chased away all other companies because for eight years, no other person wins. It is them and they are all Government-owned. They can go to the embassy and agree who takes what. It is a bigger problem, Madam Speaker, but we are just discussing symptoms. 

Can I therefore –(Interruption) 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, do you remember the Jinja-Mbulamuti Road? They had said that it was going to be constructed under Sogea-Satom Uganda. It also collapsed because of inflation of figures. 

When I followed up this project, as the area Member of Parliament, they told me that those people were inflating the figures and the UNRA negotiation committee failed to accept that, which led to their collapse. However, they had promised us to construct the Jinja-Mbulamuti Road through Sogea-Satom. That contract collapsed and now they are pushing us to another arrangement. 

When it comes to their place, they just make a request and even actually start using the money; for example, on this Hoima Road, they have already spent the money without parliamentary approval, which is an illegality. That is the information I would like to give. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, Cabinet and Parliament is now hostage to economic hitmen who are moving around – (Interjection) – Yes, I am stating this and if you give me time, I will come and clarify. What we discuss in Parliament, the business we wait to be processed here and the business in Cabinet – It is those tenderers who are on top of the agenda. 

This is a country where we have had the National Development Plan (NDP) I and II and we are going for NDP III; the financing has already been agreed on between the National Planning Authority (NPA) - which my good friend, hon. Bahati, heads - and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. With all this, why is there another clearing house on the financing modes? 

I would like to end by saying that even the oil roads we are discussing are in a region which had never had roads since independence. If we had 50 kilometres of road in Bunyoro, we would have had oil in 2011, but because we failed to adhere to the objectives of the Constitution and the principles of regional, these places were denied roads. You now need the oil but you cannot get it without the roads because logistically it would be very expensive; it would take a lot of time and equipment would break. 

Can we look at a country in terms of the national picture? The Jinja Express Highway is in the Vision 2040 and was supposed to have been financed in NDP I. We are now going to NDP III but the lifeline road for all our imports and exports is not there because of individual interests against national interest. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this issue is serious and we want answers this week. We cannot continue giving money to other parts of the country when we spend seven hours in a traffic jam to just go to Jinja. This has gone on for very many years; it is not fair and is totally unacceptable. You tell the President that we have said that it is unacceptable. Enough is enough!

MR DENIS SABIITI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason Members of Parliament are sceptical about BOT or PPP is because we have had these projects in Uganda but their performance is very questionable. The ministers here know it. There have been reschedules because of some problems associated with them in Uganda. Therefore, it is practically impossible to convince anybody who knows how they have been performing that this is the preferable method of funding an important road such as the Jinja Express Highway. It would not be the best option definitely, knowing what has been happening, because we learn from our history. Thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL GRADUATE SCHEME BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson? Which committee is this?

MS AGNES KUNIHIRA: Madam Speaker, it is the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. However, hon. Majegere asked us to hold on because he is still consulting on some issues.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us go to another item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO EXTEND THE DISTRICT QUOTA POLICY FOR AWARD OF GOVERNMENT SCHOLARSHIPS TO OTHER LOWER INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Lanyero? She is not here. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE TRIPARTITE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UGANDA POLICE FORCE, UGANDA LAND COMMISSION AND TIP TOP INVESTMENTS LTD FOR THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPPING OF A REGIONAL FORENSIC REFERRAL CENTRE, CONSTRUCTION OF HEADQUARTERS AND ACCOMMODATION FOR OFFICERS

5.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Doreen Amule): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Tripartite Agreement between the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Land Commission and Tip Top Investments Ltd, for the design, construction and equipping of a regional forensic referral centre, construction of headquarters and accommodation for officers. On page 1, we have abbreviations and acronyms; I would like to implore Members to go through them.

Introduction

The agreement between the Government of Uganda, represented by the Uganda Police Force and Uganda Land Commission, and Tip Top Investment Company for the design, construction and equipping of the Regional Forensic Referral Centre of Excellence for the Eastern Africa region, construction of headquarters and accommodation for officers, was laid before the House on 18 September 2018 by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Obiga Kania. It was then referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for scrutiny in accordance with rule 185 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The agreement was laid on the Table in accordance with section 34(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 20l5, which states thus: “An accounting officer shall not pledge or otherwise encumber the land or any other asset of a vote without the permission of Parliament.” The committee has considered the agreement and now wishes to report.

Background

In 2012, the East African Community’s (EAC) Council of Ministers resolved to have the Regional Forensic Referral Centre (RFRC) hosted by Uganda. The RFRC was to be a centre of excellence in forensic service delivery in the EAC as well as to serve as a focal point of forensic service delivery in the EAC region, East African Police Chiefs Cooperation Organisation (EAPCCO), and the African Police Cooperation Organisation (AFRIPOL).

The necessity for a RFRC in the East African Community arose out of the need to –

1. 	Strengthen the investigative capacity of law enforcement agencies in the East African region;
2. 	Facilitate other law and order sectors in the administration of justice; and
3. 	Combat the increased sophistication in crime, cognisant of its apparent transnational nature, especially terrorism and cybercrime and investigation of other emerging crimes.

The EAC 4th Sectoral Council on Interstate Security adopted the recommendation from the EAC Chiefs of Police to establish a regional forensic referral centre of excellence that would spearhead the harmonisation and provision of forensic expertise, quality control and standardisation of forensic service delivery - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I have just realised that both the ministers involved are not here. I do not know whether we should receive this in their absence and then –

MS AMULE: Madam Speaker, I would propose that I present the report but we stay the debate until the ministers are able to be present for a discussion. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you ensure that they will be here tomorrow? Okay, present.

MS AMULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.
As I was saying, we also have training, research and strengthening of forensic services in the region.

During a meeting held in Kigali, Rwanda, on 23 and 24 August 2012, the East African Community – (Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, with due respect, I would like to thank you. This is a report that is fairly contentious; it has even attracted a minority report. Some aspects that we raise will even require the Attorney-General, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Minister of Internal Affairs to be around. If we read and make a case for those arguments and the debate comes on another day when they have not listened in, I do not think they will be in a position to respond adequately. We will be doing double work. 

My humble prayer, as a matter of procedure, is that if we did this work in one go, we will save a lot of our time. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the issue of the police is very critical. We need this report but the people responsible like the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Solicitor-General and the Attorney-General are not here. 

I would like to request, Madam Speaker, that you direct that they come before this report is tabled as it is very critical. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, many times when we receive reports and summarise them for the people who are not here, we are not accurate. Sometimes they do not pick up the right issues. This is very important. I know it has delayed but I think we need to do a good job. Let us receive and debate it tomorrow. 

Please, make sure that they are all here. I think they have forgotten that they are supposed to be in this House. The Attorney-General, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Minister of Internal Affairs should be here so that we debate and they respond. Let us conclude it tomorrow because it has been on the Order Paper for a while. 

MS AMULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance. I would not want to be the one failing the House. Now that you have guided, I have no problem postponing and we present another day. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are here and you had even started but we are concerned that the people that we want to handle these issues are not here. We will give you adequate time tomorrow. Please, make sure that those people are here tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Are they here? Honourable members, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you. 

(The House rose at 5.39 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 October 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

