Thursday, 4 October 2012

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon honourable members, welcome to this sitting. I apologise for starting late today. There are issues that came and I could come any earlier, I apologise for that. It is not in my practice to come this late.

A consultative meeting on the draft national Vision 2040 has been organised by the National Planning Authority, which will take place on the 11th of October. It is a half-day meeting; it will be in the Parliamentary Conference Hall A, and you are all supposed to attend. Please, do attend and understand the principles that will be presented to you for your consideration and action later, but it is important that we get abreast with those matters that are going to be presented by the National Planning Authority.

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of St Jude Junior School in Pallisa District represented by hon. Amoit Judith, the honourable member for Youth – Eastern; and the honourable Member for Pallisa County. They have come to witness the proceedings, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, we have started late and, therefore, I use my prerogative to suspend all other items and go to item number six.

3.01
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I had some very small matter of urgent importance. Allow me one minute to present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I made a ruling on this one and I want to stick to that and we will deal with that towards the end. I will give you sufficient time to deal with it.

MR OKUMU: No, it is urgent and at the end of the day we may not be able to achieve much out of that.

Mr Speaker, the issue I am rising on is that we are celebrating 50 years, and this happens once in a blue moon. There are public servants and civil servants of Uganda who have done a lot of donkey work in this country, but it looks like we are not preparing for them. I am, therefore, raising the concern that most of these civil servants will be travelling to celebrate the 50 years in their villages, and I would request that Government gives them a public holiday on Monday and Wednesday to allow them return for work.

This is all I want to raise and I think this is a matter which is very important. Yesterday, I passed a note to the Leader of Government Business about this, and our appeal is that Government should look back at the public servants who have made the 50 years as something of importance.

3.02
THE DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, since I got his note yesterday, we have been consulting and we have not finished consultation. So, we will respond positively or negatively, so he has to wait. I have no answer now, but I can confirm that he gave it to me and we are consulting.

3.03
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga South Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With humility, I stand on a point of procedure. Yesterday, the Government Side started its formal responses to the issues, which were raised by the respective reports namely, the main report of the committee and a minority report.

In terms of procedure, is it not advisable that we first exhaust the responses before we move to the third reading?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is item number six on your Order Paper and is it procedural that you go to the third reading before you have handled second reading and committee stage? It is Bills Second Reading.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

3.05
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Before I dwell on the responses on issues that were raised by the honourable Members of Parliament on the debate on the Petroleum Bill, yesterday I promised to respond to a matter that was raised by hon. Ssekikubo and I request that I start with that before I continue with the rest of the responses.

Yesterday, hon. Ssekikubo presented documents on a commercial unit structure purportedly from an existing national oil company to which I promised to get more information and present to Parliament.

I would like to inform the House that there is no oil company and that the commercial unit referred to is an administrative unit within my ministry. I would like to further inform the House that the petroleum exploration and production department within my ministry was established in 1991 with the mandate of acquiring technical data - that is geological and geophysical - to be used in attraction of oil companies.

It also had the mandate –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: I notice that the minister is reading from a prepared text. Can the honourable members get copies of that text since many issues may arise from it as it is in form of a ministerial statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is supposed to be an oral response, but if she has some notes to refer to, she can refer to them.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I was giving you background information to the mandate of this department.

The third mandate is to monitor and regulate licensed oil companies and advise on policy and legislation for petroleum exploration and production, and for capacity building for the petroleum exploration and production sector.

At the time of formation of this department, the internal structure of the department was composed of geology and geophysics divisions. The structure was good enough for acquisition of technical data, promotion and attraction of petroleum companies.

With the discovery of petroleum, the department has had to focus on the following issues:

1.	Policy formulation and legislation;
2.	Commercialisation of the discovered oil and gas resources;
3.	Development of infrastructure; and
4.	Promotion and regulation of the industry. 

The department, therefore, has had to adapt to new emerging challenges and create new operational structures. Accordingly, as an internal arrangement, the department assigned its officers key tasks every year as a way of meeting the new department’s obligations.

In that regard, the department’s assignments for the year 2012/2013 have been divided into four units, namely:

•	Policy unit to advise on issues of a policy nature and legislation, which we are doing right now.

•	Regulatory unit to take forward monitoring and regulation of the licensed companies, which is ongoing.

•	Commercial unit to advise on issues of commercial interests like the state participation and undertaking research on formation of the national oil company.

•	The infrastructure unit to take forward aspects relating to the refinery pipeline.

The above units which report to the Commissioner Petroleum Exploration and Production Department are intended to deliver our key outputs as described in the policy statement 2012/2013.

I have made an extract from the ministerial policy statement, which is focusing on the areas that I have described and I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just make reference to the pages in the ministerial policy statement, on which it is because we already have that document on the record of Parliament.

MS MULONI: Pages X, XI, XII, XIII and XIV from the Ministerial Policy Statement for financial year 2012/2013.

The documents presented by hon. Ssekikubo were, therefore, internal documents of how the commercial unit has been set up to deliver its assignment for 2012/2013 as per the ministerial policy statement. 

The personnel who handled the above assignments are public servants within my ministry, and I will now lay on the Table appointment letters for the staff undertaking assignments in the commercial unit. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you read us one and we understand what it is about.

MS MULONI: There is one for Mr Abeinomugisha a geologist, Ochan Andrew a geologist, Ms Ssempala Vivian, Basiima David Ahimbisibwe, Wandera Robert Omwembe, Ahebwa Peninah, Mugizi Herbert Magyezi, Mugumya Winston, Tumushabe Wilson Mbire, Sserubiri Tony, Ddungu Tony Ssuna, Kabuye Isaac, Korutaro Caroline, Muwoya Daniel, and Ariho Benjamin.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I was at pains trying to follow the letters of appointment the minister is reading because a letter cannot be complete without reading the designation so that we compare with what was tabled yesterday, to see if they are in conformity or this is another matter altogether.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I asked you to pick one and then give us the proper details.

MS MULONI: I will use one of Mr Abeinomugisha Dozith:

“5th May 2000

To: Mr Abeinomugisha Dozith,

Through: The Commissioner Petroleum Exploration and Production Department.

Dear Sir,

I am directed to offer you appointment on probation as Geologist in the Public Service. The appointment is subject to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Public Service Act and regulations made thereunder, Public Service Standing Orders and administrative instructions made from time to time and the Pensions Act Cap. 281.

In addition, your appointment will include the following terms and conditions of service:

Salary scale, salary range, starting salary” - do I need to read all those, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just give us the outline.

MS MULONI: “Chapter one paragraph (a) to (b) of the standing orders requires you all new appointees to the Public Service to be examined including an X-ray. When occasion demands, you will be required to serve in any part of Uganda by normal posting instructions.

I have to request you to inform me in writing whether you are prepared to accept this offer and if so to report to the government medical officer for examination with the attached form.

Yours faithfully,
H.R. Ssesonga, Permanent Secretary

cc. Public Service Commission, Minutes 196 of 2000.”

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to first of all register my appreciation to the minister for the timely response to the demand that we made of her yesterday. However, I want to be clarified on the issue of the organogram, which was presented by hon. Ssekikubo. Is that organogram part of your ministry? Now that you are convinced that these are your staff, is it there established by Public Service? If it is, then we will take it at a different level.

MS MULONI: Thank you Mr Speaker. Yesterday when we had the matter raised by hon. Ssekikubo and the document tabled before you, I was not able to get a copy of it and, therefore, I would not know whether that is the exact structure, which is in my department of petroleum exploration and development. I could have a copy of this and compare with what we have.

But to further clarify on your matter, as I read this appointment letter, I think it was very clear that you could be assigned duties in any part of this country in any position.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we are here to help this country, nothing beyond that. We are giving a helping hand to the Executive so that things are done well. I just asked a simple question, is the organogram which was presented by the hon. Ssekikubo part of the ministry?

And according to that letter which has been read to us, the appointment letter of 2000, in as far as Public Service is concerned, a person appointed is given two years’ probation period, and it is very rare that you get yourself confirmed at exactly two years of service. In most cases, it might go to three or even four years. From that level, you can be considered for promotion, and if you are considered for promotion, you will be a senior geological officer, not even principal. 

As I talk, the Commissioner for Geological Services in that ministry is in an acting position. The job schedule however, which was read yesterday by hon. Ssekikubo together with the organogram indicates a much senior position. That is the reason why the minister should be honest enough to this House and this country to tell us whether the organogram presented yesterday is part and parcel of the ministry’s structure.

With all that you are reading here and the job specifications read to us yesterday, they do not add up, Madam Minister, unless you convince me to the contrary.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have more letters regarding Abeinomugisha. You had requested me to read one as a sample. I can read more regarding the same person -(Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to seek this clarification from the honourable minister. Just like my colleagues have said, I wish to thank the minister for answering the queries raised timely.

Mr Speaker, you have guided that the honourable minister reads one letter to act as a sample for the many persons that were mentioned. I would like to request that the honourable minister gives us more light on one of the members she read, one Kabuye Isaac. This is because, to the best of my understanding, Kabuye Isaac has been working with Kyambogo University, and if Kabuye has been working in the Legal Department of Kyambogo University, he was, therefore, not a staff in your department. Can I find out how this member came to be in this same department?

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me finish with Abeinomugisha before I get to Kabuye. The second letter on Abeinomugisha is dated 26 April 2004:

“Through: The Commissioner Petroleum Exploration and Production Department, Entebbe.

Dear Sir, 

I am directed to offer you appointment on promotion as Senior Geologist in the Public Service.” Again it states the same details and it quotes the PSA minutes number 310 of 9/2004 refers.

I have a third letter dated 22 June 2011, “assignment of duties”. This is now from the Commissioner, Petroleum Exploration and Development Department, assignment of duties. “You will recall that Mr Robert Kassande was promoted to Assistant Commissioner in charge of Geology on 1 April 2011. The position of Principal Geologist/Exploration which he was holding, therefore, fell vacant. In order to facilitate effective running of the department, I recommend that Mr Dozith Abeinomugisha, Senior Geologist Exploration is assigned duties of Principal Geologist/Exploration in an acting capacity as the process of filling the post on a full-time basis is taken forward with the Ministry of Public Service.”

So, this is the story of Abeinomugisha.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we allow her to lay the letters one by one?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as the minister reads the contents of the documents, in terms of procedure how do we affirm that what she is reading is the true story on paper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because she is reading it.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: She could be reading something to the contrary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The documents will be laid on the Table for verification.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: This is because nobody else has a duplicate of what she is reading. This is the issue that I am raising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, yesterday we requested the minister to come with those documents as proof of appointment of these particular officers, which she claimed yesterday are employees in her ministry. That is exactly what she is doing and she is going to lay those letters on the Table and after that they become the property of Parliament. You can verify them anytime, honourable member.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will now turn to Mr Isaac Kabuye. The letter is dated, 12 January 2012. 

“Mr Isaac Kabuye 

Dear Sir, 

I am pleased to inform you that you have been offered contract appointment to Strengthen the Management of Oil and Gas Sector Project in the Department of Petroleum Exploration and Production as Legal Officer for a period of two years. Signed, Segawa Ronald Gyagenda, for Permanent Secretary.”

So, this is the recruitment of Isaac Kabuye on contract in the project.

Mr Speaker, I have laid these documents on the Table -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those appointment letters of the staff whose names have been read as property of Parliament for examination by the House. Let the records capture them as such.

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, the national oil company that hon. Ssekikubo was talking about will only be formed after passing of the new laws, and the recruitment of staff will be carried out competitively.

I now want to respond to the issues that have been raised on this Floor during the debate –(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, on what point do you rise?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to give information that the minister seems to be side-tracking. I am glad that at last on round one, the minister is conceding as an internal working document, which she was reading - but even what she has read, have been letters of appointment and roles but, for instance, Davis was appointed as a geologist and subsequently as a senior geologist -(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue yesterday was, hon. Ssekikubo alleged that Government had set up a company even before we set up the legislation for the national oil company. He laid on Table a document, which was entitled, “Commercial Unit Structure.” The honourable minister has gone ahead to show that yes, there is a commercial unit as part of the structure of the ministry.

Mr Speaker, unless Mr Ssekikubo would like to correct the information given to us yesterday; and unless he, as the person who alleges, still has any other proof, is it not procedurally in order that we put this to a close and we proceed as Parliament to the next item?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, indeed there was an issue that was raised yesterday; the issue of an organogram entitled, “Commercial Unit Structure” without any further description. The matter was contested and we allowed the minister to come back today and tell us about the people whose names were mentioned yesterday and she claimed were members of staff in the ministry. Today, the minister has come with appointment letters dating back to the year 2000, with promotions in the middle and things like that, and assignment of duties to a particular officer, whose name was mentioned in the organogram, which was presented to the House yesterday, confirming that that officer is staff in the ministry. 

The minister has also said that the department was restructured and they have created four units, with one called a “commercial unit”. In my opinion, therefore, this matter is resolved, to that extent. There is a commercial unit in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development under a particular section – I do not know what she called it. But there is a commercial unit and those names are for the people who are holding those offices in the ministry. That is the clarification we have got now, unless hon. Ssekikubo has something additional.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, if the Member was patient – but being over anxious also can make us miss a point or two – because the job description the minister was reading was for a senior geologist. But what was tabled yesterday was the “head of commercial unit” in Geology with all the job descriptions like participating in selection of new recruits, liaising with the regulatory unit, managing business aspects and others. So, what we are talking about now is, if at all the minister was adducing a letter to that effect that even in the circumstances there was a further instrument to raise the promotion from a geologist to head the commercial unit, we would take it. 

Hon. Magyezi, with your experience, I hope you can agree with me. If there was a departure for the geologist to head the commercial unit, involved with reports and activities of a commercial nature, we would say, “Yes, we rest the matter.” But it is still odd, meaning information related to this is still lacking.

But having said that, I want to add that unless we get this information - the minister cannot admit part of it - that those are part of their internal working papers; let us have instruments where these roles were strictly provided. You can act in any position in this country; you cannot be a permanent secretary and then you act as something else. I want us to be clear on this and that will put matters to rest.

Mr Speaker, I want to state that - you remember part of our resolutions? We stated that there should be cessation of all commercial aspects like licensing. And indeed Government agreed with us that those which were ongoing were the ones allowed to proceed. What is now happening is the contrary! There is nothing personal to this. Members, you should be open to this. Let me, for instance, tell the minister that in February this year, new licences were offered for Nzizi and Mputa oil wells, which had not been part of the old. The point I am making is that as we resolved, Government has been going on with activities in spite of the enabling law. So, when I see someone jumping - as if that was not enough, Mr Speaker, leave alone the oil petroleum company – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, we now have to be relevant to the debate. The issue that came before the House yesterday was the issue of whether an oil company is in existence, for which you had documents relating to its commercial unit. So, please, let us not jump out of this one and then create another situation which will extenuate our debate; let the debate be structured in the form that it was being conducted. I am, therefore, going to allow the honourable minister to proceed with the issues.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister respond to the issues. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Natural Resources for the commitment and dedication that it has shown on the Petroleum Bill -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I listened to you telling the minister to answer the questions which were raised yesterday. And - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not tell her to answer the questions that were raised yesterday; I told her to answer the questions that were raised in the course of the debate and she was in the process of making those responses. It was not about yesterday; she has only dealt with that particular issue which came up yesterday. She had prepared a response; there was no debate and she was closing.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. But in our debates, once a matter is raised, it is responded to and the matter is rested. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us finish with her responses and then you come up if there are still pending issues.

MR SSEKIKUBO: You said we should restructure this and get done with it so that she can proceed with others. May I be allowed –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no. Let her answer the pending questions and then we will deal with any outstanding matter. That is how we organise debate so that we can move forward.

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to be guided; there is a commercial unit in the ministry and then the national oil company that we shall create after passing the Bill. When I look at the roles and responsibilities of the national oil company as indicated in the Bill and what was read yesterday as the roles and responsibilities of the commercial unit, they seem to be similar – they are the same! So, I want to be guided on how the commercial unit will relate to the national oil company eventually when the Bill is passed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please take the Floor.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. While I was responding to hon. Ssekikubo’s question on the issue of commercialisation, I made it very clear that with the discovery of petroleum, the following issues have arisen and, therefore, the department that handles petroleum exploration, development and production has to focus on them. And one of the issues I mentioned was policy formulation and legislation; commercialisation of the discovered oil and gas resource; development of infrastructure; and promotion and regulation of the industry. 

I further stated that in that regard, the department had been restructured in a manner that they can address these emerging issues. And that as a result four units had been created to specifically focus on those areas that I am talking about, of which commercialisation is one of them. And so, the commercial unit advises on issues of commercial interest like state participation and undertaking research on the formation of the national oil company. All these things have to be prepared. We are here debating the Bills because of the work that had to be done by various people. 

Likewise, as we debate the Bills and transform them into laws, then the onset of creating the national oil company will come on board. And when this national oil company is created, it will recruit competitively. So, these members of my ministry are actually supporting the various functions that my ministry is handling in as far as the resource of petroleum is concerned.  

Mr Speaker, I think I can now proceed. Thank you -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your guidance. One, yesterday when this issue was being raised on the Floor of Parliament, I personally submitted that the so-called Mr Isaac Kabuye was recruited from Kyambogo University as coming to join the oil company. 

But two, when the list was presented by hon. Ssekikubo, the honourable minister stood on the Floor and said some of those people mentioned in the report of hon. Ssekikubo were her staff. At this point, when she was responding, I did not hear her either own up all of them as presented by hon. Ssekikubo or isolating the others whom she said were not her staff so as to help us as the House to cross-check whether the list hon. Ssekikubo brought included what was not staff from the Ministry of Energy.

Lastly, I would want to be guided that on this issue which we are debating, we want that assurance that the process of the names being floated is not a slow but sure process of recruiting people already in the oil company and denying a competitive, recommended process of getting competent people for that company. 

Because, Mr Speaker, if we ignore this and we brush it under the carpet that it is speculation, and tomorrow we confirm that this is a slow but sure way that the government is already positioning its people to derive the competitiveness of the Ugandans to be employed in this company, it will be sad and we shall be held responsible. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let me deal with this.

On the second issue, that is not a matter for guidance from the Speaker. It is a factual matter that the minister has to handle. But on the first issue, about names that were isolated, the minister was not given a copy of the names that were brought by hon. Ssekikubo. What the minister has come here with are the lists of the members of her staff with their appointment letters as such. And if there are people in the unit that was mentioned, those are the names that she has come with. So, we cannot again say, “Can she now go and start verifying with what and what?” That will be putting it beyond what her mandate is right now because she has brought the names of the people she knows are in her ministry.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable minister for doing your best to steer this important and evolving sector. We are dealing with symptoms of a structural problem. We are now discussing a kind of crisis management to put a commercial department in the Ministry of Energy as if Uganda Government does not have substantive ministries responsible for this stage of development, beyond drilling.                       

Mr Speaker, the reason I am raising this is that I have stood here on the Floor of Parliament more than four times and demanded that as we go through the two Bills, before we go to committee stage, the Leader of Government Business helps this Parliament to bring here a comprehensive inter-ministerial policy in terms of roles - what different ministries are doing to help the sector. What I am seeing now is an attempt to smuggle in some commercial department in Energy as if we do not have Ministry of Finance, and as if we do not have Trade and Industry. 

Mr Speaker, I can give information to this Parliament. Right now the Minister of Energy is being arm-twisted by some interests in the oil investments about the refinery. If the minister is free then she can bring that information to the Members. The debate on the kind of refinery and who is going to finance it is not as clear as we see it, and this is because - Prime Minister, if you want you will bring a report on this Floor on which kind of refinery we are going to have, who is going to own it and who is financing it - if you want to argue.

The reason I am raising this is that we are trying to - actually we have already overstretched Ministry of Energy. We are not only behind in the legislation – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The guidance that you stood on. 

MR MUKITALE: We are lacking the institutional capacity and preparedness. The guidance I am, therefore, seeking is that wouldn’t it be proper for Parliament to be informed, apart from the legislation in terms of preparedness, what are other ministries related with these business options doing for this country to be prepared? Short of that, we are going to be scooped because we lack the institutional capacity and we are now trying to use some fire brigade. That is the guidance; that my earlier request be respected and the inter-ministerial policy and technical report be brought here and we get to know who is doing what.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been listening attentively to the contributions that have been coming up and I thought we could really be guided on the essence behind this debate because I thought the idea behind having these Bills is to make sure that we set the oil sector on a proper footing such that various responsibilities, institutionally, are exercised by the competent authorities that are supposed to handle them.

Now, my view is that some of the observations which are coming up right now, when we get to the committee stage, it should be the duty of each one of us to make sure that the Bills and the law that is passed subsequently, clearly ensures that the duplication, for instance, hon. Bihande is scared about, is clearly addressed. 

Because at this stage if there have been any mistakes that have been going on in the ministry and in the sector, the best we can do is to make sure that we attend to these Bills, come up with amendments and make sure that the duplications and any other malfunctions that would have otherwise happened or taken place are clearly addressed by coming up with a law that is representative of the industry that we would like to see.    

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We seem to be derailing from the basic issues that we are supposed to handle on the Floor of Parliament, as far as I am concerned. We are guided by Article 244 about state participation in this particular matter. It is very clear and elaborate. But when you look at clause 7, when you are talking about the national oil company, we seem to be moving the state away from taking charge. We should now be discussing how the state should be involved because if we disengage the state and we look at the company that is being created as a private company, but under the cover of a state company, then we have derailed from the constitutional requirement.

So, Mr Speaker, we need your guidance on this matter. The structures being talked about if they are state structures in the ministry and are intended to help the state company and this company can be supervised by Parliament, I would have no problem. But if this company is going to be autonomous and we cannot perform our oversight role to know what is going on in this particular sector, then there is a problem.

So, the chairperson and the honourable minister should clarify on some of these issues. If it is a private company and we cannot oversee what is going on in this company, then we shall be abdicating our functions under Article 244 of the Constitution. So, I need your guidance on this matter.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I was listening attentively to the submission of hon. Daudi Migereko and, I therefore, seek further guidance. What sparked off this debate was the realisation by Members of Parliament that we are closing the stable when the horses have already bolted. Exactly as hon. Jack Sabiiti is saying, is this monster called national oil company still within our grasp? We are just coming to the tail end when things are already afoot to the extent that if the minister was honest, on top of admitting that there is a national oil company and saying we have a structure, she should also have been honest to Parliament to say that even the Uganda Petroleum Authority has already been formed and people are already positioned there. 

So, what is remaining of us to perform as Parliament? The last word I want to hear is a ‘No’ because I have evidence with me. If even the Petroleum Authority is already in place, what is remaining with us to discuss -(Interruption)

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Is the honourable member in order to tell the minister to tell lies in the House when he is not even sure of what he himself is talking about? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate we are having now is on the motion for second reading of this Bill. If we agree that the Bill should go ahead, then we go to the details and see how we can improve on it. That is what we are discussing now. So, the motion is for second reading and the principles of the Bill. Do they capture the true mood of the House and the people of this country that a law is needed to regulate this sector? Do we agree with the principles that such a law is necessary? That is the debate we are handling now.

But if we now start discussing the actual provisions of the Bill, we would be now in committee stage and that would be the proper moment to handle those specific issues more properly. But we have allowed this debate to go on so that Members can generally guide, because in this debate, you lay foundations for the amendments you are going to propose at the committee stage.

I think the ground has been sufficiently laid that a strong discussion will have to be held on the issue of the structure and nature of the National Oil Company. So, when we come to that provision, there will be a long debate, I am sure. There will be amendments proposed and there will be votes conducted on that basis and there will be submissions made very eloquently to put it this way or the other way. 

So, the proper place for that would be now when you are dealing with that; but now we are dealing with the broad principles of the Bill. Are we in agreement that this law is necessary. But the debate we have now gone into is actually provisions of the Bill. We are now discussing the actual provisions of the Bill and we may not go very far if we go this way because someone is now going to start discussing issues of the structure of the national oil company; and somebody will start with the authority, that it is already in existence. Let us deal with the principles. Have we agreed with the principles of the Bill? Is this Bill necessary at all? That is what we are discussing.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, we should not rush into making a law which will not last. So, I am seeking guidance. In the study of evidence law, there is a general rule which says that depending on how you get the facts, does not matter. You can even steal the facts from a certain office, but it is important that you speak the facts. 

The guidance I am seeking is, hon. Ssekikubo took time to give us some detailed information. When the minister came to counteract that information, she half way counteracted that information; the rest of the information remained redundant. Knowing that the company referred to is not supposed to commence until we have finalised legislation, I think we should give chance to hon. Ssekikubo to tell us the truth in complete terms.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we are making these laws, it is important that we make them on the basis of knowledge and a high level of honesty. You see, when Members stand up to seek clarifications from the frontbench and the frontbench declines to give those clarifications, then Members are denied the opportunity to know the facts and the truths, which would guide them in making these laws.

So, Mr Speaker, would it not be prudent to guide especially the ministers, to allow Members who are seeking clarifications to have information, so that when we go to actually considering clause by clause, people make petitions and make good laws from a point of knowledge. Take, for example, when the minister was making her final response. She talked about the commercial unit getting engaged in the commercialisation of the discovered oil. We have information that oil has been drilled in the wells of Kigogore and Kasameme in Exploration Area 2. Has that commercial unit sold that oil? If it has, how has it sold it so that when we debate and make provisions for the oil company, we have knowledge and get to know how to plug the rules, especially when the minister is given so wide and discretionary powers in the Bill? We need to have information and I beg you, Mr Speaker, to guide the frontbench to allow Members who are seeking clarifications and points of information to be given that opportunity. 

I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to move forward on these matters now. We were waiting for the minister to make responses to the issues raised by this House. If we had allowed the minister to finish, by now we would be raising supplementary issues on matters which have remained pending. Honourable minister please, respond to those issues so that we can deal with matters which will remain outstanding because we are not moving at all.  

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Red Stars Primary School in Rubaga North Constituency represented by the hon. Moses Kasibante and the hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

MS MULONI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. As I proceed to respond to other issues, which were brought on the Floor of this Parliament, I want to restate that there is no existing national oil company and neither is there a petroleum authority formed as yet. These institutions will be formed after the laws we are in the process of making have been passed. When those institutions are formed, recruitment will be done competitively. 

I want to thank the Committee on Natural Resources for its commitment and the time it took to dedicate itself to scrutinising these Bills, understanding the issues therein and coming up with a report. 

I also want to thank the honourable Members of Parliament for the various issues you have brought on this Floor of Parliament. It is a manifestation that we are all very much interested in this resource, and I am looking forward to us coming up with a law that is going to guide the management of this resource which all of us Ugandans are looking forward to. 

In the same light, I want to thank my colleagues, the ministers. They responded to a number of issues that were raised on this Floor. The Minister of Education responded to issues of education and capacity building. The one of Water and Environment touched on issues of the environment and water. We had Tourism and Wildlife. We had the Minister of Works and Transport telling us about the various activities, which are going on in infrastructure development in the Albertine Graben. We had the Minister of Lands responding to issues of land in the Albertine Graben and the Deputy Attorney-General responded to the legal issues. I am now here to respond to the rest of the issues which Members raised. 

I will first of all respond to the two minority reports which were raised by hon. Lukyamuzi. He has really been looking forward to having a response on the issues, which he raised and I would like to respond to some of those issues. Others have already been responded to by my colleague. 

One, he was looking at the coordination of oil policies with the Bills. In here, he was looking at the definition of petroleum vis-a-vis oil and gas. The words “petroleum” and “oil” and “gas” are used interchangeably internationally. We preferred to use the words “oil” and “gas” at a policy level to emphasise and bring out the significance of gas, which in several countries is just flared or burnt. Here in Uganda, flaring is forbidden and we would like to use gas as a raw material for industries and as an energy source for power generation.

On the definition of the word “petroleum” this definition is under Article 244 of the Constitution. It is sufficient and the Bills have conformed to it. The definition that hon. Lukyamuzi was proposing would be incorrect because it leaves out natural gas and petroleum is not only formed by an aerobic decay of organic matter, but also by thermal cracking of complex organic matter. 

On the issue of the oil contract, the Contract Act, 2010 governs contractual relationships between private individuals and does not cover petroleum production sharing agreements. The production sharing agreements are one of the standard contracts in the oil industry around the world. All the production sharing agreements signed between Government and the oil companies have been presented before this House. When the Bills are passed into law, they will adequately govern the PSAs. In addition, the petroleum laws do not operate in isolation. The licensees will have to comply with all laws of Uganda and, therefore, there is no need to amend the Constitution to provide for oil contracts.

I will now comment on the oil royalties, a case of Bunyoro Kingdom, which he raised. The Constitution provides a broad framework for legislation to be made. This framework provides for sharing of royalties for minerals and petroleum and in that regard, the proposed Public Finance Bill which was tabled by my colleague, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, addresses sharing of royalties. 

I will turn to environmental damage. Articles 39 and 245 in the Constitution, together with the environmental principles 27 and 13 provide for the protection and management of the environment in Uganda. The details are provided for under the environmental related laws. However, I wish to point out that Government has and continues to undertake initiatives to protect the environment, especially with regard to developing the oil and gas sector. These initiatives include compilation of the sensitivity atlas, which was talked about by my colleagues, carrying out of strategic environment assessments and oil spills contingency planning and review of the environmental legislation. These matters, my colleagues have already talked about them.

I now want to turn to the minority report on Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage Bill, 2012. In here, hon. Lukyamuzi talked about issues of the refinery. In response to the issues he raised, I would like to give a background here for the benefit of all of us so that as we continue considering these Bills, we consider them from an informed position. 

A feasibility study for the development of the refinery in Uganda was conducted in 2010/2011 by a reputable engineering firm called Foster Wheeler Energy Ltd UK. 

The study confirmed that developing the refineries was more profitable than exporting crude oil to the Indian Ocean coast. Uganda’s crude oil is waxy and would require heating during transportation by pipeline. The study was approved by Cabinet and was presented to key stakeholders in both industry and Government in 2011. The same study can be accessed from my ministry. 

Ownership of the refinery will be developed on a public/private partnership basis with the shareholding of 40:60 respectively. Government will soon commence the process of identifying a lead developer for the refinery who will be required to have sufficient operating experience. The developer will be identified competitively. All this will happen once we have passed the laws. 

On the benefits of refining in Uganda, in addition to being more economic, developing this refinery will benefit our country as follows:

1.	Improvement of the country’s balance of payments by reducing the Petroleum Products Importation Bill, which is estimated at about US$ 1 billion.

2.	Refining is a strategic development that will ensure the competitiveness of Uganda and the East African Community.

3.	It will ensure the rational and sustainable exploitation of the resources discovered todate.

4.	It will improve security of supply for petroleum products.

5.	It will contribute to the country’s growing energy requirements and mix by producing heavy fuel oil and liquefied petroleum gas.

6.	Utilisation of by-products from the refinery will ensure the development of several off-shoot industries.

7.	Refinery development will ensure the creation of jobs for Ugandans and transfer of technology.

So, with those benefits, Mr Speaker, I think it is important that we progress with the issue of the refinery. 

The honourable member, in his report, also wondered how the refinery land had been procured. I would like to inform this House that the refinery land procurement process is still ongoing. The ministry is following all requisite procedures and laws in ensuring that the proposed refinery land is acquired in the most appropriate manner. 

The ministry, in consultation with Hoima District Land Board and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, concluded a boundary demarcation exercise for the 29 square kilometre land in Buseruka sub-county, Kabale parish in June 2012. 

In addition, a resettlement action plan study is being finalised following which Government will commence on the compensation of or resettlement process for the project-affected persons. 

The purpose of the resettlement action plan is to determine who the bonafide land owners are; sensitise them on the planned Government activities; interview them on their preferred compensation type, either resettlement or compensation; and survey and value their respective pieces of land.

The compensation rate payable in respect of crops and buildings of a non-permanent nature are determined by the district land board. The rates for land and permanent structures are determined by consultant valuers. All these rates are approved by the Chief Government Valuer.

Mr Speaker, I now want to delve into other issues that were raised by honourable members on this Floor. There was a concern on areas with petroleum potential in Uganda and Members raised an issue of possible petroleum occurrences in their constituencies. 

Mr Speaker, petroleum is found in sedimentary basins; Uganda has six sedimentary basins which are: Albertine Graben, Hoima Basin, Lake Kyoga Basin, Kadama-Moroto Basin, Lake Wamala Basin and Lake Victoria Basin. Out of these, the Albertine Graben is the most prospective to date. Work has been carried out in all the basins and it was found out that Lake Wamala and Lake Victoria basins are too shallow to generate and accumulate petroleum. 

Further work still needs to be undertaken in Hoima, Lake Kyoga and Kadama-Moroto basins. The petroleum Bills have considered the need for additional work. 

There was an issue raised about the need for planning in the sector by hon. Mukitale especially, and other Members. On inter-ministerial committees, Members wanted to be informed what the sector is doing. I would like to inform honourable members that there are several inter-ministerial committees that have been established to handle different aspects of petroleum. These include transport, security, environment and the national technical committee. All these committees report to the Cabinet sub-committee on petroleum, which I chair. Some of these committees are mandated to undertake inter-ministerial field visits to monitor and inspect activities in the sector. 

Mr Speaker, my colleagues were able to share with Members the various –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a point of procedure, the honourable minister is giving us very vital information as a response to issues raised. But at this material time, I think we need those details in order for Members to appreciate the debate and the Bill on the Floor of Parliament. 

We should be mindful that this is a new area and it is a bit technical; and also mindful that hon. Mukitale had stated that actually, Members need to know the different roles and how the different ministries are coordinating on the issue of oil, and hence the need for inter-ministerial overview. 

So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right through you Mr Speaker, to let the minister come with a comprehensive inter-ministerial overview of this sector to enable Members of this House and the public appreciate what we are going to put in the law? This area is very technical and new, and yet with very high expectations; it should be taken at a very calculated and slow pace so that everybody is taken on board, to mitigate any conflict that could arise. I seek your guidance on that, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me state again that we are debating on the motion for second reading of the Bill and we are debating the principles of this Bill. There is no way the principles of this Bill can contain an inter-ministerial document. It is a specific Bill. 

When a Bill is presented to a House like this, the House is required to examine it in some way. First of all, is it constitutional? How does it fit within the framework of the other laws? Does it cover the interests of the affected people?

When a Bill is finally passed, it is no longer the intention of the Executive that is carried in the Bill, but it is amended by the interests of the people of this country. That is what Parliament should do to a Bill. We cannot import things outside a Bill and begin debating them within the Bill. 

Let us deal with the Bill as it is presented. If you now want the Minister of Works to come and present his own position on the Bill; and you want the Minister of Environment to come with another outline of what they are going to do with the Bill; then it is no longer the Bill we are dealing with because a Bill is a product of a policy. So, let us deal with this Bill as it is and this motion as we are doing now. All those other issues will be for information for other purposes. Let us deal with this Bill for now. Let us make progress. You will have another time to ask those rejoinder questions. Let her finish her response first and then you raise the outstanding matters again.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. On use of appropriate technology in the sector, there are lots of demands from my ministry for the industry to use the best available technologies. As an example, my ministry and the oil companies have devised means of reducing the footprints and costs of drilling wells by employing technology to drill several wells in different directions from one location. 

On the National Development Plan; the effects of oil and gas production on the nation at large have been considered. The impact on the national economy, land ownership and use, physical planning, national industry, agriculture and rural activities, fisheries and its social impact have all been considered in the National Development Plan. 

The National Oil and Gas Policy, 2008 also recognises issues, which are cross-cutting and how they will impact or will be impacted on the oil and gas sector. The roles of the different institutions of Government are well documented in the policy and some institutions will be handling those aspects. 

On the institutional arrangements; the main role of Government in managing petroleum resources is classified in policy-making and implementation, regulation of the sub-sector and managing the commercial or business aspect. 

In the Bills, the minister gives policy direction to the regulator. The minister heads policy-making and implementation. However, on technical aspects, the minister is supported by a directorate with departments, which will be formed through a Public Service restructuring exercise to advise him or her on technical aspects. 

On the independence of the authority; the petroleum authority will carry out its functions independently of the Executive. The minister will only give policy guidance to the authority as is in other authorities. 

On ownership of the national oil company; the ownership of the national oil company will be 100 percent Uganda Government with possibilities of floating shares to Ugandans in the long-run. The decision to float shares will be presented to Cabinet and Parliament before implementation. 

There have been concerns on possible duplication of roles. The responsibilities of the institutions responsible for policy, regulation and commercial activities respectively have been outlined in the Bill.

The National Oil and Gas Policy also clearly outlines different mandates for different institutions and agencies of Government. 

I will now want to turn to local content. There were a number of questions raised regarding local content and the participation of Ugandans in the sector. Mr Speaker, I would like to share with you what my ministry is doing in order to improve local participation. 

One, the ministry carried out a study for enhancing national participation in the oil and gas sector as recommended by the National Oil and Gas Policy. The study made a number of recommendations including, establishment of an institutional framework for national content, capacity building of the people, enterprise development, facilitating national participation and monitoring national content achievements. 

A copy of this study can be accessed on our website www.petroleum.go.ug. And in order to take forward the recommendation of the study, my ministry has now procured a team of consultants to develop a strategic framework for national content development. 

It is also worth noting that part (8) clauses 121 to 124 of the Upstream Bill; and part (7) clauses 53 to 56 of the Midstream Bill specifically provide for state participation and national content. So, these two Bills we are considering actually provide for state participation and national content. 

Members noted that women engagement or empowerment is required and that vulnerable and disadvantaged groups involvement in the sector needs to be planned for. Mr Speaker, participation of these vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, like in any other sector, will be guided by the laws in place. The ministry is currently assessing aspects of gender mainstreaming for the energy and mineral sector. 

The honourable member from Nwoya District indicated that her district has not benefited from corporate social responsibility. I would like to inform you that money spent by companies on corporate social responsibility programmes is not recoverable and it is dependent on the companies’ willingness to donate. 

Nwoya, however, received four boreholes, donated by Heritage in 2009. It is worth noting that most of the work in the district has been undertaken in the national park. Many of the corporate social responsibility projects have concentrated in the park, where roads have been constructed together with donations of a vehicle and a ferry to Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

Work programmes are, however, expanding in Nwoya and Nebbi districts. And since operators are encouraged to consult with the district before implementing the corporate social responsibility projects, the respective local governments have the opportunity to benefit from these initiatives to support their district development programmes.

On employment of foreigners for jobs that can be done by Ugandans, my ministry is continuing to work with the Directorate of Immigration to streamline this aspect. Companies are now required to advertise for all jobs available and priority is given to Ugandans. Where no Ugandans are available, a succession plan is agreed upon for the company to train Ugandans. Work permits are only given to the foreigners where there is proof that no Ugandan was available for the job.

On transparency and accountability, Members asked why Uganda has not joined EITI. Mr Speaker, the government, as outlined in the National Oil and Gas policy, 2008 is committed to joining EITI. This is being taken forward by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

However, before joining EITI, it is important that the country puts in place necessary policies and laws to effectively manage the petroleum revenues. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has developed an Oil and Gas Revenue Management Policy and has tabled the Public Finance Bill, 2012 which puts in place the requisite legislation for petroleum revenue management. 

On procurement of services by oil companies; this is done through advertising, where the best evaluated bidder is awarded the contract. The oil companies’ procurement guidelines are currently being harmonised with those of PPDA. 

On confidentiality, some Members requested that data collected in the sector should be made accessible. Mr Speaker, all data acquired by Government is accessible through relevant departments. However, data acquired by oil companies is accessible to Government and not available to competing companies. 

Members asked why the Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs) are not accessible. Mr Speaker, all the PSAs signed by Government to-date have been presented to this Parliament.

On the management of expectations, in order to manage people’s anxiety and bridge the communication gap, my ministry is implementing a communication strategy. Various engagements with stakeholders have been held to build their capacity to understand the sector and share information.

A proactive media relations strategy is also in place, and in addition to the existence of a regularly updated website, whose address I already gave to you, the ministry is in the process of preparing an abridged and translated version of the National Oil and Gas Policy for dissemination.

On the naming of wells, it is not true that any village name has been changed. What has been happening is that when a well is presented for drilling, it is given a name. Wells in exploration Area I, which is the Bakwach Basin, have been named after animals. In exploration Area II, which are Buliisa, Butyaba and Kaiso Tonya, have been named after fish types. And those in exploration Area III A have been named after birds. In exploration Area IV, that is lakes George and Edward, have been named after primates while those in exploration Area V, which is the Rhino Camp, have been named after flowers and trees. The names chosen are in the indigenous languages of the areas.

Mr Speaker, let me now move to the training of Ugandans. Many issues have been raised on training, but let me first give a background on what is being done to encourage training in Uganda -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I am not known for putting colleagues to order and more so to the Member of Parliament for Bulambuli, who is also the sector minister. Anyway, I have stood here many times and raised the concern on the risk of losing our heritage because of this reckless naming. I had wanted to give information, but the minister forced me to first put her to order – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is she in order?

MR MUKITALE: If she allows I can give it as information, but I can also present it as a point of order. I am a born of Kisanshya Village where there are many wells around me and they are called Kasemene. But Kasemene is not an indigenous name in Bunyoro, Buliisa and not even anywhere in Uganda. Kasemene is a Congolese word. The risk of us losing our heritage and names of the villages, comes from the fact that Kasemene has already been identified as a possible central processing unit. The minister is also aware that that big development takes some very big chunk of land. And it is already called Kasemene Development Project. So, in effect, my small village name will disappear and what will be known globally will be Kasemene.

Even Kigogole is Congolese; it has nothing to do with Uganda. So, is my good friend in order to misinform Parliament that the names being given to the wells are indigenous and that they are not about to change any village name?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member rose on a point of order. The Speaker has had the opportunity to go through Bunyoro, but has not had the opportunity to go through Buliisa in order to know the names of the local villages therein. That information, therefore, is only within the Member’s knowledge and not within the Speaker’s knowledge. So, I cannot rule on that order.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. As I was saying, let me now comment on the training of Ugandans. I know that my colleague, the Minister of Education and Sports, responded to many of these issues. But in particular, there was a question raised as to how students can access training at Kigumba.

I would like to say that the institute was established to train Ugandans in artisan skills at certificate and diploma levels for the oil and gas sector, and provide necessary certification to the students completing their studies.

The public is invited, through the media, to apply every academic year. The call for applications this academic year, 2012/2013, ran in the newspapers and the deadline for submission of the applications is 12th October this year. Mr Speaker, here with me are pages from the New Vision and the Daily Monitor, in which adverts for application for training in UPIK were placed. I wish to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a newspaper? What date is it?

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, I have the New Vision of 24 September 2012 and the advert reads in parts: “Admission to the Uganda Polytechnic Institute, Kigumba….” The advert gives the details –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:What institute is that?

MS MULONI: It is Uganda Petroleum Institute, Kigumba (UPIK). So, it gives the details for the entry requirements and the deadline including where applicants are supposed to take their applications.

The second one is an advert from the Daily Monitor. It is dated 28 September and entitled: “Training vacancies at the Uganda Petroleum Institute, Kigumba.” It also gives the entry requirements and the deadline for submission of applications as 12 October 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those as such.

MS MULONI: So, indeed in terms of recruitment, we advertised and the students are able to –(Interruptions)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. Mr Speaker, the point of clarification I want to put to the minister is in relation to documents she has laid before the House, in regard to admissions to the petroleum school in Kigumba. I wanted to find out whether the ministry has some deliberate efforts to ensure that – because I may not have time to ask you this later. But for the interest of Ugandans, I want to know whether the fees related to this training is not too high. Is the training free or not? I am saying this because somebody may qualify for admission to that training but may not afford the money for tuition. So, is there any deliberate effort from the ministry to ensure that even the poor can afford this training?

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that my role was to show that indeed there is always opportunity and the competition for the applicants to access that training. But my colleague at the Ministry of Education and Sports gave some more insights because it is now handled under the Joint Admission Board in Ministry of Education.

Regarding the fees structure, I think the Ministry of Education and Sports would be in a better position to respond to that and I am sure any of us can get those details from Ministry of Education.

Mr Speaker, I will now continue to further capacity building for Ugandans. A Bachelor’s degree in Petroleum Geo-Sciences at Makerere University and a master’s programme in Petroleum Geo-Sciences at Makerere University have been introduced. They are going to commence during the academic year 2012/2013.

There was the issue of scholarships by Tullow that was raised here by the Leader of the Opposition who said that Tullow scholarships were being given to people from one region, specifically the Western region of Uganda.

I would like to state that the scholarships by the oil companies are fully funded and managed by the companies themselves. Specifically, Tullow Oil offers annual scholarships where the beneficiaries are chosen competitively. The British Council runs the selection process on behalf of Tullow Oil and this time round they offered 20 scholarships, and I would like to lay on Table a detailed brief of the Tullow Group Scholarship Scheme, which was carried out for this year. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what is that?

MS MULONI: It is a brief of the Tullow Group Scholarship Scheme, what it is, what areas of study it covers, when it started, how the students were selected, the ratio of males to females, in which universities the students are studying and what the scholarships cover.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the brief from?

MS MULONI: From Tullow Oil.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture that.

MS MULONI: Tullow Oil is the one that sponsors the scholarships. The important issue to raise here is that they offer the scholarships and manage them themselves. It is worth noting that six out of the 20 slots were ring-fenced for Hoima and Buliisa, the districts where the company operates. So, out of the 20 they ring-fenced three for Hoima and three for Buliisa.

Tullow is operating in Hoima and Buliisa. The company which is operating in your area will hopefully also give affirmative action.

Mr Speaker, I now want to turn to training by Government. Since 1986, Government trained staff in petroleum geo-sciences, engineering, economics, law and refining, among others; and the beneficiaries have been public servants who have worked for some considerable time. Yesterday, I laid on Table a list of staff in my ministry who have been trained at different levels.

Mr Speaker, there were a number of issues raised on the environment and my colleague answered most of them. However, there was one sticky one, which kept coming from Members on whether environmental impact assessments are carried out before any oil and gas activities are done. 

In this line, it is true that environmental impact assessments are conducted prior to undertaking any oil and gas activity in line with the National Environmental Act Cap. 153. All the projects so far undertaken in the sector have been subjected to the environmental impact assessment. 

In addition, environmental audits are carried out -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister. When you state that the environmental impact assessment is done when the exploration and activities concerning oil are done, are you aware that: One, the EIA is being sponsored by the company that is being assessed? 

Two, are you aware that NEMA as a national institution concerned with this activity up to now has not developed or embraced all the laws concerning the activities of oil, knowing that oil is new to the policy in place put by NEMA and hence, that the EIA done right now is not compatible or even competent enough to address the foreseen dangers in this sector, thus putting the country at risk? 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. NEMA has pre-qualified companies that carry out environmental impact assessments and the companies meet the cost of the EIA being carried out. So, it is not the companies themselves that carry out the EIA, but pre-qualified companies by NEMA. The companies simply meet the cost. Otherwise it would be a conflict of interest.

However, we have all appreciated that the oil sector is new to us as a country and thus there is a lot of support that needs to be given to NEMA so that it can be strengthened and supported to take on board this new sector and be able to manage the environmental aspect to our satisfaction. We need to give NEMA a lot of support in that manner.

I was talking about environmental audits -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I want to give friendly and useful information in support of the dire need to support NEMA. It is in my constituency where this experimenting of dumping is being done, but NEMA is absent. NEMA has only one officer attached to the field. So, it is important - actually, I requested last time that this answer does not come from Ministry of Energy and that is why I have insisted that I wanted the Ministry of Water and Environment to be the one to give an account of how they are prepared to take that risk because we do not know the challenges. 

Dumping from Nwoya to Buliisa through the roads and through Kiryandongo and Karuma is a very big risk. So, I thought the point she is raising is important, but I would really want to plead that the Minister of Water and Environment, at the right time, should come here with her own statement as a substantive ministry on how they are prepared; otherwise we are overstretching the oil discoverers.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, this is friendlier. The information I would like to give is that throughout the course of our review of the Bill, it kept emerging that NEMA, in its present state, does not have the ability and the positioning required to deal with oil.

Mr Speaker, at the early stages of this debate, we attempted to enlist a commitment from Government to the effect that they would, in due course, bring an amendment to the NEMA Act, here. And we are still trying to enlist that commitment. How I wish that today, by close of debate, Government will tell us that they will come here to review the NEMA Act and reposition NEMA into the management of oil and related matters in this country. I think I will be very comforted. 

As it were and as it is now, Mr Speaker, the NEMA we are looking at – I think the framers then did not envisage the crucial role NEMA should play in petroleum matters. So, can Government assure me today that they have the same level of appreciation about the challenges of NEMA and that they have the same goodwill to ensure that the NEMA Act is amended? I will be happy. Thank you. 

MS MULONI: Mr Speaker, I can allow hon. Kamuntu to respond to that.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, we have naturally been listening and we share the concerns of Members about the capacity needed to be built for NEMA to execute its mandate. And indeed, I confirm to this House that the capacity-needs assessment for NEMA has been carried out to determine the requirements in the context of the new sector which has emerged in our economy - environmental assessments relating to oil and gas. And the study has completed its work and it has identified manpower, skills gap, logistical needs and institutional strengthening that is required to do this. 

We have also engaged - because of what the minister has said - assessment within the country and the gaps that we can get from outside. We have engaged the Norwegian Government on this -(Interjection)- No, no, no, there is a problem otherwise there would be no need for me to be wasting my time carrying out a needs assessment. I am fully aware that oil and gas is a very important sector. I am fully aware what it would mean if there was a spill without preparedness. I am also fully aware of the impact it has on tourism. 

As a matter of fact, Mr Speaker, I know the holistic picture of what this country needs to move forward. As a result, institutions key to the environment are working closely with NEMA. These include: Uganda Wildlife Authority, Directorate of Water Resource Management, National Forestry Authority, Directorate of Environmental Affairs, the Directorate of Physical Planning and Land Use, Department of Fisheries Resources and local governments. All these are working to strengthen NEMA as the lead agency. Let me assure Members –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)– I have been listening to hon. Lukyamuzi very carefully because he has a record of being an environment champion. Of course, sometimes they accuse him falsely. I believe that he can champion environment issues during the day and during the night he might do something bad. This is a false accusation. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the attributes of the words uttered by Prof. Kamuntu before a Shadow Minister in charge of Environment are fatal. Unless the honourable minister has evidence to prove what he is saying, he should be forced to withdraw with an apology that statement because it is unbecoming of him. Is he in order to utter such information which defames John Ken-Lukyamuzi, “the Man”? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To the best of my recollection, the minister has said, “Hon. Lukyamuzi is accused falsely.” If it is in the interest of the Member that the accusation is not false then I will rule on that order. (Laughter) But if it is true that it is false then the honourable minister is right to say that you are wrongly accused. However, if your objection is that you are not wrongly accused, then I will be very able to rule the honourable minister out of order. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I believe that the accusations are false. And if they are not false, the burden of proof lies with hon. Lukyamuzi. Let me just point out –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Prof. Kamuntu for giving way. I think the gist of the questions being asked by Members is whether or not NEMA is competent enough to produce environmental impact assessments in view of the fact that the sector we are dealing with is new. I appreciate the long list of agencies and institutions that Prof. Kamuntu has read to this House. But I think the question still stands: Whether we have 1,000 agencies coming on board, and they are Ugandan agencies, and whether they have competence in this new area? This is the question that is lingering in the minds of Members. And I think this is the question that both the Minister of Energy and Prof. Kamuntu need to address.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. Now that you are coming closer to what I have been looking for in terms of listing who is supposed to do what, would you want to come back to Parliament with the costing – the budget – I know you do not have the money; none of those agencies have the money. Even NEMA’s vote suffered the deduction. Would you want to give us the budget and the roadmap with timelines, aware that the investor is not waiting for you to find money?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, Government is committed to do everything possible –(Laughter)- No, I can speak with confidence and authority. I am telling you that Government is committed to ensuring environmental protection. I can even read the Constitution if there is anyone here doubting. The protection of the environment is a constitutional provision and any government which respects the Constitution for which we have all sworn to protect, would know that the environment is our lifeline. I do not know anybody who should doubt this; it is for us and the future generation that this environment is protected. And we will listen to any criticism, for instance –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of order. It is on record that NEMA top management came to the Committee on Natural Resources when we were discussing the fate of oil production, and they said to us that at that particular time, they had only three members of staff monitoring the exercise in the Albertine Graben. They said they had a monetary problem and could not do much about what they are supposed to do. Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to stand here and speculate when the question put to him was mathematical enough to demand for specifics? What is he talking about? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It does seem that we have some difficulties distinguishing between orders and information, but in the assessment of the Speaker, this was information to the Minister. Honourable minister, please proceed.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I know the time constraint the House is facing, so the best I can do in this circumstances is to point out to Members factually, what has been done to respond to some of the concerns raised on the Floor of the House, and to also admit that the gaps - skills, logistical and otherwise - have been identified by Government and we are working towards addressing those gaps. When we are doing so, there should be no doubt about our commitment to do so. And what alternative would there be? Oil is a very important asset; we must exploit and at the same time we must preserve our environment - natural conservation - because oil will finally get finished and when it is finished we must remain with this environment. 

Secondly, I know the honourable member has raised the issue of money. Yes, I can come back to this House. I have nothing to hide. I can come back to this House and give a total budget required to address the issue of the environment. But let me confirm the following: 

One, it is a legal requirement that for any activity to be undertaken, whether oil or gas, that requires huge investment, there must be environmental assessment prior to undertaking this activity and the Minister has confirmed that this is being done. 

Two, NEMA, in collaboration with other institutions, has carried out a sensitivity atlas for the entire areas where there is oil. This sensitivity atlas has been developed and it shows the general environmental sensitivity of the Albertine Graben. The atlas displays and identifies all sorts of environments: Biological, geographical, social and petroleum. These are identified just to show you that your concern is shared.  For us we have gone out to identify all these as a shared concern we must address.

Environmental compliance and monitoring strategy -(Interjections)– yes, I will sit and hear the clarification. 

PROF. KASIVIRU: Mr Speaker, I come from that area, and not once, not twice, have I complained of environmental degradation in that region. Now, the atlas that is going to be produced will show what is present including the degraded environment. Is that relevant, or is it going to be used to improve on it or what? That is what we should be hearing. Whether we are going to bring an atlas, what we want is what next? Do you have the resources? Do you have the personnel? Do you have the goodwill? That is what we want to hear. Because you may have an atlas, but what are you going to do with it?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The biggest part of the response of the minister specifically dwelt on my report and I think it would be fair for me to say something in terms of clarification.   

Mr Speaker, there are questions we put before the minister, and when she came on the Floor of the House she was meandering here and there without giving us an answer. The first clarification I am seeking is that the Petroleum Exploitation and Production Bill was well assessed because we have had an environmental impact assessment report discussed in Hoima in 2008. What guarantee do you give us that when it comes to oil refinery and we pass this Bill you will not refine oil in the absence of an environmental impact assessment and a public hearing which has not been done?

Secondly, Uganda has got a number of neighbours whose geographical features greatly impact on the geography of the area where oil is coming from. Have you harmonised with these countries so that when we begin the exercise we are not seen to be antagonising their environment; countries like the Sudan, Ethiopia and Egypt that use the Nile?

Mr Speaker, I was listening very attentively to what the minister was saying. This is common knowledge. For example, we have the Constitution. The Constitution of Uganda is talking about petroleum in Article 244. The National Oil and Gas Policy says, “oil and gas”. But in law the words “oil and gas” are not synonymous with petroleum. So, I thought that we should have amended the contents of the national policy to read “petroleum” so that you are in consonance with what the constitution says along with what the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you debating now or you -

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: No, I am not debating, but I am responding. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there was mention of the petroleum fund on the refinery. It is common knowledge that carrying out refining of oil is very expensive. Where is Uganda getting the money to undergo the oil refining because we fear that this country could be mortgaged for the sake of the refinery. As taxpayers’ representatives, we are entitled to information leading to where you are getting the funds so that we do not see Uganda mortgaged because of the refinery.   

Mr Speaker, there is a big problem as we speak. Many of us have been talking -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Rubaga, please do not abuse the procedure of the House -

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Finally, what we are saying, honourable minister, is simple. Atrocities and environmental hazards attached to oil production are enormous. In the Constitution of Uganda we all know that these two oil Bills are supposed to operationalise the constitutional content on oil, but we are seeing you operationalising lacunas under Article 244 because it is not elaborate enough to address remedies should there be trouble in the oil production exercise. Do not sit on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, in parliamentary practice there is sometimes -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, we thank you very much for your guidance, but I really want, in the interest of time, to specifically respond because when hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi - I have known him for a long time - was speaking, I took notes. I really do and in response, some of the issues you raised during the debate I was going to respond to them because that is part of my job – when you are speaking I take notes.   

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised issues even on penalties imposed in the Bill, whether they are sufficient and in line with Article 39 of the Constitution. You raised issues relating to Article 245 -[MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: “44”.]- 45. You raised environmental principles in the Constitution. All these I noted and I really – we pay attention and we want answers. So, in my answering, that sensitivity atlas has been done and I am simply here to confirm to Members that as a first step to systematically address this issue of environment, you need that atlas -(Interruption)     

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable minister. I seek your clarification on the purpose of this sensitivity atlas because even with your sensitivity atlas, as we talk now, your neighbour, the Minister for Energy, has parcelled the entire Albertine Graben as an exploration area; that very delicate eco-system. The whole of it is an exploration area. Activities are going on and drilling has started. So, of what relevance is your sensitivity atlas? Did you in your sensitivity atlas find out that there were no delicate areas which she needed to preserve? Is it for the sake of having it in our books and arguing? That is one.

The second one is that you should be part, honourable Minister of Environment, of the ongoing activity. Can you, therefore, justify to this nation your failure to deal with the waste dumping in Buliisa? If you are really part of these activities; there is a waste dump in Buliisa as we talk now. There is another one in Nwoya as we talk now. The environment is being destroyed by the oil waste. So, of what relevance are your sensitivity atlases if they are not being translated into activities?

Lastly, I thought that the honourable minister would come to this Floor and admit to us that the present state of NEMA is not customised to oil activity and he, therefore, needs our help. The reason I am passionate about this is that throughout the review, we kept coming head on with issues of environment and we said we cannot turn the Petroleum Bill into an Environmental Management Bill. So, can we review the NEMA Act? Now the minister is busy circumventing the real issues, giving us free lectures which we cannot translate into activities that save the people of Uganda. That is my prayer for clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, I have children who are already leaving now which is unfortunate. We have pupils and teachers of Gilgal Junior Academy, Dokolo District represented by hon. Cecilia Ogwal and Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Kaliro Adventist Primary School, Kaliro District represented by hon. Lubogo Kenneth and hon. Flavia Nabugerere.

We also have pupils and teachers of Mulagi Integrated Day and Boarding Primary School in Butaleja District represented by hon. Jacob Wangolo and hon. Cerinah Nebandah. They have come to observe the proceedings. I apologise to them, I should have done this much earlier. You are welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker and colleagues, Members are not insisting for the sake of insisting. We want to help this country; we want to help this sector; and for us who are even host communities, we really want to be cushioned from much suffering. 

The minister has raised a very good list of gaps identified in the inter-ministerial integrated policy and technical team as the minister put it. But the frontbench has lacked the courage to tell us is that NEMA, Water and Environment, Lands and Education - all these ministries are lacking money. That is why I was asking for the budget item and the minister who has been in Tourism knows that Tourism is lacking the money; he has come from Finance and knows they have been denying the sector money -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification?

MR MUKITALE: The clarification I am want to seek in line with what I raised three weeks ago is, why did Government of Uganda decide the first harvest of oil money called Capital Gain Tax to be ring-fenced now, and yet for the last two years they have been denying money for NEMA, Environment and all important sectors to prepare for the oil sector.

Honourable minister and the Leader of Government Business, why don’t we use 30 percent of that money to prepare this country for the oil and gas industry? Short of that, we are helping the investor do what he wants, but subjecting the country to a crisis.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you please wind up.

PROF KAMUNTU: Thank you very much. I would really want to wind up -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. I wanted to hear from you whether you are aware that large quantities of oil which have been drilled in testing wells in Buliisa have been kept, and whether you know where it has been kept; whether you know the environmental hazard it is causing; because, the people who were supposed to buy it - one company called Hima and another one in Kenya which had been fronted by two powerful individuals in the land failed to agree as to who should buy - and whether you are aware that NEMA has not yet taken action in respect of curtailing the environmental hazards as a result of that oil.

PROF KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, if Members were to bear with me, some of the issues they are raising, I really had captured them during the course of the debate and I had in anticipation of this had them noted down here to give the response, but before I do so, clarifications come. 

So, I am appealing to Members, just bear with me. When I gave the information on the sensitivity atlas, I was giving that information simply to confirm to Members in this House that to systematically study something that has emerged as important, you need to start from an informed position and the sensitivity atlas provides that information as a base on which you begin to plan. As result, an environmental compliance and monitoring strategy has been developed. The strategy aims at providing a framework for compliance and enforcement, and it also provides for institutional capacity enhancement and in improving the participation of stakeholders in enforcing the compliance in this area.

Capacity needs assessment. I have reported to you. We have done it and we now know the gaps. I am the first to admit. There are gaps and we are going to fill those gaps. We are discussing with our development partners where these gaps have been identified. By the way, to see a gap, it means we have analysed internally and out of that analysis, there is this gap which we need to fill with the development partners.
 
We have carried out a strategic environment assessment. I must mention the following. Even waste management has emerged as the biggest challenge for the oil and gas sub-sector, and extensive laboratory tests are being done. NEMA as a legal institution and a lead agency, has now issued interim guidelines.

Mr Speaker, environmental monitoring plans have also been developed to be used continuously as you monitor the activities of these oil companies. We expect improved performance, improved compliance, and enhanced institutional collaboration. We encourage stakeholders to participate in the compliance monitoring. We want to enhance national capacity to assess, predict and mitigate likely effects of oil. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, environmental impact assessment –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Guidance

PROF. KAMUNTU: And I can confirm to you, Mr Speaker. Even the legal framework is being examined.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Guidance

PROF. KAMUNTU: From? (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Listening to the honourable Minister of Environment and noting the issues raised by the honourable members concerning the gap that has been created between the response of NEMA under the Ministry of Water, and the activities of oil which are already ongoing – it has been admitted that there are gaps yet these are environmental and health hazards to this country. 

I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker, are these outlines the minister is giving us for post-mortem or are they supposed to be used before the activities harm the country? Because, as we speak now, we have already committed ourselves as a country to an agreement giving a go-ahead to so many of these companies to proceed. Yet the effect of the environmental degradation has already been highlighted. Of what good are these laws and outlines to us, as a country? I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure the honourable member does not seek the guidance of the Speaker on this subject. It is a point of clarification which has been baptised guidance. Honourable minister, you have listened to those statements, please respond. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. [MR SSEKIKUBO: “Guidance.”] Frankly speaking –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Guidance; point of guidance.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I think I know where I want to go. (Laughter) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this is really not a stand-alone guidance but arises from the debate which has been going on. It was first raised by hon. Jack Sabiiti about the imperative of Article 244. The honourable minister has attempted to answer the queries, but apparently, there is a wide ramification in a sense that everything we seem to be addressing as Parliament seems to be going the wrong way. 

We are talking about the environment, but already there are massive deposits of waste. A Member from Nwoya complained about it, and Heritage and Government were each not taking responsibility. Even in Buliisa, it is the same. As far as the environment is concerned, things are bad. 

When we talked about the licences, he has raised a question. We had put a moratorium but new licences are continuing to be issued and we specifically mentioned Mputa and Nzizi. 

When we came to the institutional framework, we are here deliberating but already institutions are being created in an ad hoc manner. 

Therefore, I add my voice to that of the honourable member from Kitgum. What is the essence of this debate? When, irrespective of the Members’ concerns knowing that this is a national matter, Government is proceeding in spite? What will happen when we have a good law when the damage has already been done; when the environment is already spoilt; when licences are already being issued, and when structures are being set and put in place?

Are we procedurally right? Can’t Government hold back? Can’t we have a convergence meeting so that we can agree as a country on how to proceed on these matters? Short of that, we seem to be legislating, deliberating on an already fait accompli. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the earlier we pass these Bills, the better for all those concerns you are raising. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: In that vein, Mr Speaker, I conclude –[MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: “Further guidance.”]- (Interjections) I wanted to wind up, Mr Speaker.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. [HON. MEMBER: “Order takes precedence.”] 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The debate is on the Floor; and a Member holding the Floor, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, is a member of the committee. In addition to that, the manner and the practice of this Parliament, once a Bill is committed to the committee, every Member of Parliament is an ex-officio member of the committee. Really, for the Member to come and raise issues when in the second reading of the Bill and yet the committee has forwarded its report; is the honourable member in order when he is a member of the committee, and is again raising issues which should have been raised in the committee? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is need for us to organise the way we process these matters. One standard rule of procedure is that there should be extreme courtesy and you should adhere to the rules. Do not just disrupt debate for the sake of it. I have listened very carefully to the issues which have been raised repeatedly by the honourable member. I have found them wanting in merit. I will allow him one more time to listen to what he is going to raise this time. But the Chair is not very happy now with the nature of the debates which are being carried out by some honourable members. Proceed and raise your matter.
 
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I was seeking guidance with reference to a report titled, “State of the Environment Report,” published by NEMA in the years 2008 and 2010, respectively.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen those reports and you are asking me to guide on them.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am continuing, I am opening the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but you are asking me about a report I have not seen.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: But why don’t I -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But should I guide on it? Honourable member, please resume your seat. (Interjections) How do I guide on something I do not know? It is a factual matter. Please, honourable minister.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I want to conclude -(Interjections)- by confirming to this House that the legal framework governing this issue, the National Environmental Act, the National Environmental Regulation Statutory Instrument No.153, The  National Environmental Waste Management Regulation Statutory Instrument, the National Environment Standards for Discharge of Effluent into Water on Lands, National Environment Audit Regulations, National Environment Noise Standard and Control and National Air Quality Standards are all being reviewed to bring them in line with the concerns which Members have raised. I can assure you that the concerns of Members are shared and Government will do everything possible to ensure the environment is protected at the same time oil is exploited for the benefit of our country.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.

5.26
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, my colleague from environment has summarised all the issues in environment which were pending. I would like to reassure Members that Government is doing everything possible.. We appreciate that the oil sector is a new sector in our midst. We need to support NEMA and we are going to try and do everything possible to ensure that the manner in which we manage this resource is done very well. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for all the issues that you raised and I am looking forward to getting a good law out of this Parliament that is going to help us manage this resource very well. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister for those responses and honourable members for a very intense debate on the subject. 

Honourable members, can we move this Bill to committee stage to enable us deal with the specific details of the subject matter? In the interest of the time we have spent, I would desire that we push this Bill forward; can we move this Bill to the next stage by consensus? 

Okay, honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012” be read for the second time. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) BILL, 2012

5.42
Clause 1

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move that clause 1, on page 9 – I hope the amendments were circulated. Clause 1, on the commencement; I beg that it be substituted to read, “This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument; and different days may be appointed for the commencement of different provisions.” to read “This Act shall come into force on a date of assent by the President and published in the Gazette. 

The justification is to conform particularly with Article 91(8) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rules 118, 119, 120, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127 and 132 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. It further eliminates all kinds of uncertainties and manner of ambiguities in the applicability of the law at the critical stage in the transparency process. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the proposal you are making would amount to the deletion of the existing clause 1, in which case there would be no need for replacing it. A Bill that comes automatically on publication in the Gazette does not require a commencement date. It doesn’t have to be stated in the law; it is automatic that once a Bill does not have a commencement date, it commences on publication in the Gazette. So, would you like to look at your amendment again in light of the guidance?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, the spirit in that is that once we leave it the way it is –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I am saying is that if you deleted it, then the Bill would operate the way you are proposing in the amendment – a deletion would answer the issues you are trying to deal with. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: The deletion would save this country in a sense that once you leave it open to the discretion of the minister as and when the law should apply, it causes ambiguities. When she is dissatisfied, she can withhold. But once we know that when a Bill is assented to, it becomes law; let us leave it as it is. So that once the President has given assent, it takes its normal course to become law without waiting for the minister again to think of when it should be applicable as law. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, we are strongly guided by the contents of Article 91 of the Constitution with reference to the words, “As soon as possible”. That is strong enough to alert Parliament that once the Bill is passed, there should be no further delay.  I would like to support the amendment.

MR KASULE: Mr Chairman, the practice has been that we either state the day or we leave it to the minister. The reason is that much as the President may assent to the Bill, operationalisation may not necessarily take effect.  So, the minister would wait for all the departments to be put in place, for the monies to be availed through appropriation and then commencement of the Bill happens. So, we give that discretion to the minister as and when the ministry is ready. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would propose that we put a timeframe – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, there is an issue regarding deletion of the clause, in which case there would be nothing to amend if that motion is carried. 

MR ODONG-OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would like to appeal to Members to support the submission of hon. Ssekikubo without much ado because the way it is now, it states, different days may be appointed by the minister for commencement of different provisions. These are the same people who signed these contracts with the multi-national companies. 

So, you may find the minister saying in a statutory instrument which they have in their offices, saying “clause 36, 49 and 50 will not commence with the Bill” and this will cause uncertainty. So, I think the idea of the President’s assent to the Bill and it starts working would be prudent. But the way it is now, and the kind of Uganda we have these days, even these huge multi-nationals can just appeal to a minister to issue an instrument that allows a certain clause not to commence until eight or nine months while they are carrying out other activities behind the scenes. So, I would strongly move that we support hon. Ssekikubo’s motion. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we listen to the minister; maybe she is conceding. If there are objections, then we open.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Section 14 of the Parliament Act provides for different modes of commencement of Acts. This particular Bill provides for the creation of different institutions which cannot be created instantly. There is also need to harmonise the ongoing operations with the Act as the said Bill shall repeal the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act of 1985. Therefore, Mr Chairman, the commencement date for this Act needs to put into consideration the issues I have raised. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you for giving me the opportunity, Mr Chairman. When you look at this Bill, in actual fact we are talking about matters of environment; we are talking about matters of finance; and we are talking about matters of land rights for our people. Now, if we legislate and make this law, good as it is, and then we leave its operation to the discretion of the minister, and especially when you look at the dangers we are trying to prevent, it is dangerous for us as Parliament to delegate our legislative role to the minister to determine when each part or clause of this Bill will operate. 

So, I would strongly urge Members to support the motion by hon. Ssekikubo that we delete this clause because maintaining it will bring the dangers which we are trying to prevent. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand to support the motion moved by my brother Theodore Ssekikubo and guided a little by you, Mr Chairman, to cause a complete deletion of this clause. My argument is very simple. As a country, we have vested a lot of hope in oil. Wherever there are deficiencies in our budget and there are financial problems in the country, we make reference to oil. 

We cannot afford to risk this sector by putting it into the hands of one person. The minister seeks to give herself a lot of powers in controlling whatever happens in the sector. Also, given the fact that it is quite ridiculous that under one Act, different sections come into force at the same time. I think over my life in this Parliament, I have never seen this kind of thing happen. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is standard practice. It is permissible. 

MR AMURIAT: Well, much obliged. But I have a feeling that if we accepted this as it was, it would be subject to manipulation. We are talking about a sector that draws a lot of investment and brings in a lot of income. So, we cannot risk this into the hands of a minister. 

I have no reason to distrust my sister, Irene, but we do not know what kind of person is going to come after her tomorrow. It might be a corrupt person; a person who cannot be trusted, who would mess up the sector. So, as a Parliament, we would be doing injustice to this country if we risk this very delicate resource and place it in the hands of one person. I wish to submit.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I would like to submit in support of the proposed amendments, largely because, to the best of my recollection, the minister came here at the tabling of this Bill and submitted alongside it a certificate of financial implications. She assured this country that as a government they were ready to pursue the requirements of this Bill. 

So, I want to assume that as soon as Parliament finishes the legislative function, the government is committed, as they were committed the other day when they brought the certificate of financial implications, to ensure that every aspect of this Bill is set in motion when it is an Act. 

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I would like to see a situation where the minister does not take over the powers of the President. Once the President has said this is now law, I have appended the signature, why should the minister want to withhold and also have some powers, to say even when the President has said this is now law in Uganda; she also retains some power and says, yes it is law, but you know I reserve the right to determine. If Parliament is not reserving that right, why should the minister reserve it? 

Therefore, because of the crucial nature of the Bill we are dealing with, once we have all agreed and have passed it, I think that even the argument of saying that some of them will not be operational that very day, does not arise because nobody is expecting that everything gets operational that very day. But that there is a law in place; it should be a fact for everybody to know that we are moving as guided by the law as soon as it is assented to. Thank you Chair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the point that I tried to explain about parts of laws coming at different times is actually permitted by the law itself. If you are talking about a specific Bill; that it should not apply to it, that is another matter. But the rule allows that different parts of Bill can come into operation at different times. 

MRS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise in total support of the amendment moved by hon. Ssekikubo. The best example of a law I would like to give is the Land Act. Embedded in the Land Act were very many other bodies that were supposed to have been created under the parent law. Up to today Government is still grappling with issues; we don’t have the tribunals; we don’t have the land fund operational and a lot of other things happening with it. 

On this point, I give strength to hon. Ssekikubo’s view because in a case where –(Interruption) 
   
MR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, I want to give information to hon. Ekwau. You remember that you were the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in the Seventh Parliament when we amended this Constitution. We did say, in Article 178 that regional governments shall commence on 1 July 2006. Up to today, there is no regional government that has commenced despite the Constitutional provision of “shall”. 
 
MRS EKWAU: Thank you, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, for that information. Mr Chairman, it is upon that background that Members of this House who share the same sentiments and strongly believe that immediately the President assents to this law, different ministries are supposed to swing into action. If it is issues of urban planning, let all the towns under this jurisdiction swing into action. Government has at times come up to finance areas selectively. We understand the predicament of the resource basket, but we also don’t want you to use that as a cover under the law on Oil and Gas, to say, for example, that ministries don’t have funds to operationalise some of these activities and so you say that this year you are going to have only one department beginning and the other one next year and so forth. No, let us pass this and have faith that immediately the President assents to this Bill, we will have all the other sectors begin to do what we expect of them. Thank you.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening and I was actually grappling with this idea. So, I need your guidance, Mr Chairman. Supposing we pass the section as proposed and tomorrow we don’t operationalise all these institutions that are indicated in the Bill. Will that be ultra vires or will the ministry or any other person responsible, have broken any law or not? I want to be guided on that because if you say that we operationalise on the day the President assents to the Bill and you don’t set up the Petroleum Authority, for example, or you don’t set up the national oil company on the day the Bill is assented to, will anybody have broken the law or not?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: A law is not implemented like switching a light on and off. There is a process for one to take to implement the law. So, he is not just going to press a button to say, let there be an authority and there will be one. No, it can’t work that way. So, it will still be within the prerogative of the minister to start the process of implementing the provisions of the law. Except that there might be reasons why they presented it that way and that is what you should be investigating, which is also the issue that the minister can explain properly so that Members can know. Can you explain this point properly to the Members so that we can move forward?

MS MULONI: Yes, Mr Chairman, and that is the issue that I was raising. One is that the Bill provides for a number of institutions to be created, but they can’t be created instantly. But you also know that we have to repeal the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, 1985. That is why we have requested for this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The moment you pass this Bill, the other law stands repealed.

MS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I propose that we stand over this.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have seen the amendments made by Members, which are quite many and they have a point to make. But sometimes in doing such amendments, you give notice. I would like to support the minister’s position to first internalise these amendments. That would call for us to stand over of some of these clauses to allow her consult with the movers. That will help us to move in a coordinated manner. I am saying this because it seems there was no notice given to her in regard to these amendments.  These are very good amendments, there is need for the minister to do that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the state of our proceedings is such that we should proceed on matters where we don’t have contestations. So, it might be helpful for us to move forward with matters that are not contentious to leave room to reflect on the others and deal with them later. We can make progress on other provisions – the whole Bill is contentious? I have seen the list of amendments – the clauses are more than 180, but the amendments don’t tally up to that. 

So, there might be clauses where we just need to pronounce ourselves on and move forward so that we reserve the issues that require more engagement for another day. Will that not be a proper way of handling this?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Chairman, I stand on a point of procedure. From the onset of this historical Bill, contentious issues are beginning to come up and more so, from the owners of the Bill, the minister and the Executive.

We have looked at this Bill for a period of time; but now that the responsible minister is proposing to stand over this very first clause, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that, given the mood of the kick-off, we need to stand over the whole Bill until the next sitting when all of us, including the honourable minister and her team, will have refreshed our minds, before we proceed?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members –

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, as guided that if this clause is deleted, it will be as good as it being there because of the obvious reasons that you gave to that even if it is deleted, there will be no consequences; we can still have the Bill assented to. You also guided that it will still kick-start the process – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It will be published in the Uganda Gazette before it starts operating. 

MR WERIKHE: So, I think I buy the idea of having it deleted. So, I propose that clause 1, be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, honourable minister?

MS MULONI: I accept, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that clause 1, as proposed in the Bill, be deleted. I now put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, deleted.

Clause 2

MS ALASO: Just a bit of help from the Chair. Now that it has been deleted, what is the substitution?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no substitution. Once there is no requirement for different parts coming to pass at different times, the Bill comes into force on publication automatically; once published in the Uganda Gazette, it now becomes law.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I had a concern and you had warned me to bring it -

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I move to propose an amendment to clause 2 on page 10 that is, “Purpose of this Act”. 

(1) 	Insert a new sub-clause 1 as follows, “The purpose of this Act is to operationalise the National Oil and Gas Policy by: 

(a) 		Establishing an effective legal framework and institutional structures to ensure that the Exploration, Development and Production of Petroleum resources of Uganda are carried out in a sustainable manner that guarantees optimum benefits for all Ugandans, both the present and future generations.

(b) Creating a conducive environment for 	the efficient management of petroleum resources of Uganda including:
i) Promotion of reconnaissance and exploration for petroleum in Uganda;
ii) 	Evaluation of discoveries;
iii) Development and production of 	petroleum resources;
iv) Storage of petroleum before 	transporting it to a delivery point; and
v) Transportation of petroleum up to a delivery point.

(c) Establishing institutions to manage the 		petroleum resources and regulate the petroleum activities.

(d) 	Regulating petroleum activities including licensing, exploration, development, production and cessation of petroleum activities or de-commissioning.

(e) Ensuring public safety and protection of 	public health and the environment in petroleum activities.

(f) Supporting the development of state participation and national content in the petroleum industry in Uganda.

Justification: To emphasise the establishment of an effective legal framework and institutional structures for the Petroleum sector to achieve optimum benefits as the critical purpose of the Act.

(c) Insert a new paragraph (g) as follows: “Providing for parliamentary participation in the Oil and Gas Sector”. Justification: To include parliamentary participation as one of the purposes of the Act.

(d) Insert a new paragraph (h) as follows, “Ensuring transparency and accountability in the conduct of all activities regulated under this Act.” I beg to propose the amendments, Mr Chairman.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I accept the committee’s proposal on (a), that is part 1 (a), (b) and (c). However, on inserting a new paragraph (g), which provides for parliamentary participation in the Oil and Gas Sector, I do not accept that one for the reason that it will compromise Parliament’s oversight role.

Regarding the other insertion (h) for ensuring transparency and accountability, I accept that proposal. So, it is only one that I do not accept because it will compromise Parliament’s oversight role. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can the Chairman guide us on where the provision relating to participation of Parliament is in the Bill?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, as we go along with the clauses, there is a provision - I think under clause 7 - where we actually require the minister to bring to Parliament a model PATF, for example, and I believe the minister is not opposed to it. That is already one element of parliamentary participation and involvement.

Even when you go ahead with the national oil company, for example, we require the minister to come here to the House, say in the event that we want to float the shares in future. Parliament should have that privilege of actually looking at the Memorandum of Association, the Articles of Association and decide whether to proceed or not. These are areas where, as a committee, we thought and believed that Parliament in so doing will be involved in the process.

I don’t see any harm in this. If those provisions are acceptable to the minister, I don’t see why this one is not acceptable. This is an entry point, Mr Chairman.

MR SEBUNYA: I just want to seek clarification from the Chairman. Can we qualify this statement with ‘providing for parliamentary oversight participation’ because if you say participation, it is as if we are going to micromanage this industry? So, why don’t we qualify it with ‘oversight participation’?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, the oversight participation of Parliament is inherent. If it is oversight, it is inherent and that is why we have these claw-back provisions saying the minister shall come back to Parliament for one or two things. That is how the oversight responsibility is done.

MR SABIITI: Concerning the Chairman’s first amendment, you are talking of the processes, and you reach the process of production as your first amendment. Why do you exclude the word ‘sale’? In the whole of this Bill, the issue of sale does not feature anywhere; “”production and sale”. I wanted that word ‘sale’ to be included.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with this particular one of Parliament first and then we take the other issues that are coming.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, I think the justification of parliamentary participation as one of the purposes of this Act is missing a point. In the practice of auditing, if Parliament participates in the process, you have a conflict of interest. This conflict I am talking about is that you will not be able to check yourself. Let somebody check you to see your performance. 

So, you say you are going to participate as Parliament whereas we have all the rights of oversight to check the processes without even putting it in the law, because the Auditor General will give us a report. If you look at Section 164 of the Constitution on the Accountability Act, we can demand for a minister to come and account without putting it in the law.

So, I would like to support that if the minister is saying that it will compromise and we cannot check ourselves to become part and parcel of the participation, I think this amendment is not well placed.

MR WAMAKUYU: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I want to give hon. Kakooza information that the Auditor General is under Parliament, but they bring reports here for Members of Parliament to read and at times they appear before committees of Parliament. Is that conflict of interest?

MR KAKOOZA: You see, in auditing –(Laughter)– or in the practice of checking yourself, when you say you are participating in a process –(hon. Ssekikubo rose_)– Let me finish my point. If you say you are going to participate as the amendment says, “parliamentary participation” what does it mean? It means that in the processes which the ministry will be carrying out, you are going to be part and parcel. When it comes to checking yourself, how will you check yourself on the activities you are doing? So, if we, Members of Parliament want to check the minister’s processes, we cannot be part and parcel of the process. This is what I am saying -(hon. Ssekikubo rose_)- Let me finish my point. It is a standard practice in areas where you want an audit.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, I have been listening to hon. Kakooza very well, and bearing in mind that we have been in this Parliament for the same tenure, I would expect him to realise that the participation of Parliament does not necessarily mean that we run the petroleum offices and are involved in petroleum activities. But in oversight functions where Parliament is always looking at the issues going on, that is what is referred to as “participation”. We shall be exercising our role, and not holding offices. And as indeed, honourable members, Parliament even participated in the budgeting process; but it does not mean that we go on to show how monies are spent in various ministries and departments. In the same way this is the essence and spirit of the chairman’s amendment and I hope it will be taken in good faith. (Hon. Amuriat rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, hon. Ssekikubo raised a procedural question and so, I need to rule on it. 

Honourable  members, there are four stages of public policy, as we all know; there is policy formulation, policy approval, policy implementation and policy oversight, which constitute what we call the “public policy cycle”. The mandate of policy formulation rests with the Executive; policy approval mandate rests with Parliament; policy implementation after approval is for the Executive; and policy oversight after implementation comes back to Parliament. So, it keeps going on like that. 

Now, if that be the case, what participation are we looking at here? Are we looking at participation in the implementation of the law or in the oversight of the law? If it is in the oversight of the law, then it does not have to be said in the law because the procedure would be that there are those avenues where Parliament retains some authority - that bring these matters back to us, in terms of reporting on these matters. That would be an area of parliamentary oversight and it would be the normal way of doing this business. Is this clear? But if you say that participation of Parliament should even be in the implementation of the law then we  will have a difficulty.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I think that mischief can be addressed as we go along in considering the Bill; we can insert areas where we think we could participate as Parliament. This is a matter that can be debated –(Interjection)– Let me finish; why do you have to be wild? Mr Chairman, if we were only careful to read through the report, we would notice that there are areas that the committee has proposed amendments, in which case there are definite provisions for the participation of Parliament. So, it is upon us, as Parliament, rather than kill this very good proposal by the committee, to decide, as we go along in considering the Bill, where we feel we could best participate.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, the argument that the Minister raised, which is more of technical or legalize, should not have come from her. She is saying that Parliament already has the role of oversight. So, in her wisdom, she feels that it is not important for us to provide the chairman’s amendment. I think your reason should be different from what you have said; the mischief you are running away from is that as the Minister of Energy, probably you would be comfortable with less parliamentary involvement because you know the implication of that. So, I urge Members not to buy the minister’s argument that our role is already in oversight. 

As the committee chairman has said, we are under the purpose of the Act; in other words, this is even an extension of the long title (the objective of the Bill). In my interpretation, the whole of clause 2 is just part of the objectives of the Bill, which if you see in the actual Bill on page 9 - the one in bold. It reads, “An Act to give effect to Article 244 of the Constitution to regulate petroleum exploration; to establish a petroleum authority; to provide for the establishment of a national oil company; to regulate licensing; to provide for an open, transparent and competitive process; and to create a conducive environment.” So, the purpose of the Bill, to me, is an extension of the long title of the Bill. 

So, I would appeal to Members that we have been having problems even going to the oil fields – we have seen Members of Parliament chased. We have even been having problems accessing the production sharing agreements – it has been a battle on the Floor of the House by several MPs. So, anything that gives us leverage to influence oil events in this country, we should be the last to lock ourselves out because you never know maybe in 20 years, we may have a very sophisticated situation and people will say, “That is not the function of Parliament.” But when we have an entry point we will use it judiciously. The moment we close the doors, then in future everyone can challenge our actions. 

So, I appeal to the minister to abandon the argument that it compromises our oversight role; it does not. And in any case, if you feel that the purpose of the Bills – the moment you give us these powers, we may step on your feet, the courts are wide open to ask for interpretation whether our actions do not amount to interfering with the functions of the Executive. So, Members, let us keep it in the purpose; it is just like the aims and objectives. The details will always come. So, let us side with the committee chairman in his humble submission. And I really thank him for bringing such an amendment. (Applause)

MRS MULONI: Mr Chairman, I was only going to emphasise and thank you because you clearly stated to us what this could result into, knowing each party’s role – the role of Parliament and that of the Executive. And in so guiding, this is actually redundant. My whole essence of saying this would compromise Parliament’s oversight role, is because of the understanding of when you state it as “parliamentary participation” that is what it would entail. So, I am in total agreement with the Chairman’s guidance that this is redundant.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In fact, I was about to say that I was not catching your eye, but I think I am now in line.

Mr Chairman, you have just guided that we already have the mandate to carry out the oversight role in all sectors. As Parliament, one of our functions is to monitor and supervise under our oversight role. Now, in this case I want to know, which law do we use to monitor schools and to monitor hospitals that cannot apply in monitoring the oil wells? What law is that one that is stopping us from accessing the oil wells and the agreements? What is that law that we are really struggling to get in this Bill here that cannot be got or the powers that we do not have? This is a problem that we really - because if we were accessing the agreements in peace and we were accessing the oil wells in peace, we would not be arguing to come in and indicate clearly that we are part of the Bill if it was clear, Madam Minister.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am coming from the perspective of our amendment as a committee. The real reason we submitted this to this House is that we want to assert the powers, the authority, the participation of the representatives of the people. And the minister agrees with us that we already have an oversight role, therefore, we are not breaking any law; we are not contradicting anything by saying that we will do what is required of us already.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, it takes half a sentence. I do  not know why the minister and the rest of my colleagues - if this thing is not harmful - are worried about including half a sentence -(hon. Lokeris rose_)- just a minute honourable minister. Why they are worried about half a sentence saying that Parliament participation is, therefore, recognised in this Act when it is passed.

Thirdly, Mr Chairman, we have provided for specifics -(Interjections)- you will. You will get a clarification, honourable minister, just a minute. Let me finish.

Mr Chairman, we have specifically mentioned areas where we as Parliament would like to have a role and they include those areas of approval. Unless the minister does not want us to participate in the approval of the model agreement; unless she does not want us to approve the shares once floated on the stock exchange; unless she really wants to lock Parliament out, but for us to take half of a sentence in this Bill, does no harm. 

And I assured the minister, and Mr Chairman, I would like to repeat my words of counsel to the minister. Chairman of the Committee, hon. Irene Muloni, if you listen to my words which I told you, I told you in Entebbe that it is wrong to think that you can go to the forest and expect the monkeys not to be concerned about the trees. Ugandans are very concerned about the oil and we represent Ugandans here. There is no way you as a minister, who appears over 15 times in this Bill, will attempt to stop the Parliament which will be there in 20 years from appearing once in this Bill. We will not allow you because as people’s representatives we have a serious stake in oil matters. So, the sooner the minister accepts, the better for her to have this Bill passed quickly.     

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for this opportunity. One of the principles of good legislation is that if you cannot enforce, do not legislate. You did guide very well that Parliament has very well known and clear laws. The fact that we are trying to say no to this amendment does not in any way take me far from the fact that I am a concerned citizen, I have a people to represent, and that we are also interested in ensuring transparency especially in this industry. No! But the principle is very clear. If you believe in the Commonwealth practice of separation of powers of Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary, you must not be wasting time to be part of this almost seemingly obvious argument.

One, you are talking of parliamentary participation in the oil and gas sector. What activities are you talking about that you are going to participate in as Parliament? They must be enumerated. Are you going to – because in future this is the Ninth Parliament - maybe the Tenth Parliament might not be as sober as you and me. [MR SSEKIKUBO: “Information.”] I wish I could - I am about to finish, hon. Ssekikubo and you know I am not very far from - one thing is for sure; there is no way, even in the auditing profession - we are the auditors of Government, remember! Do not forget that. You can do anything; that is where your power lies. Even if we have an Act tomorrow, we realise there is a fault somewhere, we come back here and put everything aside. Anytime we can amend it. We can carry out amendments. But first of all there is nowhere; I have never heard of it where an auditor tries to audit himself.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: honourable members –

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Chairman, I want to give my brother from Isingiro, information. He asked where we could come in as Parliament and also asserted that Parliament has opportunity, and I have heard this around the House from a few Members- that Parliament has got its  roles cut out and it can go anywhere  in  carrying out its oversight. 

The committee on page 21, has proposed an amendment to clause 43, and I will read it: “To insert a new sub-clause 2 as follows: ‘the national oil company may, with the approval of Parliament, offer its shares to the public upon acquisition of required competencies and capacity provided that the state shall retain 67 percent of the shares in the company.’”

Now, in carrying out our oversight role, how would we be able to determine whether these agreements have been properly written; whether they are agreements that serve the purpose of profiting the nation of Uganda? 

The information I would like to give - and I am giving this a second time - is that we are at liberty, as we go down the Bill, to insert or remove and evoke Parliament where we deem necessary. I think we should not split hairs. This is our responsibility. We see there is a gap in our ordinary oversight functions and we would like to get involved in this very important resource. Mr Chairman, I will so provide information.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, for that -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. Each and every profession, and each and every word in a profession has a meaning. I can imagine Chairperson, at least you have been a member of the committee and you have the experience of legislation. I can imagine where Parliament is going to participate in oil and gas and we are going to audit ourselves. Why I am repeating this is that by all standards, the moment you say you are going to participate as Parliament in the oil and gas sector, you are going to be part and parcel of that process. 

When it comes to audit, you will not audit yourself and you leave this sector to be part and parcel of the problems within that sector. How will you audit yourself?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please let me guide on this again and please let us take this to the next level.

I hear the discussion leading us to say, we need to look at the contracts before they are signed. That is a prerogative of the Office of the Attorney-General. If you get yourself in approving contracts before they are signed, then what is left for the Executive to do? 

If you put yourself to that extent, then what are you approving for the Executive to do and what oversight will you carry out if the contracts go wrong? 

I said this and let me repeat for purposes of the record and future readers of the Hansard. Policy processes have four segments, and each of the segments have participatory roles for both arms of Government. Formulation of policy is never a mandate of Parliament. You cannot formulate policy as Parliament, but you approve the policy. Once you have approved it, you do not go to implement. It goes to somebody else to implement. Once somebody else has implemented, that is the Executive, it comes back to Parliament for oversight. 

So, if you are looking at this Bill, Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production, how is Parliament going to be involved in the exploration of oil? How is Parliament going to be involved in the development of oil and how is Parliament going to be involved in the production of oil? Or is it possible that what is intended is that Parliament should be able to oversee that, yes we are giving you the instruments to deal with these issues, have you done it properly as we agreed in the law through oversight? That is the last stage of the policy process. 

So, please let us not go into this debate again. So, by saying, honourable. Members - please first listen; and I am not saying this because we do not want provisions to provide for parliamentary oversight. No, but if you are going to say broadly that you will be providing for parliamentary participation, then you are going to be required to define in the definition clause what would amount to parliamentary participation, so that it is clear. My responsibility here which I serve quite diligently is to guide on these issues.

MR SSEGONA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and it is with extreme gratitude that I take your guidance. I seek to be guided further. We are talking about policy and law, and countries make laws and policies depending on their own situations; and the situation that we are talking about is, in many instances, we have been let down by leaving all these powers to the Executive, and this is why we want parliamentary participation. 

I think the challenge would only be, let us define the participation that we are talking about because the policies that we are talking about are not written on the wall for us. We are writing the policy and we are writing the law.
 
Mr Chairman, the guidance I am seeking from you is what would be wrong with us making a law, defining our participation as Parliament depending on our own situation? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is precisely what I have just said. You cannot put it in the body of the law as “parliamentary participation” without defining what that parliamentary participation will be. You need to define it. I am just guiding honourable members, but if you leave it open that Parliament is going to participate, it is problematic.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you for the guidance, Mr Chairman. As the Committee Chair has put it, the committee members discussed this, we interacted with the minister and somehow, we agreed. I am a bit set aback and disappointed that at this point in time the honourable minister is attempting to rock the boat. 

This Bill we are trying to discuss - I would pray that we do not take it as an ordinary Bill, because we are treating this Bill as per the professional auditor, my colleague hon. Kakooza, is treating other Bills. This is a special Bill and what has been -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, I would like to put this on record and create order. When we are in Parliament, we come from different backgrounds and when we give advice as Members of Parliament, people should take it in good faith and they should understand that the way we are legislating and the way we put the law should stand the test of time; and to ask people at that time that when they were legislating, that we were doing it for the good of everybody who will be there.

Is the honourable member in order to impute that when we advise professionally, we are misleading the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I heard from the honourable Member for Kitgum is that my friend, the auditor, hon. Kakooza. Unless you want me to rule on the issue that you are not an auditor, which I would be glad to if that is what you are seeking because the honourable member has recognised you professionally as, ‘my auditor friend has said’ So, would you want me to rule on that issue, hon. Kakooza? Are you an auditor or not? (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Chairman for the wise ruling. Honourable colleagues, I am just drawing our attention to how unique and important this Bill is. Of course, we are content with the difficulty we have as Parliament, where members of the Executive also double as the legislators. So, being a student of public policy also, that is where we get some difficulties because the Executive having their spelt out roles in this case, we have them even as legislators, who have again to do oversight roles on themselves and that is the difficulty we have. 

To proceed on my point, Mr Chairman, what I want to highlight here is that mention of the participation of Parliament should not set us aback because the participation of the state was also highlighted in the Bill; we have clearly indicated the roles of Parliament; and we are just highlighting the purpose, and subsequently in the Bill it is clearly highlighted where Parliament comes in. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the point which I tried to explain is, we cannot legislate on the broad participation of Parliament in an Act of Parliament because that is for the Executive. But there are provisions which will allow Members of Parliament to look into what these people are doing. You do not want to be bundled up together with the things the Executive do and then you cannot have the authority to oversee. If you have been in it, how do you oversee it? 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Again, looking at it professionally and without retracting what I said earlier, if we choose to insert this clause in the opening provisions, then it means we have to put something in the substantive provisions of how we are going to participate. I think for now, I implore you that we agree to leave this clause out and then we go and find somewhere we can put it in the substantive provisions. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, I agree with my senior counsel, and unless we are very sure, those who have read through the Bill like hon. Amuriat – unless we are very sure of what they have provided for in the Bill for Parliament, it may not be very advisable at this stage to leave this provision the way it is, because - yes, we may have to stand over it. Unless we see what is in the meat of the Bill, we may even be better off having our constitutional powers to do anything that relates to legislation in Uganda. 

The moment we start saying providing for parliamentary participation in Oil and Gas and then in the Bill maybe the minister says, “Parliament will be involved in workshops, seminars,” we would have restricted our roles to that. I suggest that for now, we may have to stand over this until we see the level of parliamentary involvement. If we see it very minimal, then we rather use the Constitution. 

PROF. ATWOOKI: Mr Chairman, I was giving information based on my experience. In the Sixth Parliament, I was a Member of the Committee on National Economy. There was what they call a power purchase agreement for Bujagali - and many people do not know this information. The committee by accident chanced on a draft of the power purchase agreement which was going to be signed for Bujagali. Had the committee not got that draft and it had gone ahead to be signed, Uganda would have been doomed, because among the conditions which were in that agreement was that Uganda was supposed to guarantee the water level of Lake Victoria and that if we failed to pay the tariffs which were contained therein, Government’s institutions were going to be attached, including Parliament and many others.

When we got that draft, we gave information to the head of state and he called us in Nakasero. The minister then was Richard Kaijuka. Actually, the President put to task hon. Kaijuka to explain how these provisions were in the draft and were about to be signed. It was a few weeks before Kaijuka would sign that power purchase agreement.

So, what am I saying? Sometimes, people may think participation of Parliament could be bad, but it could also be very helpful. If that power purchase agreement had not been sited by the committee and brought to light before being signed and we had waited that, “That is the function of the Executive. Let them sign. We shall come for oversight,” this country would have been doomed.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, listening to Members’ submissions, there is no doubt that we may never have matters which are solely the ambit of Parliament which do not have the effects and impact on the Executive or even on the Judicial arm of Government. The point I am trying to belabour here is that, let us not start from a point of view and say, “Who is winning which powers?” That is dangerous. “Who has gotten the better of the other?” That is still dangerous. We stand to lose as a country; and we stand to gain as a country; to the extent that what Members are saying that there shall come a formidable Parliament - yes, who tells you that there shall not come a formidable Executive? It will come when the Executive wants to take all the powers. It may reach a point when the Parliament wants to stress its mandate. In such a scenario, it is important at this point in time that we pull together. Let there not be, you know we are winning; you know Parliament is interfering.  Let us come with open hands and open minds to have a clear and better law for our country regarding oil and gas.

For that matter, hon. Muloni is good, a listener and understanding. Who tells her that tomorrow she will be the one in charge of this policy? Members of Parliament can be reasonable. Who tells you that tomorrow, there could be a difficulty here and there? 

My appeal to this House now that we have this opportunity to write the law, I wish the honourable minister could concede on this. Let us have it embedded. It is very critical unless Parliament wants to legislate itself out of this process, but it is important we capture it. At the end of the day, we can look back. Where we find inconsistencies, we cure them. It is a principle of the law, if it does not lead to absurdity –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you Mr Chairman again. Mr Chairman, we seem to be making a very important law to which many Ugandans are attaching their lives. I notice that in this House, we do not have the Attorney-General of this country. This is the time we need him more critically than ever before. Obviously, I stated earlier that we may concede on this, but possibly make a substantive provision where Parliament shall clearly perform a particular role or roles. 

I sought your guidance on whether we are proceeding well. We are on course, but not forgetting, Mr Chairman, and with your guidance again, can’t we really have this matter stood over or slept over and we conclude because it seems very contentious? Reading the minds, everyone seems to be passionately attached to their views and I think in good faith.

May I suggest that we sleep over this particular clause and possibly get time to come up with amendments with the guidance of the Attorney-General that will help us achieve the same end? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we will not be able to proceed at this moment. We will stand over the matter and subsequent matters that arise from the Bill.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.48
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.49
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012”, and it has considered clause 1 and stood over clause 2. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE PREPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.49
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is the fourth day of the week; tomorrow, therefore is Friday. A normal parliamentary day would have been on the 9th which is Independence. The calendar of Parliament suggested that we take a short recess from the 13th of this month -

Honourable members, in the circumstances, it will not be possible for us to proceed with business. Independence being on the 9th October which is a Tuesday, and Wednesday 10th, Members will be coming back. So, we will only have one Parliamentary day on the 11th and then Friday is 12th and 13th, the day on which we should adjourn is a Saturday, which no Member will be available for us to do that. So, we only have one day of next week, which is Thursday 11th where we can be able to proceed with this. Unless Members have objections we could proceed with tomorrow morning. 

6.52
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving us room to express objection. The issues that we are going to deal with in respect to this Bill are very important. These are issues where we need to consult both technically and policy wise. Kindly give us tomorrow to do the research so that we do not do a substandard job for this country. This Bill is before Parliament, Parliament is here to stay and we are still around. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do we come on the 11th of Thursday? Is that Okay? Parliament is adjourned to Thursday 11th next week at 2 o’clock. 

(House rose at 6.53 and was adjourned until Thursday, 11 October, 2012 at 
2 o’clock.)
