PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA10806STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTuesday, 31 October 2023because the Auditor-General’s reports are provided for under the Constitution and the Public Finance and Management Act.Today, I chaired a meeting of the leadership of the accountability committees, representatives from the Office of the Auditor-General, the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and our technical people. We found something which Parliament had never worked on for all these years and we found it very necessary to be done. Therefore, after referring the Treasury Memorandum to the Auditor-General, we could consider that the auditing cycle is done as per the Audit Act, and then wait again for issues to be captured in the next year’s audit report.However, the Auditor-General again audits the treasury memoranda and reports to Parliament. The audit he or she makes of the treasury memoranda should be tabled on the Floor of Parliament so that we know that he or she did the work. Otherwise, issues would be lost. That is why most of the issues were recurring; people feel Parliament has adopted and finished, the Auditor-General audits the treasury memoranda and stops there; we had no mechanism for following up. We resolved that the report of the Auditor-General on the treasury memoranda should always be tabled before Parliament, not submitted; things are done here in plenary, in the open, not in offices, and then, the IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 11TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. In the previous days, we handled very critical items regarding accountability. You remember last Wednesday, we talked about the issue we are grappling with; business for the accountability committees, especially after adopting the Auditor-General’s reports, so that the finance ministry can go and prepare the Treasury Memorandum. I spent the weekend digging deep into the Hansard  to see how all this had been previously handled but I could not get any precedent, because, the law was more or less tying us down. Rule 221 reads, “The Speaker shall, after receiving the Treasury Memoranda, refer it to the Auditor-General for Auditing in accordance with the National Audit Act, 2008 ”.  That rule was introduced in the 10th Parliament, basically for the management of treasury memoranda 10807THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023accountability committees should look through and see whether indeed, their recommendations were handled. If they were not handled, then we would get a mechanism for the committees to ensure that these matters are followed up. That was a consensus we had - In fact, the Auditor-General said that this time, he was happy because of what was happening. They were concerned about what was happening with their reports.Honourable colleagues, I have called a Business Committee meeting on Thursday. One thing which I have also discovered is that the sectoral and standing committees, especially accountability committees, are not working together to address issues of accountability. The accountability committee finds issues, raises recommendations, and the House adopts them. However, the sectoral committee goes ahead to appropriate money to a sector, where questions have been asked and nothing has been done. We are going to hold a Business Committee meeting to arrange meetings between accountability committees and the sectors, which they oversee. For example, the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government) should be meeting the sectoral committee on local government to look at accountability issues which were raised so that before more money is appropriated to that sector, we ensure their accountability issues are handled. Otherwise, we shall keep getting the same issues in the audit because we are not able to work together and ensure that during the budgeting process, which is the biggest stick that we have as a House- our issues are strongly handled. We are going to give very serious attention to issues of accountability.Another one is - I know Hon. Musasizi is preparing and very soon, we shall be receiving the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework which means, the budgeting process by Parliament has started. On his side, he has started. We usually get reports about the money which we appropriated for the last financial year in sectoral committees on paper but we need to see it on the ground. (Applause)At the end of this session, I will announce how best we are going to do that but we need field visits and I will join you on some of those visits, honourable colleagues . (Applause)  We need to see that the finance minister releases money for the first and second quarters - we shall be having a very congested budgeting period and yet we are only getting documents. Can we go and see these important activities for which we allocated money to see how they are doing? If we do it for some time, I think we shall be able to help, especially with the oversight. As you know, under our rules, oversight is under the sectoral committees. I will be guiding you on how we shall handle those issues at the end of the day, honourable colleagues. With those very many comments, later on, I will amend the Order Paper to allow the laying of papers so that the report of the Auditor-General on the treasury memoranda is laid and we then refer it to the relevant committees. Hon. Musasizi, do you want to comment? 2.23THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My comment is to thank you for identifying the gap. It is actually not the gap; all along, I thought this was being implemented. The accountability cycle ends when the Treasury Memoranda is audited by the Auditor-General and laid back in the House, not for scrutiny again, but for use. It becomes the information we use in our day-to-day conduct of parliamentary business. Therefore, I thank you for identifying this gap and also putting mechanisms to implement it.10808STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Hon. Macho? 2.25MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker, you are spot on. (Laughter)  I have called it “spot on” because you want to ensure the functioning of the organs and systems of Parliament. Every accountability cycle must be complete with every step being followed to accuracy. This will even help the chairpersons of accountability committees to do their work effectively and on time and also allow Members of Parliament to do all assignments on the dot. This will even make work easier and we shall not need constitutional reforms to have Assistant Deputy Speakers and waste taxpayers’ money because the work would have been done effectively. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, we are going to have more reforms on issues to do with accountability and they will be made by you, here in the House because we are identifying many gaps. For example, each chairperson determines how they process the reports of the Auditor-General. If we get, for example, the audit handbook of Parliament and make it an appendix to our Rules of Procedure then the chairpersons will follow that. We have not had issues where we amend the recommendations of the reports here on the Floor. Sometimes, you ask yourself how such a recommendation passed a clerk, chairperson or member’s eye. We are going to find a way of improving so that we have very substantive reports. 2.27MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You talked about the first and second quarter releases. I can assure you that the releases are not there; people are crying all over in the ministries. We would like to be informed of how much – (Interjection) – It is “air supply”. Like on the roads, people were relying on the Shs 1 billion that was supposed to help during the bad situation. However, the money that they used to send to the districts is no longer there. They would send between Shs 10 million and Shs 20 million to the districts.I suggest that we get that information so that we advise each other. This can help us to plan for the next financial year. We would rather have a budget that concentrates on a certain sector and feel that something has been done in this country, rather than saying every year that “this will be done” but end up not doing anything. The number of roads to be worked on are many; none has been worked on. People are crying about projects in their constituencies. How will Members of Parliament come back if there is nothing on the ground? You have seen the issue of the Parish Development Model. Some people have been keeping the money for many months. However, Hon. Henry Musasizi knows how he goes to his constituency. I would like to see him going to our areas to know where the money goes. (Applause)These Members of Parliament are good disciples, but they are not being assisted by the finance ministry. After drawing a budget, the ministry of finance people go in for another one. What impact have we had on the ground? Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Hon. Byanyima is saying that money has not been released. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR10809THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 20232.29THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I share the same sentiments with Hon. Byanyima –(Laughter)–  Yes, this is a fact. In the first quarter, we released zero money under development and less than 18 per cent under recurrent. Why did this happen? This is because most of the debt obligations, both principal and interest, had to be paid in that period. Those payments took priority on the budget. In quarter two, we released what we did not release in quarter one, plus a full release for quarter two. Under the development budget, we did up to 50 per cent.What we are doing now is trying to find ways of getting cash to fully finance this release. When you go back to your districts, you might find that in some areas where we have released money, the payment has not been effected. However, Mr Speaker, it is not our intention but it is the mismatch between the release and the actual realisation of cash. I would like to ask honourable colleagues to understand the circumstances and walk with us because we must speak the same language. Regarding the issue of the roads, we gave Shs 1 billion to each district and we shall release it in four quarters. The Shs 1 billion was supposed to be over and above what the Uganda Road Fund was releasing to these districts. At the same time, during the appropriation process, this Parliament took away Shs 60 billion from the Uganda Road Fund budget and it has affected release of the funds.I need the support of Members in future when I bring my proposals and we see how to manage them because they directly affect your service delivery. Thank you.2.33PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two observations: First, I am glad that you are calling the Business Committee, among other things, to discuss the nexus between sectoral committees and standing committees, and eventually appropriation. I am a member of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. We said that no money should be appropriated to the Uganda Warehouse Receipt Institution because according to the law, their work is regeneration not implementation. However, over the years, they have been engaged in implementation. This position was defended at the level of the Budget Committee.However, my honourable colleagues in the committee and I were surprised to find that we appropriated money for the Uganda Warehouse Receipt Institution. There are some gaps we need to discuss at that level on how things change somewhere in the middle. The second observation is in response to the honourable minister who is frankly saying that the income does not match with the proposed expenditure.  It is high time that as Members of Parliament, we are realistic to ourselves. Coming up with a budget of Shs 52 trillion when we know what Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) collects and given the debt servicing and the hostile global environment in terms of borrowing, is it still realistic to pass a budget of the Shs 52 trillion in terms of expenditure when the income side is very weak? I have continuously observed that when we are discussing the budget, we are more interested on the expenditure side; we want this to be done without looking critically into the issue of income. 10810STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTNow that we are in the early stages of the budget cycle, we have to be realistic. Remember those early days of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. There were some concepts which were not palatable but which I find very important; live within your means and do not spend what you do not have. We better reflect on those – (Hon. Kaberuka rose) I am done. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kaberuka, kindly take your seat. When a Member is off  the microphone, he cannot give - But he has told you he is done. That was an indirect way of saying that he has not granted you - Honourable colleagues, Prof. Mushemeza has raised a critical point which we have to look at. In the next budgeting cycle, let us be smarter. A very good example is, the Government comes here, shows you the revenue and the expenditure side and tells you, “We want to raise this much from taxes.” When we come to handling of the tax Bills, we reject some amendments which are worthwhile. For example, we continue to appropriate Shs 52 billion when we have already cut off Shs 500 billion from the revenue. Therefore, Hon. Mudimi and your team, together with the Hon. Amos Kankunda, you should now start communicating with them that if we reject certain tax proposals, can we have them costed? After they are costed, the ones that have not been adopted by the House should be struck off the budget. Otherwise, we are appropriating air and when the minister starts suppressing, we complain. Please, these are things that we are going to look into deeply. Honourable colleagues, I have an Order Paper to follow. You have reacted well to my communication. Let us have matters of national importance starting with Hon. Opendi. Hon. Ochai, do you have a procedural matter? MR OCHAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise under Rule 42 and the procedural matter I would like to put across is a reminder to the Government of the commitment to ensure accelerated regional economic growth and development. At the very beginning of this Parliament, specifically during my maiden speech, I envisaged a Parliament that would ensure that regional development - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, sorry. Hon. Ochai Maximus is a potential minister - (Laughter) -  he is one of the budgeting experts we have in this country. Therefore, I am not mistaken. Honourable colleague, a point of procedure is to do with how the House is proceeding. Rule 42 is about questions to the minister. If you start bringing questions to the minister at any time under procedure, we would not be proceeding very well. Let us go to matters of national importance starting with Hon. Sarah Opendi but as she comes, in the public gallery this afternoon we have students and teachers of Kazo Junior School, Kazo District. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Jenifer Muheesi and Hon. Dan Kimosho. We also have students and teachers of Hope Boarding Senior Secondary School, Lutembe, Wakiso District. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Betty Naluyima and Hon. Charles Matovu. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Kindly stand up for recognition. Thank you for coming. Honourable colleagues, we also have members of the Girl Child Education and Orphanage Development Organisation, Budadiri Town Council, Sironko District. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Florence Nambozo and Hon. Isaias Ssasaga. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. They brought me malewa  and a bunch of  matooke . Thank you. (Applause) COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Prof Mushemeza]10811THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023Since the Inspector General of Government (IGG) reports to Parliament and not the other way round, I have declared so the IGG should take note. 2.40MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of a one Inspector of Police, Thomas Otim, who is reported to have defiled a one-and-a-half-year-old child in Arua City. What is so disturbing is that this one-and-a-half-year-old child was a child to another senior police officer, SSP Madrama. What is more disturbing is that this child was taken to the regional referral hospital for a check-up and it was confirmed that indeed, there was penetration and Mr Otim was held responsible. However, when the file was taken to the Resident State Attorney, he examined the file and recommended that it should be closed for lack of sufficient evidence. The police has since taken action by dismissing Mr Otim from the service but that is not enough. The Resident State Attorney continues to hold the office doing his work with no action taken; this corruption and abuse of office must end. My prayer is that the Attorney-General comes to this House to explain the action that has been taken against this Resident State Attorney who recommended that the file be closed in disregard of a report from the regional referral hospital. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, this is a very appalling situation. However, even when the situation is very bad like that, you have to ensure that you remain within the confines of the law. Parliament cannot direct the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) in the execution of his or her mandate. The only thing we can do is to ask the minister to follow up the matter. We are the ones who gave the DPP powers and therefore, we can only report a concern and request the DPP to take up the matter. The DPP, at any time, can appeal. Do you remember the case of Kajubi? They reinstated it after public pressure. I can promise you, honourable colleagues, that I am going to follow up this matter personally and within the law so that we do not appear to be directing the DPP in doing their work. Thank you. 2.44MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move under Rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure. I have noted with concern the status of the infrastructure in the schools in this country. Last week, a Member of Parliament was on the Floor to present the case of how the roof in one of the schools in her constituency was blown off. Today, I am here to present the case of Ocet-Toke Primary School in Layamo Subcounty, Kitgum District, where the roof of the school building was blown off. This was captured earlier and the administration had requested for it to be repaired. If the dilapidated infrastructure stays in this state, Mr Speaker, we shall register a lot of disasters. We need deliberate moves to address this. My prayers are:1. The disaster ministry provides Ocet-Toke Primary School with at least 200 pieces of iron sheets to handle the situation for these children to go back to class and avoid studying under trees.2. The Ministry of Education and Sports deliberately budgets to have all the schools renovated so that we avoid having our children injured or prevented from attaining their education. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 10812STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT2.46THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your Excellency –(Laughter)-  Mr Speaker, I stand with the Member in that situation where our children are studying under trees because of the disasters that they are facing. I request that we get the report from the management committee or the school so that the disaster preparedness ministry can handle that issue. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The other day, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said she has iron sheets. What you should do is follow up with the Member with the aim of helping.MS NAKADAMA:  Mr Speaker, it is true that we have iron sheets but there is a procedure to follow. That is why I was telling her that they should write. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, what is going on? There is something I want to clarify: MPs should stop generating requisitions. Since a Member has raised the matter, my guidance would be that your officers should follow up with the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of the area. (Applause)  The MP has done their job. I know you have a system. Kindly, link up with them. I am avoiding a situation where MPs will be held responsible - The Government Chief Whip? 2.48THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua):  Mr Speaker, the assumption is that by the time a Member raises such, he or she has got information from his or her constituency through the relevant structures. For us to move in a formalised way, I would kindly request that we make it two-way traffic. Much as the Office of the Prime Minister would undertake to ensure that the officers can follow it up with the districts, even Members who raise such would help us - such that it is two-way traffic – to follow it up with the subcounty and the district and ensure that the letters are delivered and we have the record, as the Office of the Prime Minister. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Some CAOs are contesting against the MPs in the next elections. (Laughter)  Secondly, MPs get most of this information from their voters not the technical people. However, what the Government Chief Whip is saying is, coordinate with the district authorities. MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under Rule 78 to seek clarification from the Office of the Prime Minister. I had an issue in my constituency –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, that is not –MR ENOS ASIIMWE: I am seeking – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Listen, please. Hon. Enos, we have discipline in the House. Rule 78 provides for a point of procedure but that point must be qualified by the issue you are raising. You are raising a matter of clarification under procedure. A point of procedure shows that there is something that is not going on well in the House. (Laughter)  However, conclude your point. MR ENOS ASIIMWE: Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. The clarification that I am seeking from the Office of the Prime Minister is that two weeks ago, I had an issue in my constituency and I went through the procedure: the team at the district made a report and it was submitted to the Office of the Prime Minister. We are now entering the third week – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is Kabula County.MR ENOS ASIIMWE: Yes. No action has been taken yet she said that she has iron sheets in her store. I am wondering why they have not responded to the needs of the schools that had the roofs of their buildings blown off by wind in my constituency three weeks ago. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR10813THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023MS NAKADAMA:  Mr Speaker, when I say we have some iron sheets, we still follow the procedure. Let us not expect that when you write today, tomorrow the iron sheets will be in your district. Let us wait for the procedure to take its course. Honourable members, the iron sheets will come to your district through the CAO. Let us be patient and wait for the procedure. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. The biggest issue that MPs usually raise is fairness. They have been coming and saying that a colleague who raised an issue the other day has received yet they have waited for three months and not received anything. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what you can do is compile a list of all the requests that you have, share with us and show us the order that you are following. This is something that the Committee on Presidential Affairs should be able to handle. Hon. Zinkuratire, I hope it is not the same.  2.53MR HENRY NKWASIIBWE (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo):  It is a bit related. (Laughter) It is also a matter of national importance. Mr Speaker, several subcounties in Ruhaama constituency were hit by strong hailstorms which massively destroyed crops and homesteads. The affected subcounties include Ntungamo, Nyarutuntu, Ruhaama and Ruhaama East. Those hailstorms have left many people homeless and they have nothing to feed on. They are living in desperation. I, therefore, pray for urgent intervention from the Government to provide relief items and food to the affected people.2.54THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO  (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, sorry for our people who do not have food to eat right now but still, let us get that communication from the disaster management committee of the district. Bring it and we will see how we can take this food to the districts. Honourable members, if I may add, when food is given to only Members of Parliament when the district is not aware, they will say you have stolen the food. Therefore, we have to go through the disaster management committee. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, at the next meeting, submit to us the list of the areas you have given so that Members can have hope that you have been giving. We can say, with effect from this financial year - just from July. We need to see those you have given and those pending. Honourable colleagues, I am not going to be calling the Rt Hon. Prime Minister because she is giving the same answer for the same issues. Hon. Nankabirwa, do you want to add something?2.55THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Mr Speaker, we have just heard from Hon. Musasizi how the budget has been performing where he has mentioned the zero release. When you ask for the performance as far as the distribution of iron sheets is concerned and say we begin from July, I do not know how the list will look. That is why I would like to beg you that we consider from the last financial year. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We closed that; we cannot do much about it. This financial year, we can say, we can add more. 10814STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMS NANKABIRWA:  But it is good information for the Members of Parliament so that they can follow that this actually happened in their constituencies. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Musasizi said in the second quarter, he released a handsome amount so we should be able to move. Honourable colleagues, we have free sitting. Hon. Bhoka?2.57MR GEORGE BHOKA  (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on a video clip that has been trending on social media in Uganda and beyond, challenging the efficacy, safety and benefits of the proposed malaria vaccine that the Ministry of Health intends to roll out in Uganda. We know that malaria is a big public health challenge in this country contributing to ill health, death, especially of children, and productivity losses. We appreciate the efforts of the Government of Uganda to constitute a national malaria control programme –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you have gone ahead to submit substantively. Here we do not respond to social media. The rules do not allow us. MR BHOKA:  The issue I am raising is one of national importance –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, please. Let me guide you. Before you submit substantively on a matter, you first ask the minister whether what you are seeing is true. Then, you can go on and raise other issues. What if it is not true and you are wasting our time? Ask the minister whether it is true. MR BHOKA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. Minister of Health, I rise to seek clarification on whether or not the information trending is correct. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Once she confirms that it is true, I can allow you to substantively submit.2.58THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) ( Ms Anifa Kawooya):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have rightly answered; that is what is trending on social media. We are not operating on social media as a ministry and it is not correct. Once we get the right information through the right channel and policy, we shall come to this House and give a report. Thank you – (Interjection)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am not the one who allows clarification, according to our rules. It is the Member holding the Floor. Hon. Bhoka, you will link up with the minister to share the information and the minister will follow it up. Thank you. Hon. Ninkusiima?2.59MR JOHN NINKUSIIMA ( NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to raise a matter of national importance concerning my constituency. I have two subcounties that were greatly hit by heavy rains and serious wind –(Interjections)–  I am bringing up the same issue. The subcounties are Rukiri and Kikyenkye. We have a technical school that is found in Vatican Cell in Mabona Parish, which is government-aided, whose three blocks were completely razed by the same heavy rains. In Kikyenkye, there is Rwomuhoro Primary School where the roof of a three-classroom block was blown off by heavy wind. As I speak, pupils are studying under the trees. At the technical school, the classroom block where they are supposed to conduct practicals was also blown off. I kindly ask your ministry, Prime Minister, to consider giving me at least 300 iron sheets per school so that our students can go back to school. I also ask the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to visit us and assess the level of damage. Thank you.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR10815THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would not have called you but you need to respond to that issue of paying a visit. 3.01THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO  (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, I am going to call my minister, together with my team, so that we can go and assess the damage. I know that since the ministers of education are here, we shall come back with a good report and ministries of disaster preparedness and education will take action. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Dr Otaala?3.02DR EMMANUEL OTAALA  (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to raise a matter of national importance. Two weeks ago, a whirlwind from Yokango Parish in West Budama South constituency – (Interjections)  – Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are the one inviting trouble. I told you to remain focused because you are the one on record, but you are listening to voices.DR OTAALA:  Mr Speaker, the point I am raising is that over 45 families have been rendered homeless in Yokango Parish, Nyangole Subcounty in West Budama South constituency. These households were made of permanent buildings. All of them have been razed down and the people have been sleeping outside. There is need for urgent humanitarian assistance. What is unique is that it is thought that one of the residents was testing a new threshing machine that started the whirlwind, which engulfed the whole parish, razing down several homes. My prayer is that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in the Office of the Prime Minister intervene with the necessary humanitarian supplies to save the people who have now been rendered homeless. Secondly - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order!DR OTAALA:  The Office of the Prime Minister should provide iron sheets for the 45 affected families to rebuild their homes and lives. Thirdly, this august House discusses the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure regarding the land wrangles between – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are a senior legislator. Is that how to behave in the House? You came to my office and I guided you. As a senior legislator, that is not how to behave.DR OTAALA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Most obliged.3.04THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, I will get in touch with Hon. Dr Otaala to know exactly what they want, what the wind did and how to help those people. I thank you.3.05MS LINDA AUMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance in the education sector in Lira District. There is only one Government A’ level secondary school in the entire district which has been trying to perform well. However, it has a laboratory with no equipment. This means that despite the school’s struggle to perform well, we are not producing scientists. We also have books, but they are kept in the stores. My prayers regarding this are: 1. To request the Government, in the subsequent financial years, to consider 10816STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTAmach Complex Secondary School by renovating the existing laboratory, equipping it and also constructing a library to enhance proper education and performance.2. More secondary schools should be built. There is a high student dropout rate because they cannot attend secondary schools that are far away. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, for the record, what is the name of the school again?MS LINDA AUMA:  It is Amach Complex Secondary School in Erute South Constituency.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister.3.07THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Amach Complex Secondary School is one of the schools we have planned to expand and equip with the necessary scholastic materials, including laboratory equipment and a library. Pray for me so that the budget provides the necessary resources. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students of Trust High School, Kasangati, Wakiso District. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Betty Naluyima and Hon. Nkunyingi Muwada. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House so please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. Next item.BILLS FIRST READINGTHE PETROLEUM SUPPLY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20233.08THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa):  Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 128 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum Supply (Amendment) Bill, 2023” be read for the first time. In accordance with Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 118 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications to the Petroleum Supply (Amendment) Bill, 2023.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Natural Resources to be processed as per Rule 129 of our Rules of Procedure. Within 45 days we should have it because it is a very small Bill. Therefore, the committee chairperson should ensure that we have it within two weeks. Thank you. Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF CHANGE OF PASSPORTS AND INTRODUCTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL EAST AFRICAN PASSPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I received a request from the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs that his colleague, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs - Since they both deal in lethal related items, they can support each other. Therefore, I allowed Hon. Jacob Oboth to do the necessary.3.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is about the status of the [Ms Auma] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10817THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023change of passports and the introduction of the International East African passport. It is quite lengthy and I hope it is uploaded on the intranet. If it is uploaded, I need guidance on whether to highlight or read it verbatim.During the 17th Ordinary Summit of the East African Community Heads of State held in March 2016, their Excellencies launched the new East African e-Passport and directed that the commencement of the issuance of the new international East African e-Passport should take effect by 1 January 2017 and thereafter implement a phased-out programme for the then current East African and National Machine-Readable Passports.Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on whether I should read the background and introduction - this document has been with us - or I can go to the core areas worth reporting.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Sure, because we have been with it for so long.MR OBOTH: The advantages are on page 5 paragraph 4.0 and the status update matrix is in paragraph 6.2. 1.  e-passport system and Related Infrastructure as of now a)  Online applicationApplicants can fill in and submit online, make payments and book appointments. The digitalised filing system has led to efficient service delivery with a turnaround time of three days. This is done.b)  Biometric enrolment of face images and fingerprints All applicants in the country must appear for interview and biometric capture. The impact has reduced incidences of non-nationals accessing Uganda passports. Status on that is done.c)  Integration with the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) and the Uganda  Revenue Authority (URA) and no need for LC1 endorsements The system descriptionReal-time remittance of accruing Non-Tax Revenue to URA and the same particulars with NIRA in the passport database has resulted in the integrated Government and improved Non-Tax Revenue collections from passports. This more than doubled from Shs 53.3 billion to Shs 118.7 billion. d)  E-passports issued Passport delivery has seen increased pressure due to labour externalisation and the need to replace the old passports. The status on ordinary and diplomatic passports is shown in the figure. e) The automatic fingerprint identification systemA biometric storage database for the storage of the fingerprints captured during enrolment has improved passport database and passport integrity; it is done. f)  Disaster recovery system Part of the business continuity plan, in case of any catastrophic events, is not yet done. Blank passports so far supplied by Uganda Security Printing Company (USPC) Limited USPC Limited was contracted to supply passports and it has supplied over one million ordinary passports, 15,000 diplomatic passports, and 20,000 service passports. 3. Personalisation centre (a) Interim personalisation centre: An interim centre was to be constructed to ensure seamless continuity of service delivery. The result is a fully equipped and functional centre with an automated service delivery queuing system, furniture and air-conditioning. This was done. 10818STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT(b) Storied Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Personalisation Centre: A three-storied personalisation building is to be constructed at the ministry headquarters. This is to ease office space accommodation and improve service delivery. That is not yet done.3.  Regional enrolment centres and missions abroad.(a)  Regions with fully furnished and equipped enrolment centres in Mbale, Mbarara, and Gulu were done. The ones which are not done are Arua and Jinja. (b)  Missions abroad with fully furnished and equipped enrolment centres in Washington D.C., London, Pretoria, Copenhagen, Ottawa, Abu-Dhabi, and Beijing, were done. (c) Images of polycarbonate and paper-based passports: Comparison between old passports (paper-based passports) and the new passports (polycarbonate passports). You can see from the diagram on the data page that this was done. (d) Security features: Laser tactile feature, MCD, holothread, Magic ID, MLI, Transparent Window, OVI. The status is the optically variable ink feature and all the details there. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. This is an update and these are issues which the sectoral committee should follow up as we had said. Next item.MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ACTIONS TAKEN TO MITIGATE ACCIDENTS ON THE MPIGI-KANONI ROAD3.19 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Mr Speaker, the statement is moved under Rule 412(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The Member of Parliament for Gomba raised a concern that this House is aware of; about the Katonga Bridge, in May. These are the identified vulnerable areas along the diversion: (a) Sitabale corner (b) Mpenja corner (c) Nabwoledde swamp (d) Namajuzi swamp. The diversion route has no CCTV cameras to support physical deployments. The major causes of accidents are:(a) Reckless driving and improper overtaking in areas without climbing lanes. (b) Sections of the road have been damaged by heavy trucks and have been prone to accidents. (c) Heavy trucks slide back on steep slopes and collide with others, particularly at Nabwoledde Swamp. (d) There is no weighbridge along the diversion route. (e) In addition, there are inadequate humps, especially as one approaches the intersections and roundabouts, that could alert the drivers. (f) Fatigue, especially by the heavy cargo vehicle drivers. Some interventions carried out at the diversion route: (a) Permanent deployment of traffic police to oversee the day and night movement of the traffic. A permanent police post at Nabwoledde has been established to support the traffic officers. (b) Between Sembabule and Bukomansimbi, four police pickup vehicles of integrated highway command and a traffic patrol vehicle have been deployed to secure the route.[Mr Oboth] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10819THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023(c)  Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has deployed earth-moving equipment - which other people, including Hon. Tinkasiimire call graders, to widen the road, particularly along these risky swampy areas. (d) UNRA also maintains a visible team of officers to monitor and continuously seal the damaged portions of the road.(e) Traffic officers are on standby to monitor traffic at the narrow stretches of the diversion route. More officers were added to support the diversion route and with the partial opening of Katonga Bridge for light vehicles, the staffing gaps have been filled by officers on general duty.(f) The presence of private towing vehicles on call at specific points is available to support the Uganda National Roads Authority breakdown services.(g) Finally, extra signage has been installed to address the signage problem. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I remember this matter was raised by Hon. Saazi who is not here, but Hon. Robina Rwakoojo had also followed up on the same matter. Therefore, I will allow Hon. Rwakoojo. 3.24MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. For correction, I raised the same issue three times before Hon. Saazi. I thank my honourable colleague for raising it in detail, especially concerning Gomba East County. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs, on behalf of his colleague, for coming up with this response. I would like to note that what he has said is true. In addition, UNRA withdrew the buses from the time I came here to report last because the tonnage was now acceptable for the Katonga Bridge and it reduced the traffic. The lorry drivers from Tanzania who used to drive badly are driving better than they used to. For almost a month, it was only on Monday that I saw another accident and the police came on time. What is left is for the district to form a multi-sectoral committee and create a parking facility for the trailers in town from 6.00 p.m. to 6.00 a.m. daily. I thank the minister for the response and my honourable colleague for the additional question. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of St Michael Primary School from Gulu City. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Rev. Fr Charles Onen and Hon. Betty Aol. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause)STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE STATUS OF GUNDA FOREST RESERVE, NAMYOYA FOREST RESERVE AND GULU FOREST RESERVETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well done, Hon. Oboth, for standing in for your honourable colleague.  (Applause)3.27THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 13 July 2023, you guided that a joint statement on the status of Gunda Forest Reserve by the Minister of Water and Environment, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, be presented to the House.The Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in her letter dated 28 March 2023, stated that His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda had identified land at Gunda, Katabi Town Council for the setup of a National Technological Demonstration Centre under the Directorate of Community-led Industrialisation under State House. The mandate of the centre is to 10820STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTpromote industrialisation at village, parish and subcounty levels. The matter on the degazettement of Gunda Forest Reserve was later raised by Hon. Betty Naluyima as of 4 July 2023. Mr Speaker, on 13 July 2023, you also guided for a joint statement to be prepared for Cabinet. The Uganda Land Commission (ULC), in its sitting in May 2023, had looked at the matter and by the time the presidential directive was communicated to the commission for action and further management, the commission had already allocated the land to 46 competent persons. It was also brought to notice by the Commissioner of Land Registration, in a letter to the Uganda Land Commission for bidding, the allocations that ULC had made. Under that, Mr Speaker, I engaged all the stakeholders to study the matter and forge a way forward. The stakeholders who I invited included the Ministry of Water and Environment, Wakiso District Local Government, the Uganda Land Commission and the Land Registration Department from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. From my interaction, I directed the following to be implemented: a) ULC to halt and rescind the allocations made on the land and engage the allocatees to provide them with land elsewhere.b) I also directed them to work hand-in-hand with Wakiso District Local Government and other stakeholders to have Gunda Local Forest Reserve degazetted to pave way for the setup of the National Technological Demonstration Centre.c) Finally, I directed Commissioner, Land Registration to cancel any titles that may have been created on the same land. Mr Speaker, I wish to inform this House that the Uganda Land Commission halted the processes and rescinded all allocations made on the land at Gunda. In addition, it should be noted that fortunately, no official land titles had been created nor issued for the said property, as only allocations had been made. As I conclude, engagements with Wakiso District Local Government, Uganda Land Commission, Ministry of Water and Environment and other stakeholders are ongoing to lawfully have Gunda degazetted to enable us implement the presidential directive. I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable, your statement is not yet complete. You can come with all of them. Honourable minister, we have Namyoya Forest Reserve and Gulu Forest Reserve under the same statement. You can do it continuously for all of them.MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 13 July 2023, you guided that a joint statement be made by the Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on the status of Namyoya Forest Reserve in Mukono together with the status of the land title bearers on the said land. In the Mukono District Council meeting that sat on 13 December 2013, the council approved a motion of degazetting Kifu, Nabugulu, and Namyoya Central Forest Reserves.Furthermore, in the district council meeting that sat on 28 March 2017, Mukono District Council approved a motion mandating the District Executive Committee to consider offering land to Victorious Car Bond Limited for the development of a High-Tech Industrial Park.The land hosts Kifu, Nabugulu and Namyoya Forest Reserves. The same matter was again discussed in the district council meeting that sat on 29 March 2019 during which the district chairperson moved the motion seeking the council’s approval for degazettement of Kifu, Nabugulu and Namyoya Forest Reserves.[Ms Nabakooba] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10821THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023The chairperson said that Mukono District Council, in fulfilment of the Government’s goal of transforming Uganda from a peasant economy into a middle-income country as enshrined in Vision 2040, is desirous of offering land for the development of a high-tech park.In addition, the high-tech park is to provide state-of-the-art infrastructures and support facilities including housing services and amenities as a critical part of asset complementariness, employment opportunities for the community and generate local revenue for the district. Subsequently, the council once again approved the motion to degazette the forest reserves. However, it is worth noting that the technical report by the Ministry of Water and Environment on the degazettement of the Namyoya Forest Reserve noted that Mukono District did not meet the procedural and legal requirements and therefore, recommended that the process be halted until the district meets all the requirements for degazettement and gazettement.Mr Speaker, with regard to the status of the land title bearers in Namyoya Forest Reserve as of August 2021, the ministry, through the Office of the Commissioner, Land Registration, issued a notice in the print media on certificates of titles that were erroneously and illegally issued on the land forming part and partial of the central forest reserves in Uganda, Namyoya Forest Reserve inclusive.The issuance of the affirmation titles contravenes Article 237 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 44 of the Land Act Cap 227. In view of the above, the Executive Director of the National Forestry Authority recommended the cancellation of the certificates of titles for having been illegally issued and wrongfully obtained. The process of cancellation of the land titles is still ongoing. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. On Gulu -MS NABAKOOBA:  Mr Speaker, during the 12th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Third Session of the 11th Parliament held on Thursday, 13 July 2023 you guided that a joint statement by the Minister of Water and Environment, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development be presented to the House, among other things, on the status of Gulu University land.As you may be aware, on 3 April 2020, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda directed the Rt Hon. Prime Minister then, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, to degazzette 70 acres of Gulu Central Forest Reserve and avail it to Gulu University for expansion.Subsequently, the 10th Parliament of Uganda resolved that the Minister responsible for Water and Environment urgently fulfils the President’s directive to degazzette 70 acres of Gulu Central Forest Reserve and avail the land to Gulu University for expansion.The university wrote to the Chairperson LCV , Nwoya District Local Government requesting for a council resolution of no objection for the gazettement of a forest reserve in Nwoya District.In the same vein, the Chairperson of Nwoya District Land Board requested for the application forms to convert the certificate of land titles from leasehold to freehold.On 19 September 2022, the university submitted, filled and signed application land forms for conversion of their land title Plot 63 Block 4 at Purongo, Nwoya District measuring 208.131 hectares from leasehold to freehold to the Chairperson, Nwoya District Land Board for appropriate action.Nwoya District Land Board further guided that the university submits additional forms that is form 4: grant of freehold, form 10: notice of hearing the application for the grant of a freehold and also form 23: demarcation form for the grant of freehold to enable the land 10822STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTboard begin the process of conversion from leasehold to freehold with ease. The forms were fully filled and submitted to the Area Land Committee, Got Apwoyo to prepare the land for its submission to the Nwoya District Land Board for consideration and approval.Furthermore, the university leadership also wrote to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Water and Environment on the degazettement of the central forest reserve in Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City.The Ministry of Water and Environment, in a letter dated 30th May 2023, issued the university with guidance on how to proceed with the degazettement of part of the Gulu Central Forest Reserve and gazettement of the 500 acres in Nwoya District to aid the initiation of the process so that the ministry could also take up its subsequent role.The stakeholders are in the process of conducting a social and environmental impact assessment, land valuation and other mandatory legal and procedural requirements as guided by the Ministry of Water and Environment. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable colleagues, these are very clear answers. I do not know whether we have issues.3.43MR RAUBEN ARINATWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for her statement. I will start with Bunda Central Reserve that is already occupied by residential houses. If you are saying that you are going to degazzette it as an industrial area and compensate those people who have already encroached, why should we compensate them?Allow me to also talk about Namyoya Forest Reserve. There are so many titles in the central forest reserves in this country. We have over 1000 illegal land titles and they are being created by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in connivance with officials from the National Forestry Authority.Formerly, the encroachment on forest reserves was by digging and grazing, but since 2010, they started creating illegal land titles. It has now even gone beyond: they are now degazetting forests without using Parliament or the courts of law. What they actually do is that the land grabber goes to court and opens a case against the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which has given the title, and the Attorney-General. What do you expect when those ones go to court as defendants, witnesses or subject matter specialists?  So far, we have lost many forests, for example, Buhungiro  in Kyenjojo District. After going to court, Government loses the case and the encroacher is compensated. For example, for Buhungiro Forest land, someone has been compensated at Shs 1.6 billion –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.  Honourable colleagues, when we are receiving statements where we are not going to make a resolution, we do not need to speak for five minutes. Parliament is not going to make a resolution. We are receiving it for information purposes. Your submission was good, honourable member, but conclude.MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE:  We also have a case in Bugoma where someone was compensated at Shs 3 billion for a forest land. I want to bring it to your attention that, actually, these degazettements have ill motives behind them. So, we should be very careful when considering them. I submit, thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Once the law provides the process, what is important is the process being followed. The Government itself is not following the process. A very good example is Gulu University. For the land you are talking about in Gulu University, where you built - it is not even an encroachment, [Ms Nabakooba] MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10823THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023because Government borrowed money from African Development Bank (ADB), built infrastructure on a forest reserve and started working backwards. So, what example is the Government setting for the local people? If the Government is doing it, why not local people?  I personally went to Gulu in the 10th Parliament as part of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. We visited Gulu University to look at this same issue. We were asking, “How did you even put an ADB project in a forest reserve, which you had not yet de-gazetted?” The same Government comes to indict people here! Hon. Oseku -MR OSEKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want to interrupt the minister when she was submitting her statement because the floor was very clear. All along, she was making a reference that you guided that a joint statement be made involving her and the other entities. The clarification I am making was on how this is going to go on the Hansard . This is because the statement that she has submitted appears to be unilaterally from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Mr Speaker, maybe we could get that clarification. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Usually, when we have a multi-sectoral issue, we say: coordinate but we have a lead minister whom we can hold accountable here. So, on this matter, the lead minister was the minister for lands since she is in charge of titles and all that. So, the record will show a statement by the minister for lands, as it is on the Order Paper.3.47MR SIMON WOKORACH (NRM, Aswa County, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the 10th Parliament for the good work done when the issue of the land at Gulu University came to the notice of Government and Parliament. I would also like to thank the current minister for the statement made, not only as a Member of Parliament from Acholi Parliamentary Group, but also as a Masters student at Gulu University. My kind request is that they open the doors for any consultations, which will be made with the administration of the university so that we can conclusively get this done and dispose it off so that Gulu University can expand and develop.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. However, honourable member, nothing much has been done on this issue. I remember that when I was the Government Chief Whip, I received a petition on this matter and I brought it to the attention of the minister. Gulu University has done everything that it is required to do but it is the ministry for water, which is not doing its job. We need a motion here from the minister. So, I do not know why you are thanking people who have not done their job. (Applause) The leadership of Gulu University came and met me when I was the Government Chief Whip. I carried the documents to the minister. The matter was even brought to the attention of all the ministers responsible and the issue was: honourable minister, go and prepare a motion and we have a de-gazettement. However, the Ministry of Water and Environment does not want to hear anything to do with de-gazettement. Honourable colleagues, I have seen some of you who have not been attending the House, but want to speak today. You know yourselves. I will not allow you today. When you attend the next sitting, then, I will allow you – no, it is not you, our champion. I have my good friend who knows himself. (Laughter)  We shall sort matters after here. I want to give a chance to people who have been attending the House. Let us have Rev. Fr and then Hon. Katuntu.10824STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT3.50REV . FR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City): For record purposes, I have been attending the Plenary. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, it is not you, Rev. Fr. I am not picking the ones who do not attend.REV . FR ONEN:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have read the minister’s statement. She referred to and quoted the 10th Parliament. I was not in the 10th Parliament but Gulu University sits in my constituency. I recall that the 11th Parliament resolved the issue concerning Gulu University. You have rightly stated that the Minister of Water and Environment does not want to hear anything to do with gazettement but I think she does not have the DNA for development. Her DNA does not have the development sentiment.Mr Speaker, Gulu University -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  His DNA. The minister is a man.REV . FR ONEN:  A man? (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.REV . FR ONEN:  Thank you for correcting and guiding me. Mr Speaker, Gulu University land is at the final stages of de-gazettement. The minister should update his notes. He is quoting the 10th Parliament but the 11th Parliament has already done everything.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable member. We have not done anything. De-gazettement is done through a motion and we pass a resolution. So, we have not completed our work. (Mr Obua rose_)  Government Chief Whip, do you want to say something? MR OBUA:  Yes, Mr Speaker, as a Christian, I rarely read the Book of Lamentations. I always want to read either Acts of the Apostles or Revelations.You stated clearly that when you were the Government Chief Whip, there was a petition. I am happy that today, in our Father’s house, you occupy a room, which is bigger than the one you were occupying. May it please your Chair to direct the minister in question to ensure that this motion is brought?The role of my office will be to communicate the decision of Parliament through that directive to the concerned minister. This time round, I pray that the directive comes with a timeframe because it is not only Gulu University. I know we are also investing at the Teryet High Altitude Training Centre, which is also constructed on public land that belongs to the Government. Can we set the ball rolling through the bigger room that you occupy? As a commander under you, I will swing into action. Thank you. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Minister of Water and Environment and the  Minister of Education and Sports, let us meet tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. over this matter, with the aim of having it sorted. (Applause)  I do not know but Gulu met every criteria. How many acres were they taking? [Members: “74”]  They are around 70 acres, but they planted 500 acres. They are already compensating, which is the biggest problem in such cases.Next item - Since I have ruled on what I am going to do tomorrow, that is why I have said that we should go to the next item, in the interest of time. (Ms Sarah Opendi rose _) Procedure, Hon. Opendi -MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2022, the honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development made a commitment to follow up the report of the Standard Gauge Railway affected persons in Kasoli.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, is that a procedural matter? MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10825THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023MS OPENDI: Yes. The procedural issue I am raising, Mr Speaker, is whether the minister should not brief this House on where we are on the Kasoli project, aware that the year is going to end.There is a land title that is in the bank and Bemuga Auctioneers was supposed to auction that property.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, Kasoli is not on the Order Paper today. (Laughter)  Procedure is to do with matters we have on the Order Paper. I am sure the minister has taken note; her ears must have been open. However, let us stick to the business of today. (Mr Abdu Katuntu rose_)Hon. Katuntu, would you like to guide us on something?MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you know, I rarely stand up to speak on these issues, except when I think there is something critical.Hon. Arinaitwe has raised a very important matter about cases that the Government is losing in court regarding the subject matter and colossal sums of money being ordered to be paid. However well-intentioned you may be, honourable minister - and I repeat – please, follow the law. I listened to you saying, “I have directed the cancellation of titles”. I was looking at the Registration of Titles Act and where the powers of the minister are. Under that Act, does the minister have powers to order cancellation of a title? Do not give people the opportunity to get free money. These things should not be on record that “I have directed this; I have directed that. Cancel that title.” Please, the law is very clear on the process of cancellation of the land title. My caution is that as you give those directives, please, try to reflect on the law and see where your powers are.If somebody ever brought that directive and said, “By the way, it was not the statutory duty of the minister to do this but she took a political decision”, chances are high that a court will say that, that was an illegal directive. I am giving this legal advice. I wish the Attorney-General was here to advise you on some of the directives you give. Mr Speaker, as I conclude, it is not the first case that ministers give directives but sometimes, those directives are way beyond the powers they have, as overseers. You can give the directives but they should be anchored within the law. You may take my counsel; you may not.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am sure, honourable minister, that you are doing it according to the law. MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank Hon. Abdu Katuntu, for the comment. However, I would like to go on record that whatever we do or whatever I do, as a minister, is in accordance with the law. If I direct the cancellation, the office of the Commissioner Land Registration, which is one of the departments under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, refers to the Registration of Titles Act, on what it says. They do a public notice and follow all the processes. (Applause)  Once they are done, they then proceed with the cancellation. In between that process, we are at times challenged in the courts of law, if somebody feels that they do not want to be part of the process or they think their titles are authentic. We still engage with the office of the Attorney-General and the Commissioner Land Registration, who usually backs me up technically in the process and always give us reports. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is in line with the law. I remember there was a certain MP, I think in the Ninth Parliament, 10826STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTwho went on the Floor and said, “We must remove this Government by all means”. When everyone was quiet, he added, “…and according to the law.” (Laughter)  MR AFIDRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I would like to raise is in regard to the motion being presented by –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We do not have any motion.MR AFIDRA: …to the report by the honourable minister, in regard to the –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. It is an item, which you have completed. I ruled on it.MR AFIDRA: It is a procedural issue, if I can come in.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, when a Speaker has ruled, you refer to Rule 87 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament if you want to review the Speaker’s ruling. Thank you. (Hon. Komakech rose)  Procedure, Hon. Komakech.MR KOMAKECH: Mr Speaker, I rise on Rule 52 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Today is a big day in Uganda; it is National Mental Health Day. We have 14 million Ugandans who are mentally sick. It is in the public domain. In Pader District alone, we have 600 –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter?MR KOMAKECH: The procedural matter I am raising is; why can’t the Minister of Health bring, in this House, a statement on mental health awareness and what the Government has done to fight mental illness in the country?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Komakech, here, we are mentally okay. We follow our Order Paper. (Laughter)  Next item?LAYING OF PAPERSI. REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO RENMINBI (RMB) YUAN 1,050,000,000 FROM THE EXPORT IMPORT BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE SUPPLY , INSTALLATION, COMMISSIONING AND SUPPORT OF THE NATIONAL DATA TRANSMISSION BACKBONE INFRASTRUCTURE/E-GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT PHASE V4.01THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal to borrow –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I have already stood in for you that you are mentally okay but I can now hear noise. (Laughter)MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a proposal to borrow up to RMB 1.05 billion from the Export Import Bank of China to finance the supply, installation, commissioning and support of the National Data Transmission Backbone Infrastructure, also called e-Government Infrastructure Project Phase V . THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The loan proposal is referred to the Committee on National Economy to be processed, in line with Rule 155 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which requires that the relevant sectoral committee is consulted in the process.  II: THE ANNUAL BUDGET PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2022/2023 4.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Annual Budget Performance [The Deputy Speaker] LAYING OF PAPERS10827THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023Report for the Financial Year 2022/2023, V olume 3, covering V otes 114 to V ote 149. I beg to lay. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is referred to the Committee on Budget for processing and report back to the House. MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2022/2023, V olume 4 covering V ote 150 to V ote 406.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The consolidated report is referred to the Committee on Budget because it is in volumes. MR MUSASIZI: The volumes are different; the records must capture them. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Read all of them. MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, this is the Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2022/2023, V olume 2, covering V ote 014 to V ote 113. I also beg to lay on the Table the Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2022/2023, V olume 5, covering V ote 407 to V ote 615. Lastly, I beg to lay on the Table the Annual Budget Performance Report for the Financial Year 2022/2023, V olume 1, covering all programmes from V ote 001 to V ote 013.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. The consolidated report covering all volumes is referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration and report back as provided for under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Thank you. III.  REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE AUDIT OF THE TREASURY MEMORANDA 4.06THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the audit of the Treasury Memoranda presented to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in July 2022. I beg to lay. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. This is where I had guided earlier on; we need to ensure that all these reports are laid here. As a way of following up, we want the accountability committees, since they have time, to look at them and see whether, indeed, action was taken. This will help us in our accountability cycle as a House. Therefore, I refer them to the relevant accountability committees. Thank you. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MANAGEMENT AND UTILISATION OF UGANDA POLICE FORCE LAND IN SELECTED AREAS IN KAMPALATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, we have had this report for a long time. Therefore, committee chairperson, summarise it and the Hansard  will capture the full report. 4.07THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Kajwengye):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs under Rule 189(a), (b), (e)and (f) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament  undertook an oversight visit to Naguru Police Barracks on 13 October 2021 and established that Uganda Police land in Naguru was occupied by entities other than the Uganda Police Force. 10828STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTApart from the report, I beg to lay the following documents. I will read them and then submit:1. Presidential Directive dated 25 April 2008;2. Letter dated 24 February 2010 from H.E. the President to the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs;3. Letter dated 6 July 1992 from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs to UNAFRI;4. Letter dated 17 June 2011 from the Secretary, Uganda Land Commission to the Commission and Land Registration;5. Deed of variation between United Nations African Institute for Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders (UNAFRI) and Future Group Limited dated 12 December;6. Sub-lease agreement dated 28 April 2015 between UNAFRI and Future Group Limited;7. Deed of satisfaction of a judgement of High Court No. 256, 2010. That was the case between Future Group v UNAFRI, December 2014;8. Extract from minutes of the meeting of Uganda Land Commission held on 16 and 17 November 2011;9. Letter dated 24 March 2020, from the Inspector General of Police to the Minister of Internal Affairs;10. Letter from Oscar Industries to Uganda Land Commission;11. Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) dated 24 April 2010 between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran on Health Co-operation;12. The MOU dated 24 April on Islamic Republic of Iran Development Aid to the Republic of Uganda;13. Addendum Memorandum of Understand -ing dated 10 April 2015 between the Min -istry of Internal Affairs represented by the Uganda Police Force and Azad Universi -ty on the Management of Uganda Iranian Health Centre;14. Copy of minutes of the meeting between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Uganda Police Force on Uganda Iranian Health Centre held at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 29 July 2022;15. Receipt showing proof of remittance by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) of Shs 17.28 billion to the Consolidated Fund; and16. Receipt showing proof of remittance by UNRA of Shs 272,090,000 to the Consolidated Fund. I beg to lay all these documents. Mr Speaker, you have ruled; this is a 51-page report. It is uploaded on the intranet  and I have done an executive summary. With your guidance, I can proceed with that. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please do, honourable. MR KAJWENGYE: Thank you. Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the management and utilisation of Uganda Police Force land in selected areas in Kampala. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs under Rule 189(a), (b), (e) and (f) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament undertook an oversight visit to the Naguru Police Barracks on 13 October 2021 and established that Uganda police land in Naguru was occupied by entities other than Uganda Police Force. These entities include;1. United Nations African Institute for Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders, herein known as UNAFRI;[Mr Kajwengye] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10829THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 20232. The Uganda-Iranian Health Centre;3. Oscar Industries Limited;4. YUASA Investments Limited;5. Future Group Company Limited;6. Justice, Law and Order Sector; and7. The East African Community Monetary Institute. Following this discovery, the committee deemed it prudent to inquire into the management and utilisation of Uganda Police land in selected areas in Kampala and other incidental matters and make appropriate recommendations. The committee’s inquiry covered police land in and around these areas, including;i. Naguru Police Headquarters land in Naguru and Ntinda;ii. Nsambya Police Barracks; iii. Kibuli Police Station;iv. Kira Road Police Station;v. Jinja Road Police Station; andvi. Clock Tower Fire Brigade Unit, Nakivubo.Findings, Observations and Recommendations 2.1 Naguru Ntinda Land - Plot 2-96, Katalima Road measuring 140.49 acres. Committee findings The land is registered in the name of Uganda Land Commission and the user is restricted to the Police.The land had been divided into new plots and allocated to the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders (UNAFRI), Oscar Industries, Uganda-Iranian Health Centre, Justice, Law and Order Sector, and the East African Community Monetary Institute. i. The title indicates that there are no encumbrances on the land. ii. Currently, the land is utilised as described in Table 1 of the major report. 2.2 Land allocated to UNAFRI (16.8 acres) The then Minister of Internal Affairs, the late Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, in a letter dated 10 February 2011, to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry, allocated 16.52 acres of land comprised in Plot 3, Mukabya Road, and plot 2A-8A, Katalima Road, to UNAFRI. Subsequently, a certificate of title to UNAFRI for a lease of 99 years, effective 1 March 2011, was issued on the understanding that UNAFRI would develop the land and carry out its objectives as by statute of May 1995. The land allocated was valued at $1.5 million. Shortly after UNAFRI had been allocated the land, the institute subleased it to various institutions as per the table below. The table I have put down shows the lease, effective date, duration, and size of the land and notes thereafter. UNDP lease was given on 1 June 1993, duration 10 years, size of the land 2,332 square meters. The lease ended in July 1995 when UNDP lost interest. World Food Programme (WFP) effective date 1 August 1995, duration 10 years, size of the land 3.1 acres. Notes on this is that the WFP utilised the land up to 1997 and abandoned it. Subsequently, the lease was cancelled.Trans-Saharan International (U) Limited, which is a car bond. It got a lease effective 1 June 1998. The duration of the lease was five years. Land size 3.1 acres. The lease was renewed on 1 October 2003 for a term of five years but subsequently terminated on 1 December 2004 for non-payment of rent. YUASA Investments Limited, which is also a car bond. It got a lease effective 1 February 2005 for five years. The size of the land is 3.1 acres. The lease was subsequently surrendered and terminated. A new lease of 25 years 10830STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTeffective 1 June 2006 was issued. Later, the parties entered into a lease agreement dated 14 September 2011 in which land measuring 1.608 hectares was leased to YUASA Investments Limited for a term of 49 years, effective 14 September 2011. 5.     Future Group Limited got a lease effective 21 November 2007 with a duration of 25 years. Size 1.192 hectares. In 2010, however, Future Group sued UNAFRI, vide Civil Suit No. 253 of 2010 for breach of lease of agreement, particularly for failure by UNAFRI to give Future Group vacant possession of the leased land. The case culminated in a consent judgment in which judgment was entered in favour of Future Group. Consequently, UNAFRI granted Future Group Limited a lease of 49 years, comprising an initial period of 25 years and the grant of an additional 24 years in lieu of payment of the damages and costs of the suit. Source: Title deeds of respective lessees Uganda Police Force argues that the Government of Uganda granted UNAFRI a lease on the understanding that the institute would proceed to develop the land and carry out its objectives as per its statute. Therefore, UNAFRI had breached the lease terms by failing to utilise the land for its allocated purpose and had instead subleased it to third parties. As such, the Uganda Police Force prayed that the land be returned for further management and that UNAFRI immediately vacate and surrender the 12 senior staff houses to the Uganda Police Force. On the other hand, the Acting Director of UNAFRI informed the committee of Parliament that the institute had not been receiving the requisite funding from the member states and that, therefore, the Governing Board of UNAFRI authorised the institute to supplement its budget by subleasing part of the land. Further, the legal status of the institute, as provided for under Article IV of the host agreement protects the dealings of the institute to its properties. Recommendations The committee, therefore, recommends that:The Uganda Land Commission reopens the boundaries of the land under dispute between the Uganda Police Force and UNAFRI to clearly distinguish what belongs to whom.Regarding the excess of 5.594 hectares allocated to UNAFRI, the Uganda Land Commission should rectify the record on the title to allocate the equivalent of 6.8 hectares that was officially allocated to UNAFRI by the Government per the agreement.Regarding the land on which the 12 housing units are situated currently being claimed by UNAFRI, Uganda Police Force should initiate legal proceedings under the law to acquire quiet possession of the same. Land allocated to Oscar Industries Limited On 25 April 2008, His Excellency the President directed the Uganda Land Commission to unconditionally allocate Oscar Industries Limited 20 acres of Uganda Police Force land along Ntinda Road off Nakawa for the construction of structures on the adjacent UPF land to house the Inspectorate of Vehicles (IOV) department and the residents of officers that would be affected. Subsequently, Oscar Industries were allocated land under leasehold V olume 3935 Folio 11, Plot 401A-441A, measuring approximately 9.031 hectares (22.31) acres. The Uganda Land Commission revealed that part of the land granted to UNAFRI was erroneously allocated to Oscar Industries, culminating in a land dispute between the two parties. Further, Oscar Industries had surveyed and obtained a certificate of titles over 9.031 hectares, equivalent to 23 acres. The three [Mr Kajwengye] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10831THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023acres were more than what was entailed in the presidential directive. Uganda Land Commission rectified the overlap and the initial acreage allocated to Oscar Industries of 23 acres was reduced to 20 acres. The certificate of title was amended to read Plot 239-299 and 401-441 Ntinda Road as opposed to the initial 401A-441A Ntinda. Uganda Police Force reported that Oscar Industries did not fulfil building covenants in the lease. Upon the five-year expiration, the land automatically reverted to the Uganda Land Commission with the Uganda Police Force as the user. However, the committee established that Uganda Land Commission subsequently extended the lease to 49 vide Minute 13/293(a)(221) of 13 July 2013 to 2 August 2013. Uganda Land Commission could not justify the extension, explaining that in the past, the extension of leases by the commission was solely based on the technical advice of the Secretary of the Uganda Land Commission. Oscar Industries stated that the Uganda Land Commission extended the lease to allow them time to relocate the offices and for the Uganda Land Commission to find a solution to illegal allocations and alienation of part of their land. Further, that upon relocation of offices, Oscar Industries Ltd would then be free to have its lease extended to full 99 years as indicated in the lease agreement.The committee, while conducting a visit to the locus in quo , established that Uganda Land Commission, instead of allocating Oscar Industries Ltd the residue of the land after deducting the three acres of UNAFRI , which had been erroneously included in the certificate of title for Oscar Industries Ltd, allocated Oscar Industries Ltd plot 239-299, which is far away from the location of the land initially allocated to it. The committee further established that the land contains a school, which Oscar Industries Ltd is expected to relocate before it can develop the land. The committee recommends that:i. The Uganda Land Commission and Oscar Industries Ltd should, in consultation with the Uganda Police Force, renegotiate the lease terms to implement the original project on the unencumbered portion of land on which Oscar Industries Ltd is to build the replacement houses for the Uganda Police Force to effect the spirit of the lease agreement. The renegotiation should be done and concluded within three months from the date of adoption of this report.ii. Any renegotiation with Oscar Industries Ltd should not include compensation because there was no justification as the error committed by the Uganda Land Commission on the encroachment of UNAFRI land was rectified.The Ugandan-Iranian Health Centre situated at Plot 2, Katarima Road, Naguru.The Government of Uganda and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran signed an MoU on 24 April 2010, in which Islamic Republic of Iran agreed to provide the Republic of Uganda with $ 1.5 million as a grant to be spent on a project to be proposed by the Government of Uganda after consideration of the Iranian side. To operationalise the agreement between the Government of Uganda and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, another MoU on Health Cooperation was signed on 24 April 2010. The Government of Uganda agreed to contribute sufficient land out of Naguru Police land for the Iranian Government to establish a health centre for the people of Uganda based on Public Private Strategy, currently referred to as Public Private Partnership in a phased manner, beginning with establishing a polyclinic. However, the Iranian Government replaced Azad University with Muslim Physicians without Borders Association, a private sector entity, to implement the project. 10832STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTConsequently, on the 25th of May 2017, an MoU was signed between the Ministry of Internal Affairs, represented by the Uganda Police Force and Muslim Physicians without Borders, which among other things, provided for profit sharing, skills transfer and treatment of police staff, their spouses, children and immediate dependents at a favourable rate.Thus, the Ugandan-Iranian Health Centre was constructed in Naguru, Katalima Road on land owned by the Uganda Police Force. The hospital was commissioned by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda on 26 October 2017. Irregular change of ownership of the health centreThe Uganda Police Force and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs reported that whereas the project was to be established for the people of Uganda based on a Public Private Strategy currently known as Public Private Partnership, in 2020, the Uganda Police Force discovered that their Iranian counterparts had registered the project as a private limited liability company, wherein two Iranians owned 98 per cent and 2 per cent shares respectively, without the knowledge of the Uganda Police Force. The above incident created mistrust between the parties to the extent that by the time of the inquiry, the Uganda Police Force revealed that it was contemplating a withdrawal of the courtesies it had extended to the hospital, namely the ambulance, fuel and payment of utility bills; noting that it was legally not tenable to continue spending Government resources on a privately owned entity. In addition, the change of ownership caused a stalemate in the hospital’s management to the extent that no board meeting has been held since October 2018.Following this discovery, engagements with affected parties were initiated, lending to a consensus that the Iranian side deregisters the company as a private limited liability company and returns to the spirit of the MoU before any constructive engagements could be made on the way forward. To-date, the Iran-Uganda Hospital Limited situated at plot 2, Katalima Road, Naguru - that is police land - is still a private limited liability company incorporated on 15 March 2018 under registration no.80020000721028 whose shareholders are:i. Shahram Pourjahani 98 shares ii. Afi Karimi 2 shares, as per the companies registered at Uganda Registration Services Bureau. The committee, therefore, recommends that:i. The Uganda Police Force should liaise with Uganda Registration Services Bureau and any other relevant actors to take the appropriate legal steps to safeguard the funds and assets of the health care to mitigate the possibility or effect of the resources being transferred to unscrupulous persons.ii. The Uganda Police Force should engage the hospital’s management to develop guidelines for the implementation of the subsidy and to implement the clauses on profit sharing and skills transfer to ensure value for money of the project. The Uganda Police Force should ensure that the guidelines clearly state that the subsidy to the Uganda Police Force staff on the services offered by the health facility is determined as a percentage of the cost of the services. iii. The representatives of the Health Facility Board from Uganda, that is, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the three members from the Uganda Police Force should take action to ensure that the board is vibrant enough to oversee the proper implementation of the MoU and that the health centre is run efficiently and effectively.iv. Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uganda should follow up to ensure that the full amount of $ 1.5 million in development aid was [Mr Kajwengye] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10833THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023remitted to the project and documentary evidence be provided to Parliament within three months upon adoption of this report.v. The Criminal Investigation Department should expedite its investigations on the proceeds that the facility generates from the services rendered. vi. The Directorate of Public Prosecution (DPP) and other investigators should investigate the individuals involved in the fraudulent change of ownership of the health facility to a private limited liability company with a view of prosecution. 2.3  Land allocated to the East African Monetary Institute, situated at Plot 10A-14A, Katalima Road FRV-KCCA 545, Folio 4, measuring 0.9900 hectares. Uganda is a signatory to the protocol for the establishment of the East African Monetary Union, which was signed on 30 November 2013 and among others provides for the establishment of the East African Institute, which will evolve into the East African Central Bank, the East African Statistics Bureau, the East African Surveillance Compliance and Enforcement Commission and the Institution responsible for financial services.Pursuant to a Cabinet directive of a meeting held on 25 August 2021, three acres of land were carved out of Uganda Police land at Naguru Police Barracks for the East African Monetary Institute in the name of Uganda Land Commission (Ministry of East African Community Affairs).RecommendationThe committee recommends that the Ministry of East African Affairs updates the Parliament on the bidding process to house the East African Monetary Institute. 2.4 Land other than that at Naguru-NtindaLand at Kibuli, Nsambya situated at Plot 31-51, Kibuli Road Plot 1-11 Press House Road and Plot 20-50 EVEN Kibuli Road, all under FRV 212, Folio 7, measuring 49 acres. Uganda Police Force informed the committee that this land in Nsambya houses the Nsambya Police Barracks. Additionally, the Uganda Police Force reported that it owns another 60.86 acres on lease at Nsambya from the registered trustees of St Joseph’s Mission Mill Hill detailed in a table below:a. LRV 528, Folio 17, Plot at Nsambya, which measures 45.9 acres with a tenure of 99 years with a lease period from 1 January 1954 to 31 December 2052. The remaining period is 30 years.b. LRV 418, Folio 20, Plot at Nsambya measuring 14.95 acres a tenure of 99 years, which started on 1 January 1957 and is supposed to end on 31 December 2055 remaining with 33 years.ObservationDuring the oversight visit, the Committee observed that this land was being encroached upon.RecommendationThe Nsambya Uganda Police land should be surveyed, titled and fenced off within three months from adoption of this report.2.5 UNRA land uptake and compensationsThe Government of Uganda, in conjunction with Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and Kampala Capital City Authority, is implementing the Kampala Flyover Project at the clock tower, Nsambya, Mukwano, Kitgum House and Garden City junctions. The project is being implemented in two phases: Lot 1 and Lot 2. The construction of phase 1 of the project started in May 20I9.Accordingly, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has acquired and seeks to develop 10834STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTsections of police land at Kibuli, Nsambya and Nakivubo (Fire Brigade) to create a construction corridor for the Kampala Flyover Construction and Road Upgrading Project. The first land uptake by UNRA was already implemented and the affected parties have to-date been duly compensated. Table 3 below details the properties affected by the first land uptake by UNRA.1. Plot 27, Entebbe Road, measuring 0.194 acres with a compensation award was Shs 707,163,750;2. Plot 1-5 Press House Road, measuring 0.179 acres with compensation amounting to Shs 823,400,000 was given;3. Plot 7-11, Press House Road measuring 0.645 acres with compensation to the tune of Shs 2,933,880,000 was given;4. Plot 31-51 Kibuli Road measuring 2.825 acres with a compensation award of Shs 12,816,980,000 was given. This gives the total of 3.843 acres, which attracted a compensation of Shs 17,281,423,750.2.5.1 Second land uptake by UNRAUganda Police Force (UPF) and UNRA reported that according to the detailed design changes of the Kampala Flyover Project, there was a need for additional land taken for the new Kibuli-Nsambya Link Road, Mukwano Flyover and road widening. Accordingly, UNRA acquired additional UPF land measuring approximately 1.2686 acres for which UPF is to be compensated Shs 8.883 billion, as indicated the table below. Again, the committee has found it pertinent to tabulate: plot, affected area, acreage and compensation award. This in total amounts to an additional 3.843 acres that attracted a compensation award of Shs 8,883,687,735. The source of this data is UPF and UNRA.The second land take will displace 206 police personnel and their families. When paid, the compensation amount will be utilised to acquire strategically positioned land to construct new barracks, low-cost housing units and accompanying infrastructure.The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development expedites the release of funds for the compensation of UPF for the land, to facilitate the relocation of the affected police facilities and secure alternative accommodation for the affected personnel. I have given a detailed table as Members can read.Consideration of other incidental matters Governance issues at Uganda Land CommissionFindingsUganda Land Commission was not fully constituted since the chairperson and secretary of the commission are currently on interdiction, pending investigations by the Inspector General of Government (IGG) on corruption-related allegations. The administrative affairs of the commission are being superintended over by an interim chairperson appointed by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. This position is non-existent in the legal framework of Uganda Land Commission. To ensure continuity of the operation of Uganda Land Commission, members of the commission are utilising the window provided under Section 51 of the Land Act, Cap 227 to appoint, from among themselves, a chairperson for each sitting, since the substantive chairperson is absent.  Uganda Land Commission was composed of nine commissioners, but one of the commissioners had refrained from participating in the activities of the commission until its legal status was clarified. [Mr Kajwengye] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10835THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023The current state of affairs at the Uganda Land Commission does not only concern the enormous mandate of the commission and the sensitivity of the land matters in Uganda, but also unsustainable and poses legal challenges. Mr Speaker, the committee recommends, therefore, that the IGG expedites the ongoing investigations of corruption-related allegations against Uganda Land Commission. Structure, staffing and remuneration of Uganda land Commission The committee noted that whereas the Uganda Land Commission is a constitutional commission, it is operated like a Government department. The commission is understaffed and lacks essential departments such as the legal and survey departments, notwithstanding that land matters are legal and technical. The committee was informed that Uganda Land Commission relies on the Attorney-General for legal services, which legal services were withdrawn. Consequently, cases are heard by court exparte  (in the absence of the Uganda Land Commission and the Government), resulting in over 418 court cases and claims against the Government, totalling to Shs 1.470 trillion as at 27 October 2022. Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that;i. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development revises the budgetary allocations regarding the remuneration of the Uganda Land Commission members, per the Public Service Circular 2022 on salaries and remuneration. ii. The Ministry of Public Service addresses the inadequacies in the structure and staffing of the Uganda Land Commission to make it more effective and efficient. iii. The Government tables Uganda Land Commission Bill in Parliament to streamline the operations of the commission and accord it the much desired operational and financial independence to enable the commission to exercise its functions independently, effectively and efficiently. Failure to conduct due diligence Uganda Land Commission informed the committee that in the past, the commission was not conducting due diligence on land, that is, physical inspection of the land in respect to which an application for a lease or extension of a lease was made to establish the status quo, a practice which had since changed. The committee was further informed that the commission was making decisions based on the technical advice of the secretary to the commission without referring to the documents on the file of the matter under consideration. The committee notes that the above practice is a recipe for the creation of overlapping interests on land, fraudulent transactions and land conflicts. The committee, accordingly, recommends that Uganda Land Commission incorporates, as part of its procedures, the mandatory inspection of land in respect of which it intends to transact, to mitigate the rampant practice of allocating the same land to different parties and the possibility of fraudulent land transactions. Mismanagement of the affairs of Uganda Land Commission While interfacing with Uganda Land Commission, the committee was informed of the allegations of staff forging minutes of the commission and fraudulently dealing in Government land. In addition, the committee was informed of the possibility that some of the missing files of the commission, such as the file for UNAFRI, were hidden by the said staff  to cover up for the fraudulent transactions. The mismanagement of Uganda Land Commission is further evident in the inadequate manner in which the minutes of the commission are drafted, as well as the irregular land transactions facilitated by the commission. 10836STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTFor instance, the irregular variation of the lease for Future Group from 49 to 99 years in the entire term of the head lease of UNAFRI. Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the ongoing investigation of the allegations against the chairperson and secretary of the Ugandan Land Commission by the IGG should be expedited for the smooth running of the organisation. Conclusion Mr Speaker, the continuous contestation on the ownership and utilisation of public land by police and other parties demonstrates the inadequacies of Uganda Land Commission in allocating and managing public land. As such, the committee calls upon Parliament to compel Uganda Land Commission and other relevant stakeholders to reopen the boundaries of the contested land belonging to Uganda Police Force. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Next time, I will demand that you summarise the executive summary. (Laughter)  However, it is a good brief. Thank you, committee. Honourable colleagues in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Nabumali High School, Mbale. They are represented by Hon. Richard Wanda and Hon. Miriam Mukhaye. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.Honourable colleagues, my Order Paper is demanding a lot, so, I will pick Hon. Herbert Tayebwa, Hon. Ababiku, Hon. Edakasi, Hon. Mujungu, Hon. Paparu, Hon. Opio and Hon. Afidra. Let us be quick so that we can handle another item. 4.50MR HERBERT TAYEBWA (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee for the good and elaborate executive summary. When you follow the summary properly, you may think this is not happening in Uganda. There appears to be a lot of rot, which is unknown to us. However, I want a clarification on the report. The chairperson indicated that the land leased to UNAFRI was 16.8 acres. However, the land that was sub-leased to other agents was 11.062 acres. The report does not indicate whether the remaining land was properly utilised by UNAFRI. More so, Mr Speaker, when you look at the report, the sub-leases happened even before the lease to UNAFRI – because the report indicated that UNAFRI got a lease in March 2011, but the other sub-leases were obtained in 1995 and 2008. You would actually see that they even got it before - I really wonder how it happened. Mr Speaker, other institutions got land: Oscar Industries Limited got 23 acres; Ugandan Iranian Health Centre has not indicated how many acres it got and the East African Monetary Institute got three acres. We also need to understand how big this police land is. How many acres are remaining out of what has been leased and is being utilised well? It was given to us for the case of Nsambya and the case of Kibuli. A small mistake on page 10, I think it was a bad copy and paste, instead of 2.2686 in the table, they put 3.843. It is just a small mistake. I submit, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Maybe to give notice to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, that later on, I will request you to give us a simple diplomatic status of UNAFRI because you ask yourself if this is a UN agency or is it just by name? Hon. Ababiku?4.53MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I am concerned about the irregular registration of the Iranian [Mr Kajwengye] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10837THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023and Uganda Partnership Hospital. The recommendation is saying that the police should take it up. I strongly believe it was a relationship between Uganda and Iran. Therefore, I recommend that our Government should take it up, but not narrow it to the Uganda Police Force.Mr Speaker, I am also concerned about the Iranians’ allocation of land. The country is bleeding. The complaints are too many about the Iranian allocation of land. Can the honourable minister tell us how best the ministry is going to address this? Mr Speaker, encroachment on public land, like the case of police is done without guilt consciousness. I strongly believe that it is done by those who can defend themselves. I am of the view that this Parliament and Government should come up with stringent measures, such that if any public place is encroached on, the eviction must be done instantly because if we delay, issues of human rights will come in, and people will start to demand compensation. Lastly, Mr Speaker, I strongly believe that the police acquired all these plots for prisons. Can we get to know, now that we are using this land or plots for alternative use, how much we have deprived Uganda police? Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.55MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report. The issue of the Uganda Land Commission staff, and I guess the chairperson and the secretary are also mentioned in the report, is really a challenging issue. There is a lot of continued corruption. Files disappearing, minutes being forged, it is just continuous. You cannot do any transaction with the land office without paying money. How far will we go with this? The House needs to take very serious steps and I agree with the recommendations that have been put forth. Even within the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) themselves, for instance, there are many files in UNRA, where UNRA should have compensated the owners but those titles are lying in the Uganda Land Commission and you cannot get them. This is a big challenge, Mr Speaker. Finally, we have so much of the Government land that is not titled. Here we are talking about being unfenced. I know the land in Kaberamaido, over 1,000 acres that belong to the Government ranch but we cannot even tell where the title is up to now. Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be right if the minister laid before this House all the land that belong to the Government, so that we know in this district, these are the properties of Government, in this place, these are the properties - so that we can take full note of those properties. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Edakasi. Honourable minister, how feasible is it that you have a registry of all Government land? The Member is saying you should lay it on Table so that we may know the status of all Government land in the country.4.58THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Judith Nabakooba):  Mr Speaker, what I can say on the matter of an inventory for Government land is that we have some information in the system but it is not conclusive because we expect MDAs to make returns annually to tell us what is in their possession, what they have disposed of, but this is not the practice. Even for the Accountant-General, it is a requirement for the accounting officers to declare the assets in their possession and you realise that most of these things have not been harmonised.What we saw as a challenge, Mr Speaker, is that as Government, we had not surveyed and titled most of our land; that is why it is prone to encroachment. It is there that you know that 10838STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthis is police land or this is land belonging to a district but when you ask for a certificate of a title, it cannot be presented by the district officials. We have written to them quite often to tell them to use their local resources to ensure that at least, the survey process is done, and also they work with the ministry’s zonal offices in the respective regions, to ensure that they get titles. What we will do, we can give you what is in the system right now, but we will also remind them to make submissions for what they have done as far as public land or Government land is concerned in their respective districts. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this can be one of your greatest achievements. If other ministers were failing on it, we have a lot of trust in you; you can ask us as Parliament, how do we support you and ensure you achieve this. Then, it becomes one of your greatest achievements, other than saying that you have also given up. MS NABAKOOBA: I thank you, Mr Speaker and Members, for that support. We will be coming to you to give you our plan of what we want so that you can support us. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For now, first report on what you have and we see whether you have anything. How much time do you think you need? MS NABAKOOBA: We can do this probably in two weeks’ time. I will lay on the Table what is available. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two weeks’ time, it is, honourable minister and then, we build on from there. The committee in charge of local governments, when you are handling budgets for local governments, let local governments also give us their status. Sectoral committees, whichever committee you are handling, let land be one of the issues that you touch on and when the House is processing ministerial policy statements, that is one of the issues we shall be asking you, on the issues of land. How did you find issues of land within the sector you are handling? Thank you. Hon. Mujungu?5.01MR GIDEON MUJUNGU (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the report but there are things that I think this country needs to begin thinking about rightly. I am concerned about the issue of UNRA compensating the Uganda Police Force. The report says in order for UNRA to progress on the flyover down here, they need to acquire 1.2686 acres worth Shs 8.883 billion, payable by UNRA to the Uganda Police Force.Mr Speaker, I am quite aware that both the Uganda Police Force and UNRA are Government entities that draw their resources from the national treasury. In order for UNRA to progress with this road, it needs to raise Shs 8.83 billion payable to the Uganda Police Force. If they do not raise it, given the budget constraints, the road will stall.Isn’t it the right time for this House to advise Government to reconcile accounts without transferring cash? For example, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can cross accounts such that instead of UNRA paying money to the Uganda Police Force, they can just transfer the land from Uganda Police Force to UNRA. I do not see the reason why ministries, departments and agencies of Government have to pay each another yet they draw money from the same source. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, it depends. There are some projects funded by our partners where they will insist – Let me give you an example of how MDAs end up benefitting and a very good example is Makerere University. Makerere University’s roads and new look from the gate and all that came about because it was compensated when they were constructing that road; they took part of the law school land and Makerere University now looks different. Would we have gotten money to give Makerere University to do that?  [Ms Nabakooba] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10839THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023Therefore, some MDAs will want to know whether they will be supported if their land, for example, is taken. What is critical is not to delay the Government project. Otherwise, they can agree to that. In the end, if money for compensation is available, ensure that it is given to an MDA and utilise it well. Our question had been, “How come Kampala City Authority is not constructing roads in Makerere? Isn’t Makerere part of KCCA?” Makerere is a ward in KCCA and it even has councillors in the KCCA Council but the roads have not been worked upon. It is because Makerere refused to give them land then.  In my opinion, this is a policy issue; a Government issue and they know how – Yes, Hon. Namuganza, did you want to update us? MS NAMUGANZA:  Yes, Mr Speaker. It is a Government policy. However, the information I would like to add to your guidance is that some of these projects go through settlements. You will find police structures and police officers utilising that place. Therefore, if you tell the police to remove their officers and they do not have money to resettle them elsewhere, they will not do it. Otherwise, where it is open, we always have a memorandum of understanding saying, “we cannot pay now” and UNRA has always paid later. I beg to submit.5.06MR SETH WAMBEDE (NRM, Northern Division, Mbale City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am perturbed as to who is in charge. For example, you can find a United Nations Agency, (UNAFRI partnering with the Ugandan Government but they later on they divert from what they are supposed to do. Who monitors them? Does the Ministry of Foreign Affairs monitor these UN agencies to establish whether they are doing the right thing? Suppose they are doing illegal things, how do you find out?There may be a hospital project but when you check on the directors, you notice that there is nobody from the Ministry of Health, police and the owners of the land have not held meetings for many years. I have failed to understand who is in charge.Mr Speaker, I feel that agencies like UNAFRI have breached diplomatic conditions and I ask them to close vending. You vend by sub-leasing to somebody else. For instance, they were given 40 years but they have sub-leased to another entity for 99 years. Where did they get the permission? Was it from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or the lands ministry? What authority do they have? I feel that UNAFRI has not served its purpose and objectives. You come and establish a private business on what was supposed to be a partnership with the Ugandan Government. Where have they been remitting their taxes? Has that hospital been remitting taxes? Committee chairperson, I would like you to find that out. We must slap a huge tax bill on that hospital. In any case, it is illegal and it should be closed. It should not be allowed to operate. Why would you allow an illegal entity to operate? It is a private company and they must pay taxes from the start and give us reports on what they have been doing for us to appreciate their role. Less than that, they are illegal – (Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Listening to Hon. Wambede, the report was very beautiful. In all these things, there must be individuals behind. That is the part, which really - most of these things are despicable. You really need to dig deeper. The initial lease also had a purpose.MS NAMUGANZA:  Mr Speaker, like you have rightly said, the Iranian Hospital was established for a purpose. At that time, I was the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development and I was part of the whole program. The Iranian delegation came to meet His Excellency the President three times and it was a big delegation of about 20 people, including security officers, from the Iranian Government.10840STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTOne of the key issues about that Iranian Hospital is that it was supposed to offer free health services to the police officers and their families. The memorandum of understating was very clear. That is why even when the hospital was built, they notified His Excellency the President and he is the one who invited them to come back so he would commission the hospital. Mr Speaker, I wonder - it was not supposed to only be the hospital, some other facilities were supposed to follow. That hospital, as it is now, is incomplete yet it is supposed to be a fully-fledged hospital according to the plan; it is bigger. I think the problem came about when the police leadership changed whereupon Gen. Kale, who was coordinating with H.E the President and us, was removed because I remember –(Interjections) – Yes, I am giving information - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Namuganza, at least the one - You know they are all evil but the Iran Hospital, in terms of land – the one of UNAFRI where that UN agency was given land but started dealing with car dealers and the like -MS NAMUGANZA:  The car dealers on the main road - I am talking about what I know. All that was discussed when we did the police land inventory because His Excellency the President ordered in 2017 that, that police land be re-surveyed. We did the whole inventory and there is a report. Even if you asked the police or the lands ministry, there is that report. That is the time the President decided to purchase Nsambya land from the Catholic Church because the Police had just leased it from the church. However, I was informing the House that communication came in about the change in the police leadership when they were supposed to go to another phase of the hospital and so, it was agreed that they would allow the police to reorganise its administration before the second phase would start. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, they were only comfortable dealing with the police leadership of Gen. Kale.MS NAMUGANZA: No, I think that was before and why they were doing that is because they got communication - because I remember the Iran Chief of Police was here during the process of starting that Iranian Hospital. I think when there were those changes, like any other country would do, like for example, under housing, when the Government of Libya got problems, the memorandum of understanding on housing, which we had with the Libyan Government, was put on hold. It is normal. As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I want to say that if there was a change –(Interjection)- I am just finishing with this one.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, you are the one holding the Floor; do not listen to people on the side. Just submit and conclude.MS NAMUGANZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I am saying is that I cannot just sit in this House and keep quiet when I was part of this. Anyway, according to the report of the committee, if there was a change, the police leadership would have informed His Excellency the President who coordinated all this. I am just hearing new things and I am surprised. I think that is why you were telling the Minister of Foreign Affairs to respond. Mr Speaker, His Excellency the President has always guided us that when we are dealing with an issue that has diplomatic challenges, we should always notify him. He said this when discussions on the issue of South Sudan started. He led us on this and so, I was wondering why the police are reporting that they no longer have control over the hospital; I have not heard about that. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Foreign Affairs, are we proceeding well in terms of handling the UN agencies?[Ms Namuganza] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10841THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 20235.17THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr John Mulimba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Permit me to explain the question you put across; whether United Nations African Institute for Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders (UNAFRI) is a United Nations agency. UNAFRI is a creation of the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. It arose out of a number of resolutions made at the United Nations General Assembly, African Union, and United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) it is those resolutions that led to the creation of this institute. Accordingly, in April 1989, that UNECA resolution created UNAFRI and accepted Uganda to host it. Uganda entered a host agreement between herself and UNAFRI. Therefore, UNAFRI is a full-fledged UN agency. In that host agreement, we stipulated how we granted UNAFRI land. UNAFRI has a governing board composed of members of UNECA. UNAFRI is open to all African member states but as we speak, the statute has been exceeded by 29 member states. The governing board comprises the ministers of foreign affairs of all these countries. The governing board accordingly presides over the management of affairs under UNAFRI. Mr Speaker, to come down to whether we are proceeding well, I think we need to tread very carefully when we go into condemning an institute of the United Nations to which Uganda is a member. Matters of management thereunder can only be questioned in respect of the host agreement, which grants Uganda the conditions and tenure of entry. I would therefore advise - but maybe before I give my advice, the management has been changing hands from among the member states because it was supposed to be rotational. The immediate former leadership was with the Democratic Republic of Congo. On 11 September 2023, Uganda assumed leadership of the management of UNAFRI. I beg that now that Uganda has reassumed the chair of the management of the board of UNAFRI, permit us time, as Ministry of Foreign Affairs which is directly in charge, to delve into these matters, as a member state and as chair of the governing board. We will give information to the member state of Uganda through the Parliament of Uganda and consequently, an information paper to the Cabinet so that all these facts can be dealt with. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, with that guidance – but honourable minister, my only fear is that whereas we have obligations to our partners, we also have obligations to Ugandans and especially this Parliament. However, I want to give you the benefit of the doubt because you have committed and because I see what will end up here with the UN - No, please, when we are dealing with diplomatic agencies, we have to be extremely cautious. That is why I asked the minister to first tell us the diplomatic status of UNAFRI. I know that diplomats are also reprimanded but there are clear channels on how to handle such matters. Honourable minister, we would not be wrong to adopt the report so that you take it to the UNAFRI Governing Council to look at these issues. Would that be wrong? 5.17THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr John Mulimba): Mr Speaker, I have concerns where recommendations are to the effect that we are directing a certain agency, under the Government of Uganda, to deal with another agency over matters of land, which we have already ceded to a United Nations agency. My prayer is that for matters of digression in handling this, permit the Governing Board to look into that and we shall share information. Regarding the recommendations to the effect that government-to-government agencies - we would rather direct the Government to ensure 10842STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthat everything is done in accordance with the law and the attendant MoUs. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our committee chairperson is a diplomat; he has been practicing diplomacy. Committee chairperson, this is your report. Would you like to make a comment? MR KAJWENGYE: Mr Speaker, in doing this, I was representing the committee and Parliament. We have discharged our duty, as a committee of Parliament. Some matters of policy are within the realm of the ministry. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am appealing to that part of you. (Laughter)  You know we have to take advantage of the expertise we have in the House. MR KAJWENGYE: Absolutely. In fact, one other highly restricted profession is diplomatic practice. You do not flout the laws of the host state. (Applause)  If you do, you are reprimanded. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the host government holds the key all the time. I am happy that he has committed to this Parliament that he is going to take action. Otherwise, as far as the committee recommendations are concerned, we have discharged our duty. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo - (Laughter) - he has been in the corridors of power on such matters so, we will take advantage. 5.24MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the record, I am also an expert and a scholar as well as a philosopher of international law. Mr Speaker, diplomatic immunity is a creature of a statute and treaty and has obligations and privileges. Even when you breach or offend the obligations, the treaty lays down the mechanisms on how you are dealt with. It cannot be by municipal authorities – municipal to mean “national authorities”, in total disregard of our international commitments. I submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. With that, honourable colleagues, I have picked a very important point that you have privileges and immunities but you also have obligations. As Parliament, we also have obligations. The middle point will be for me to put the question for the adoption because submissions can spoil this. Hon. Abdu Katuntu, do you want to guide us on the same?5.25MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo should have reminded himself and the House that there is a senior colleague. (Laughter)  First, I would like to know the view of the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development on what the committee has found out. Are you hearing of it for the first time? If so, then there is a problem with the ministry. Secondly, the most important thing is that this country is governed by our Constitution and laws. However, when a diplomat breaches that law, there is another process of handling it, not necessarily the normal constitutional process. That is why even when a diplomat commits a criminal offence, you have to plead with the embassy to lift the immunity. I think the Minister of Foreign Affairs was right. What we can do is to refer this matter to the Minister of Foreign Affairs with a demand that he reports to us on the action they have taken. We do not have to make specific recommendations as to what should happen with the breaches, but refer the matter to the ministry, pending its report to us. At that point, we can then decide, one way or the other. We do not want to appear like we are breaching the law. First of all, I do not know what the host agreement says. Did the committee have the opportunity to look at it? [Mr Mulimba] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT10843THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to ask the chairperson whether they engaged UNAFRI. What did they say? Did they invoke diplomatic immunity? MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, they cannot engage the diplomat. There are again other channels they would have used; like going through the foreign affairs ministry. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Katuntu, we have ever done this. I remember when we were handling the Uganda Telecommunications Corporation Limited probe, we engaged the Libyan Government through the embassy. We wrote to the foreign affairs ministry, which arranged for a meeting at the ministry. That is the kind of engagement I am talking about. MR KATUNTU: Without saying that you are summoning them? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.MR KATUNTU: The committee should have studied that host agreement to find out whether UNAFRI actually breached the host agreement. As of now, I am not sure whether the committee looked at the host agreement. If they did not, it leaves a bit of a gap on what extent we can go to recommend. Assuming what we recommend now is contrary to what was in the host agreement, it puts the treaty and us in a very bad state.Mr Speaker, I would like to plead with honourable colleagues that while we are aware of our obligation to our country, let us also follow the international standards on handling diplomatic issues. Therefore, I suggest that we shelve that particular matter and go ahead to talk about other issues that are not related.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even the matter relating the Iran Government would be treated in the same way. MR KATUNTU: Can I make one comment? Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, Uganda’s land is not elastic; it is inelastic. The population of this country is increasing. The food, which we must feed this population on, has to increase on that land. The housing, which has to house the people, must also increase. This issue of land is at a crisis. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Hon. Nabakooba, you need to seriously take note. The population is increasing, demand on the land is increasing, both for housing and food production. Let me give you an example, Mr Speaker. The chairperson of the committee has told us that cases against the Uganda Land Commission alone are 418. I would like to tell you that even if the Uganda Land Commission was to lose only 50 per cent of those cases, you do not know the effect in terms of money; we are in real trouble. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us conclude on this. Honourable colleagues, with that guidance, allow me to make my ruling on the matter. I listened to the chairperson; he referred to the host agreement as one of the documents he read. It will be difficult for us to engage the minister to follow-up a matter and take action when we have not adopted it, because what would be the basis? Rule 220 on action-taken reports does not say, “you must”; one can only do what is possible. Therefore, once the House has adopted, honourable minister, on reporting back, you will tell us that “here it was possible because of A, B, C and D; here, I could not do it because the host agreement does not allow it; and here, I sorted out these matters under the framework provided for under the host agreement.” Moreover, resolutions of this nature are recommendations; they are not mandatory.MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I agree with your guidance. However, I will still plead with you because in the meeting of 11 September, we campaigned, very aggressively, to regain 10844STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthe chairpersonship of the Governing Board of United Nations African Institute for Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders (UNAFRI). My perusal of the host agreement shows that what is contained here - I would like to say the following – (Interruption) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister speak, these are very sensitive matters. MR MULIMBA: UNAFRI did not and has not breached the host agreement in all those actions that have been elucidated – (Interjections) - yes, there is no breach whatsoever. We studied this agreement very carefully and compared it with the resolutions of the governing council because all these actions were under the command of the governing council, which is the Council of Ministers of all the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) member countries who have subscribed to the statute. There was no breach of the host agreement. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did the Council of Ministers agree that you lease to car dealers? MR MULIMBA: Yes, they gave a mandate. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it the Council of Ministers? MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, the host agreement was so open that they permitted the governing council to source for funding beyond the funding provided by the General Assembly and therefore, they preferred, in their wisdom, to sublease part of the land, which had been ceded. The reason Uganda, as a host, has campaigned to reclaim the chairpersonship is to correct some of the internal issues. However, I would like to concur with what Hon. Abdu Katuntu has said that the mechanisms for mitigation cannot be by one partner state; it must be as provided for under the statute. We hope that under our leadership as a host, we will get there. I submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the management and utilisation of Uganda Police Force land in selected areas in Kampala be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, under Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure, you will bring an action-taken report to explain all these issues. Thank you. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE 25TH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION FOR THE YEAR 2022 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Fox Odoi, we have had this report for long. Therefore, make a summary; the Hansard  shall capture the full report for future reference. 5.36MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County. Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I present the report, permit me to lay on the Table, the following – (Interruption) MR KATUNTU:  Mr Speaker, the record should show that it has captured the report first then Hon. Fox Odoi can do the summary. It should not the other way around. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Mr Speaker, permit me to lay on the Table a report of the Committee on Human Rights on the 25th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the year 2022.  I also beg to lay on the Table minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Human Rights during the consideration of the 25th [Mr Mulimba]10845THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the year 2022.  The committee report is a 94-page document with two annexures. Permit me to highlight only the first 14 pages because they deal with the issues that the Uganda Human Rights Commission raised in respect of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. These recommendations have far-reaching implications on all matters of human rights. I will go to page 8 of the report. Recommendation one: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should prioritise support for the Kalangala Oil Project to boost domestic production of palm oil and its alternatives to reduce the country’s dependence on imports.Government reported that it is committed to continue supporting oil palm project production in Kalangala. To date, palm oil smallholder farmers have been supported to establish 5,891 hectares of oil palm, exceeding the original target of 4,700 hectares. The Government reported that this intervention has reduced Uganda crude palm import by approximately US$ 30 million per annum.The committee recommends that the scope of the Kalangala oil palm project should be reviewed and expanded, given its role in the import substitution.Recommendation two: the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Works and Transport, as well as the Ministry of Science and Technology, should, as a long-term measure, fast-track investment in electric transport to reduce dependency on fossil fuel. Government remains committed towards the investment in electric transportation to reduce dependency on fuel through Kiira Motors Corporation (KMC). In the FY 2023/2024, Shs 20 billion has been appropriated to KMC to support them through their commercialisation phase. The committee recommends that KMC should be supported with more funding to expedite the transition to the commercialisation phase. Recommendation three: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase funding to the Uganda Police Force to facilitate it in the construction of decent offices with the requisite facilities and amenities that are in line with human rights standards on police stations, the provision of adequate equipment, supplies and dissemination of laws to all personnel. The Government of Uganda reported that it is committed to providing decent offices for police stations with requisite equipment, facilities and amenities, in line with international policing standards. The committee recommends that the Uganda Police Force should be availed with adequate resources, in a phased manner, to facilitate the construction of decent offices for police stations with requisite equipment, facilities and amenities across the country.Recommendation four: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail sufficient funding to all districts so that they can adequately respond to environmental crises. The Government’s position was that the overall budget for environment across all local governments was enhanced from Shs 700 million in the Financial Year 2020/2021 to Shs 3.5 billion in Financial Year 2021/2022 and Financial Year 2022/2023. Shs 4 billion was provided to local governments in the budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024 to cater for environment related interventions. In addition, local governments can allocate funds from their respective unconditional grants for the same purpose. The committee recommends the timely release of funds to enable all local governments to respond to environment-related interventions. 10846STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTRecommendation 5: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that all ministries, departments, agencies (MDAs) and local governments have specific budgets for gender equality and social inclusion, including women empowerment as per the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reported that they are in conjunction with the Equal Opportunities Commission, which issues the Gender and Equity Certificate to each qualifying MDA after a thorough analysis of their budget. This was work in progress. The committee recommends a budgetary increase for gender equality and social inclusion of the following categories: children, older persons and persons with disabilities. Recommendation 6: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate and release adequate financial resources to clear the pending pension arrears and regularly allocate, and release adequate financing to the public service pension schemes, going forward. Mr Speaker, the Government reported that Shs 38.8 billion has been provided for in the budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024 to cater for verified pension and gratuity arrears. The committee recommends that accounting officers should prioritise the timely payment of pensions. All pension arrears should be cleared. Recommendation 7: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should prioritise budgetary allocations to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries (MAAIF) to ensure the sufficient investment in agriculture to help with information gathering and research, thereby contributing to development. The budget for MAAIF has increased from Shs 564.4 billion in the Financial Year 2022/2023 to Shs 1,030.994 billion in the Financial Year 2023/2024. The funds will be geared towards supporting the mechanisation of agriculture, the establishment of irrigation facilities and supporting PDM interventions in local governments, among others, in order to increase agricultural production across the country. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also reported that it has supported MAAIF through the Agricultural Cluster Development Project to establish the National Food and Agricultural Statistical System (NFASS), to ensure that agricultural data is reliable, timely, consistent, disaggregated and accessible to facilitate planning and decision making. NFASS has been piloted in five districts of Nebbi, Amuru, Iganga, Kalungu and Ntungamo and is being rolled out to five subregions of Lango, Karamoja, Bukedi, Teso and Elgon. The committee recommends the timely release of funds to enable the ministry and other stakeholders to effectively implement the planned activities as per their work plan. Recommendation 8: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should effectively fund remand homes. The Government reported that funds have been allocated in the budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024 to fund the activities of remand homes. Recommendation 9: The Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development should sufficiently fund the Uganda Human Rights Commission so that it can pay competitive wages to its staff and address the challenge of high staff turnover. The Uganda Human Rights Commission has sufficient wage allocation for staff in post – this is what the Government reported. Salary enhancement awaits a comprehensive review of salaries across government entities. [Mr Odoi-Oywelowo]10847THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023Further, the Government reported that salary enhancement was suspended by one year for the Financial Year 2023/2024 and the implementation of the comprehensive salary enhancement plan will commence effective Financial Year 2024/2025, as per the 2nd Budget-call circular, page 3(iv) issued on 15 February 2023. Recommendation 10: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate funds to Uganda Human Rights Commission to acquire at least 43 new vehicles and maintain the existing fleet. The Government reported that in the Financial Year 2021/2022, the Uganda Human Rights Commission was allocated an additional Shs 1 billion specifically for the procurement of motor vehicles. A significant allocation to the procurement of vehicles was also maintained in the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023. The Government further reported, that vehicle purchase was frozen in the Financial Year 2023/2024, with the exception of the purchase of hospital ambulances, vehicles for medical supplies and distribution, agricultural extension services, security and revenue mobilisation (Refer to the 2nd budget-call circular on page 4 (vi)). Recommendation 11: The Uganda Human Rights Commission should be allocated funds to acquire speed boats for two field offices (Buvuma and Kalangala) based on the islands. The Government reported that this will be considered in the medium term. In the meantime, the V ote could utilise transport means provided by the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Works and Transport. Recommendation 12: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should sufficiently fund the Uganda Human Rights Commission so that it stops depending on donor funding for the execution of its core activities. Over the years, the Uganda Human Rights Commission has been supported to cover the gap created by the exit of donors. For example, funds were provided to absorb into the structure, the staff previously facilitated by donors. This information is in the second budget-call circular number 14, page 3. Recommendation 13: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make budgetary provisions for capital development to construct the Uganda Human Rights Commission Headquarters and regional office premises. The Government reported that the construction of new offices was halted, awaiting the finalisation of a Government campus. Only allocations for ongoing commitments under the multi-year projects and retooling projects have been provided. This information is in the second budget-call circular (page 4) (ix).Recommendation 14: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide adequate funding for Uganda Human Rights Commission to invest sufficiently in Information Communications and Technology (ICT). This includes affordable internet of appropriate speed, equipment, software and applications to support case management, human rights education and monitoring. The Government reported that Uganda Human Rights Commission has an annual budget allocation of Shs 276 million for ICT. The Government committed that additional resources shall be considered in the medium term. Recommendation 15: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase budgetary allocations for the health sector in line with the Abuja Declaration to improve the health needs of all citizens, specifically, including women. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reported that they are aware that in April 2001, the heads of State of the African Union pledged to set a target of 10848STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTallocating 15 per cent of their annual budget to improve the health sector. The health sub-programme budget has been increased in nominal as well as in percentage terms. In the Financial Year 2021/2022, the allocation had reached 14 per cent. Government enhanced the salaries of scientists, mainly the medical personnel. This will push the ratio even higher. Government also reported that in the medium term, given the change in focus in the National Development Plan III to prioritise enhancing the productivity and social well-being of the population in the country, more investment is expected in the sector in the medium term. In the budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024, Government has prioritised the human capital development programme to which the health sub-sector belongs. Starting with the Financial Year 2023/2024, Government is committed to annually increasing the budget for antiretroviral treatment by Shs 50 billion per annum. The committee recommends the provision of adequate funds to the health sector as per the Abuja Declaration to enable the sector improve the health needs of the citizens. Recommendation 16: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide adequate funding to the National Environmental Management Authority to maintain and sustain early warning systems where applicable. The Government reported that the total budget for V ote 150 for National Environmental Management Authority has been increased from Shs 18.943 billion in the Financial Year 2022/2023, to Shs 41.360 billion, in the Financial Year 2023/2024 to facilitate recruitment of additional staff and strengthening environmental protection. The committee recommends that this should be done. Recommendation 17: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should increase funding to provide adequate accommodation to police officers - Mr Speaker, there is a long narrative that follows; I will try to summarise it. In the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provided Shs 26.212 billion for the following:i. The construction of seven accommodation blocks - 10 units per block - in the districts of Nakasongola, Sheema, Busolwe, Mitooma, Kanungu, Kakumiro, Katwe-Kabatoro and Ntungamo;ii. Completed the construction and commissioned seven blocks, a total of 420 housing units of the Naguru Apartments;iii. Construction of Kira Division staff  apartments, 24 units is at 80 per cent; iv. Erected and installed 5,410 double-occupancy uniports out of 6,446; a total of 84 per cent across the country; andv. Constructed 45 housing units, five units each block, in Butebo, Bukwo, Namisindwa, Amudat, Alebtong, Nabilatuk, Karenga, Kwania and Obongi, pending commissioning. In the budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024, the budget for residential buildings is Shs 26.412 billion, a slight increase of Shs 0.2 billion from the level of Financial Year 2022/2023.The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give special consideration to the development budget of Uganda Police Force. Mr Speaker, by way of summary, permit me to state the following – that the report captures recommendations in respect to:i. The Ministry of Water and Environment (page 21);ii. The Petroleum Authority of Uganda, (page 23);iii. The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (page 23);[Mr Odoi-Oywelowo]10849THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023iv. Ministry of Foreign Affairs (page 29);v. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development (page 32);vi. Ministry of Education and Sports (page 41);vii. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (page 46);viii. The Parliament of Uganda (page 49);ix. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs (page 51);x. Ministry of Health (page 54);xi. Office of the President - the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity (page 57);xii. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (page 60);xiii. Uganda Bureau of Statistics (page 67);xiv. The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs (page 69);xv. The Courts of Judicature (page 79);xvi. Ministry of Internal Affairs (page 80);xvii. Uganda Prisons Service (page 82);xviii. Uganda Police Force (page 83); xix. Ugandan National Oil Company (page 93); andxx. Conclusions (page 94).Mr Speaker, permit me to encourage my colleagues to read the report. I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson. The report was uploaded long time ago, so it has been with us. If there are those who expected to read the report as he reads, they will be disappointed. I open up the debate. Okay, let us hear from: Hon. Agnes Apea, Hon. Midius Natukunda, Hon. Opio, Hon. Teira, Hon. Okot-Ogong, Hon. Martin Muzaale, Hon. Kaberuka, Hon. Tonny Ayoo, Hon. Betty Engola, Hon. Kagwera, Hon. Dr Achia, Hon. Enosi Asiimwe, Hon. Dr Bhoka and Hon. Edakasi - please, I mentioned your name so I do not need to go back. 6.01MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and committee chairperson for the well-elaborate report. However, I am a bit concerned that the recommendations being made by the Human Rights Commission Report on action taken reports by MDAs propose more funding and building administration blocks, and so on. In my view, these are not anywhere near human rights-based approaches to programming and implementation. For example, under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, there has been grave abuse of human rights and brutality against the fishermen on the lakes. These issues have been raised - people have been killed, children have been raped, and people’s property has been destroyed, but the Committee on Human Rights stands up to propose more funding to buy motor boats and build administration blocks? In my view, the report and the issues we discuss here need to have the face of the people we represent. In fact, some of us are here today because we read the Order Paper and noticed that a human rights report would be read on the Floor. If anyone listened to us carefully, we would be taken as failing to focus on some of these issues.Secondly, this report could have also helped us to raise issues of inequality and vulnerability of our people and country. Given that the report was looking across ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) in this country, every department needed to identify some of those human rights-based issues that need to be 10850STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTaddressed. However, I am afraid that the report has turned to lobbying for funding. All the recommendations are about funding. What this country wants to see is the position of the Government on how to address human rights abuses in this country. (Applause)  I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I have a problem. It seems you did not read the report. What Hon. Fox Odoi has said here is what you seem to consider as the full report. The report is 98 pages and he has just made a summary. Otherwise, when you look through it, you will notice that there are several recommendations on many aspects. If you limit yourself to what Hon. Fox Odoi has talked about here – he emphasised it at the beginning – can I have order in the House?Hon. Fox Odoi emphasised this part as an enabler for the Uganda Human Rights Commission in the preservation of human rights and solving some issues. Otherwise, there are clear cases that have been captured. The report has been with us, so, honourable colleagues, do not debate while peaking to only matters on pages 8-14, but up to page 98.  6.05MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee chairperson for the report. In regard to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development’s programme targeting the youth so as to tackle unemployment and underemployment, the report, on page 37, talks about the Presidential initiative on skilling the girl-child project, which was started in 2017 with an aim of skilling females in hands-on skills in tailoring, catering, and other skills. However, as far as I know, this Presidential initiative on skilling targets all youth regardless of gender, and it is based on subregions. I would like the committee chairperson to clarify whether these are two different Presidential initiatives; one for girls and another targeting all the youths because at recruitment, affirmative action is not considered. They choose whoever qualifies and not base it on gender. Are these different projects or it is the same? I thank you.6.07DR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and committee for the report, most especially that it has not only focused on political and civil rights but has also gone into a new approach towards looking at the environment, climate and other areas.However, I emphasise that as much as we look at the practices, we need to look at the threats to human rights in Uganda. When you consider what happened when we passed the Anti-Homosexuality Act 2023, a lot of sanctions have come in and all that is on the basis of aspects of human rights. It is important that, as a country, we put our foot down. I have looked at reports about our country from the United States, for example, and they mention Uganda as a violator of human rights, yet we are upholding our values. It is important that it comes out strongly. It is also important because, on the 15th of next month, more than 107 Heads of State are supposed to gather in Samoa to sign what is known as the Post-Contonou Agreement. This is an agreement between the African Caribbean Pacific and the European Union, and it has provisions that; de-criminalise homosexuality, call for abortion, call for the LGBTQ promotion itself and teaching our children comprehensive sexuality education. I thought that this is something that needed to have come out strongly and that the Minister of Foreign Affairs would be here to respond as to whether Uganda would be a signatory to that because these are fundamental issues that need to be addressed as a country. Otherwise, we may be seen as not having considered the salient issues that affect our sovereignty in the report. I thank you.[Ms Atim]10851THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 20236.09MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli):  Thank You, Mr Speaker. Today, you started on a very good note by creating an arena for the implementation, especially of matters concerning the budget. In the same vein, a good report as comprehensive as this and probably the first of its kind on the Floor makes amazing recommendations that are important. However, we have always fallen short of follow-ups on the implementation of most of the recommendations in the reports.Mr Speaker, just as you guided us on how we should approach budgeting, we should have a very clear stand on the implementation of most of the recommendations that we make in these reports. The issue of failure to pay pension, for example, has surfaced in many different reports on different fora. The dignity of the country is mainly visible in how it respects respect the elderly, but you see these old people going to banks and ATM machines every month and they find no money. They are called to the Ministry of Public Service time and again. Some stride to these offices until they go to the next life without receiving payment, yet we make amazing recommendations in this House. Secondly, as we were growing up, we respected the Government partly by virtue of its infrastructure. When you went to a Government hospital, it would shine and you would tell that that is a Government facility. The report did not use the actual words we are supposed to use, to describe the state of the infrastructure of most of the Government entities, especially the Police. Mr Speaker, closer to us, the residences of our police officers are alarming. We need to find a real solution that draws back the reputation and dignity of the Government, that it has held time immemorial. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Teira raises a critical point, and we are looking into all these issues. Another point is of post-legislative scrutiny. We pass laws here but you may find that even after 10 years, the regulations have never been made to implement that law, yet you sat here and burnt the midnight oil to pass such a law. These are the issues we are designing mechanisms for, to ensure that we follow up. For example, the issue you talked about; I have seen a recommendation in the report stopping the bucket system in prisons but how are we going to ensure that indeed, the bucket system is stopped. How are we going to provide an alternative in terms of financing? These are issues we have to look into deeply. Yes, Hon. Okot-Ogong, and then Hon. Kaberuka. 6.12MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I thank my brother, Hon. Fox Odoi, for that wonderful presentation. I have some issues to raise concerning human rights. Mr Speaker, our people supported the Government in fighting the Kony rebellion. We recruited Amuka boys and girls who worked tirelessly together with the UPDF. I was their overall commander, and they did a good job - (Interjection) -  together - and Hon. Obua, the minister, was my escort.  (Laughter) I want to assure you that he is a wonderful escort.  (Laughter)  Mr Speaker, close to 20,000 of our boys, who heeded to the Government call to support the efforts of UPDF have been demanding for some support; a thank you from the President. It was promised and pledged by the President but up to now, they are demanding. I think this is also an issue of human rights – because they worked but have not been paid; economic rights – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but that issue goes to the Committee of Government Assurances.10852STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMR OKOT-OGONG:  Yes, the matter falls under the Committee of Government Assurances but they did their job and they have never been paid. Secondly, cases are lying in the courts; they have never been handled. Justice delayed is justice denied; this is an abuse of human rights. This issue must also be captured. You take your case; but nothing. Another human rights issue relates to access to medicine and medical attention. People in the villages have no access to medicine. The Government supplies medicine worth Shs 1.4 million for three months but for the rest of the months, people cannot access medicine. This is a matter of human rights, because we work for people and we must support them. This is another form of human rights abuse. Money is spent on other issues, but when it comes to giving people access to medicine and medication, it is lacking. We appeal to the Human Rights Committee to address these issues. The other point relates to domestic violence. We want clear records on domestic violence. This is happening every day in our area, and the records are there at the police stations. These cases are reported, but never handled. You have heard of the issue that was raised about a young girl; it was reported but the matter was swept under the carpet. This is happening everywhere, even in your constituency. As Members of Parliament, we demand that the Committee on Human Rights steps up its game, because its mandate is clearly stated in our Rules of Procedure of Parliament: to track how human rights matters are being handled in the country. Lastly, I appeal to this Parliament: our people have demanded for animal and cattle compensation for ages. Our animals were taken but we have never got any redress from the Government. We have always been promised that something is going to be done but nothing has been done. Last year the President promised, when he was campaigning, that the Government would give Shs 150 billion, but up to now nothing has been given. How can the President of a party of NRM, a great party – (Interruptions) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Point of order. Is he violating your rights?MR OSEKU: With due respect to Hon. Okot-Ogong, Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda, first of all, accepted to undertake compensation to those people who lost their livestock. In the Financial Year 2021/2022, a total of Shs 50 billion was provided for and released for the Acholi, Lango and the Teso sub-regions. In the Financial Year 2022/2023, an allocation of Shs 30 billion was made. Unfortunately, there was no release. Therefore, is it in order for Hon. Okot-Ogong to mislead the House that there has never been anything allocated? Wouldn’t he rather ask the Government to expedite the process instead of saying nothing has been done? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okot-Ogong, I took it that you meant, it is not being done expeditiously, and that the compensation is not sufficient. So, maybe clarify; if I got you right? MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, thanks for your wise ruling. It is important to have a wise person amongst us. That is exactly what I meant.  (Laughter)   We have been promised, but the payment is not being expedited. The money is put in the budget but never released. Therefore, my prayer is that Government should expedite that process because justice delayed is justice denied. Government, in terms of human rights, these are human beings who lost their assets; please pay them. Thank you. 6.19MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have read this report, and I thank Hon. Fox Odoi for presenting the report he read; it restricts itself to the 25th Annual Report 10853THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023of the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the year 2022. Mr Speaker, alluding to what you guided, the report, on the issues in the agriculture ministry, does not talk about the problems in the fisheries sector; they are not captured by the Human Rights Commission. This is not an accountability committee, which is supposed to interrogate the performance of that commission.Mr Speaker, it is high time the Committee on Human Rights interrogates further to serve this Parliament with information regarding how human rights are being handled by the Uganda Human Rights Commission.When we look at this report, it is generic in nature. When we talk about Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOs) and looking at how we are handling people, the outcries of these unanswered questions would have been captured such that we put the country at rest. By having these palm oil issues, does not really answer the critical matters.Going forward, I urge this committee to interrogate further and the commission to do more work for this Government because there are a lot of things being done by the Government but they are not reported. I have observed an issue on human rights, especially the one concerning pension. My primary school teacher ended up being a principal of a PTC, but for the seven years after he retired, he has never got even a single penny. I am happy that he has echoed it. How do we compel the Government to make sure that these elderly citizens are catered for? Mr Speaker, you and I share the same problem of human-wildlife conflict. Our people are being killed and there is no compensation at all. How do we reach out to the families? We are reaping a lot of money from these wildlife gazetted areas – the other day four people were killed in my constituency and no attention was paid to them. How do we reach out to them? Can human rights organisation reach out to them and find out why the Uganda Wildlife Authority together with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities are not responding? We have workers across these MDAs. The President said that the salaries of scientists should be enhanced but the artists and arts teachers are also working. Have we thought about how we can also remunerate them to appreciate their service? I have received calls from my constituents; medical people who are working in the prisons, saying that they are still on old salaries. The committee should also reach out to the prisons department and know why they have not enhanced their salaries.Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to thank Hon. Odoi-Oywelowo for the report. I thought that he had put the other things, but now, they are indicating that things are normal.  (Laughter)6.24MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report is very comprehensive and it gives a picture of a desired Uganda. However, Mr Speaker, you know that the challenge in our country is to do with the finances. If you look at the report, it has captured almost every aspect of human rights but money is still the problem. However, there are some areas that are very critical. Our brothers are held in prisons for very long and the reason is that there are no judges and the CID office is not properly equipped. I request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to at least facilitate these departments; the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Judiciary and the Uganda Police Force, especially the Crime Intelligence Department, is very key. In Uganda today, our people are unable to defend their rights. This morning, I had a very funny experience. I had just parked on the 10854STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTstreets of Kampala for about three minutes. Some people jumped out of their pickup car and clamped my car. The reason was that they were demanding me money. I never received any message that they were demanding me money for parking fees; not even a notification in terms of a warning that I should pay. They gave me a receipt demanding for Shs 52,000but the fine was Shs 40,000. I was held for two hours to sort out that problem. However, if I was given an opportunity that they demand me this amount of money, I would have paid them rather than wasting my time and also fining me Shs 40,000. If the Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs is here, we wish to understand the manner in which Multiplex Limited is doing its business. It is very unfair. I found another Ugandan lady crying because of a similar scenario and they were demanding her Shs 6,000. They clamped her car and fined her Shs 40,000. This is improper. Mr Speaker, there are many areas of gross violation of human rights in this country because some Ugandans are voiceless and they cannot run anywhere. In our police stations, we need further training of our police officers. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, the point raised by Hon. Muzaale is key but we should also be conscious of our responsibility; we all know that if you park within KCCA, you must pay. The day you drive out without paying, you are accumulating problems.The method might be crude but we should also be conscious of our responsibilities. I have had situations whereby you look for these guys to pay for parking but you do not find them. Sometimes you park for long and they go without clearing you.Nevertheless, we have obligations. I do not want us to have a record here that in Parliament, when someone fails to pay, their car is clamped and then they go to Parliament, complain and they summon a minister to explain why a car of an MP was clamped. We shall be sending a very wrong message, as a House. - Do not mind honourable, I know you will follow up that matter with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 6.29MR RONALD AFIDRA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in thanking the Committee on Human Rights. Today, we have seen how our Parliament operates in the different committees, because of the inclusiveness of the report. I know this House has deliberated on the issues of human rights and when you look at Article 23 of our Constitution, it stipulates a lot of areas that cover human rights. Today, I agree with the committee that we have a competent House that you are presiding over as our Speaker.  (Applause) That said, I would like to address my mind to page 93 of the report, which talks about employment opportunities in the oil companies that we have established in this country. The report clearly states the disparities and inequalities that this country is seeing in the oil sector.According to the report, “The central region has about 36.64 per cent of employment in the oil sector in this country, the northern region - where I come from - has only 6.8 per cent, eastern region has 12.98 per cent and western region is 43.5 per cent.”When I talk about the inclusiveness of this report, it is a huge report with all the details that this country needs and I would like to appeal to the Government to critically look into the key recommendations of this report.Once the recommendations are implemented by the Government - in the areas of unemployment and inequitable employment opportunities in this country, creating a disparity that can be seen, brings key issues for us, as a country. My region is lagging behind. Yet the northern region had a say in the formation of this [Mr Muzaale]10855THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023government because we voted overwhelmingly to bring back the National Resistance Movement Government to power. Therefore, seeing disparity in employment becomes questionable for us. So, I urge the government to particularly look into that report and bring us on board.Secondly, before this, we were debating on the issue on the land commission, including the Uganda Police Force. There is again another section with the Uganda Police Force in this report; we have deliberated on this Floor in regards to the actions of the Uganda Police Force in providing their mandated right - which is to keep law and order.Above all, the Minister of Internal Affairs has often come on the Floor, urging us, as Members of Parliament, to support Uganda Police Force. Therefore, this report has equally brought 17 recommendations to enhance how our police force should be supported by this Parliament.One of them is on infrastructure. We all know that infrastructure is alarming in most of the police stations though the government is doing some work. However, they have recommended for the establishment of infrastructure. Today we deliberated on the land report where we said that the Uganda Police Force land is to be compensated by Uganda National Road Authority to a tune of about Shs 26 billion - If I added up the Shs 8.8 billion plus the Shs 17 billion.The recommendation of that report said that the Uganda Police Force will invest this money in the infrastructure. Therefore, we have some source of revenue to enhance the infrastructure of the Uganda Police Force and to support the recommendation that the Government within its agencies has some resources. Therefore, I urge Parliament to support us that compensation be given by UNRA so that the money can be invested and close the gaps.Mr Speaker, allow me to make a simple appeal. Matters of human rights are universal and it cuts across all. Hon. Okot-Ogong talked about compensation which is a right to all Ugandans and includes cattle. West Nile equally lost cattle and the Government has put a budget to compensate other regions unlike the West Nile region. I would like to appeal to the Government that as matters of human rights are universal, include West Nile in the budget of the compensation of cattle, tobacco and what is due for them so that we can be able to move forward. Mr Speaker - (Interruption)DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Member, for yielding the Floor. I would like to inform the Member that the issue of cattle compensation has been extensively discussed in Cabinet, particularly, focusing on Acholi, Lango and Teso.During the last discussion, the President directed that assessment be done for West Nile and Karamoja so that they can be compensated -(Interjections)-  Have you heard what I said? The President directed that in addition to Acholi, Lango and Teso, that West Nile and Karamoja also be assessed for compensation. So, West Nile is being considered as well as other regions like Bukedi and parts of eastern Uganda.The concern was that the need for compensation is not limited to those three subregions of Acholi, Lango and Teso. So, work is being undertaken to assess the compensation needs in those areas.MR AFIDRA:  Thank you, honourable minister for that good information from Cabinet - that inclusiveness in this country is being considered by His Excellency the President. We do hope that as a House, once you present it, I would like to appeal to all Members to support the Government when it comes with an additional budget for this kind of compensation.10856STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I was consulting with Hon. Afidra - when we are discussing – and also when the committee is making the reports, we should be cautious. For example, on the oil and gas sector which Hon. Afidra talked about, they were assessing Uganda National Oil Company (UNOC), which is a trading company.I think UNOC represents around 10 per cent - or it might not even be 10 percent - of the jobs in the oil and gas sector. The message it sends here - which I expected him to talk about – because we talked about it here the other day. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I hope you took up the matter because I even called the Prime Minister over the same, I also called the chairman UNOC about the issue of scholarships which they were giving that came here on the Floor and it was being limited to Bunyoro and yet there is a lot of oil in Nwoya. They made an announcement in public newspapers, giving scholarships to one side and leaving out the other side. These are things which cause unnecessary problems. So, we agreed that the Prime Minister should meet UNOC to address these issues. They might appear small but they hold very deep sentiments because the oil that is in Nwoya - and when you look at the developments - when I asked the Ministry of Energy they said that they are going to build an agricultural institute in Nwoya. I asked; “You mean that you cannot do anything in Nwoya related to oil?” you want to drill the oil and build agriculture and yet in other areas you - Investments to do with oil are very heavy and they help. So let us go back and reflect.I am giving caution to Government to go back and reflect. If these people are saying that you are taking out Total, I think the biggest wells are in Nwoya. That kind of sentiment, when it comes out -Honourable member, I wanted to correct the record clearly that this is not the oil and gas sector; it is on Uganda National Oil Company. If you studied the whole oil and gas sector, then you would find that the picture is different. Hon. Tonny Ayoo – I had already picked the Members to speak. Hon. Joyce, did I pick you? No. Hon. Tonny Ayoo and then Hon. Betty Engola. 6.40MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the report they have presented. It is comprehensive. Mr Speaker, we all live in this country. For the issues that have been raised by the committee, we live with them and we can confirm that they are true. If you want to talk about deprivation in terms of health services, they are inadequate and, in some areas, people die when they are not supposed to. When you talk about education services, they are inadequate. Here, you even have schools that raise fees very high and the Government does nothing, depriving many people of the opportunity to study.Mr Speaker, they have talked about police, where you find two adults with their spouses and children living in one uniport. Now, imagine what happens to the rights of these children. Two families!My concern is that if we do not take any action, as Parliament, we shall continue to complain. Where is the problem that is causing the continued deprivation of rights of citizens in the country? I have looked at two things that we need to look at more critically. Firstly, we are having a lot of impunity and lack of accountability by duty-bearers who are supposed to serve the people and protect them. Secondly, we lack resources and corruption is causing us to lose a lot of money that we could have used to solve the problems that we are talking about. 10857THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023Talk about the roads. In Uganda, a kilometre of murram road is from Shs 20 million and above, yet in other places, a kilometre of road could be constructed at about Shs 10 million or less. Therefore, we need to call upon the Government to take responsibility, make people accountable and stop impunity. This is why people go missing and investigation becomes difficult - because somebody takes a bribe.The Auditor-General gave a report that out of the budget of Shs 45 trillion the other year, Shs 11 trillion went to corruption and no value for money. This is why we find it difficult. We could be able to build houses, from that Shs 11 trillion, for police. We could be able to build more hospitals, facilitate police to do investigations and facilitate the Judiciary. We would be able to ensure that we have enough drugs and that better hospitals are built in the country. Mr Speaker, Parliament must hold the Government accountable to ensure that the duty-bearers account. Look at PDM; The Government is spending Shs 100 million in a parish to ensure that the local people get out of poverty. However, you find that a parish chief or the chairperson of the SACCO in the parish, because of lack of accountability and impunity, are demanding money from the people and they are giving them half of the amount. Instead of Shs 1 million, they are giving them Shs 500,000 and Shs 200,000 to some.This is where this report should open our eyes. We should hold the Government accountable so that we save money which is going to corruption and do more work so that – (Member timed out.)MR TONNY AYOO: This is so that those who have been given the responsibility do the right thing. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, we do not hijack the microphone. (Laughter)  Honourable colleagues, of late I have been testing you, to see how much time you can use. I have not been giving you two minutes or three minutes. Some of you use five, others use one while others use two. I am trying to get an average because I see there is where we reach and start repeating ourselves. Let us be considerate about the time. If you can police yourselves, the better.Hon. Betty Engola? (Members rose)  Honourable colleagues, I picked all those who stood up at the beginning. So, if you came late or made up your mind later –(Laughter)-  let me first sort out the honourable colleagues whom I had picked.6.45MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. The committee came out with 17 very good recommendations, which are all very important. The committee raises hope for the people who are listening out there because the recommendations are to solve the problems and issues therein. People are listening and in the report there are issues – the list is long. They mentioned vehicles to be purchased, salary increments, offices and so forth. People are waiting. Mr Speaker, this is my concern – because I know there are also other recommendations from other committees, not only from the human rights committee. I find 17 recommendations very many. Secondly, I am wondering: How long will it take the Government to handle these recommendations? Are they doable? When shall we implement them? Those are my concerns, Mr Speaker. I thank you. 6.47MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. My first point is about wildlife-human conflict, which is very serious in this country, in that the people bordering the national parks and game reserves can no longer feed their families because their crops are destroyed. lives are lost and people are maimed. 10858STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTI would recommend that we fast-track the electric fencing. We should give more money to the ministry. The issue of compensation is a law in this country, but it is far-fetched; people do not get this money. Children are no longer going to school because they have to stay home to keep away the wild animals, especially the baboons. Some of us who come from those areas, bordering national parks, have a problem. At night, around 2.00 a.m., people are calling. We need to fund the Uganda Wildlife Authority because the staff is inadequate and those who are there are not well facilitated. You call them at night and they say: “How do we move to that place?” That is the problem, Mr Speaker. The other issue is about environment management in this country. We can talk about agriculture, water and everything, but the moment we do not manage our environment well, we are not about to reach there. Pollution is now a norm in this country. People in town just throw things the way they want. Actually, it annoys; when you are crossing from Uganda to another country, someone will say: “Leave your kaveera  there. We are now crossing into another country.” It is as if we do not have a government and systems. I think we need to pull up our socks. I can see we are talking about a draft policy on wetland management, but even the laws we have in this country are not being implemented – before we add more. I believe this Parliament can do a lot.It is true that the report seemed like it was about funding. The moment we do not fund, people cannot move. However, funding alone is not enough. We have seen where we have put money but nothing has come out. Like my colleague has said, with corruption, when you put more, it is as if you are putting money in a bottomless pit.Mr Chairperson, through the Speaker, much as we want the funding, we need to be serious about corruption and ask, “What do we do?” Even if you funded these entities at 100 per cent, we shall still come to nothing, as long as the Government, we –  (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Achia?6.50MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to colleagues who have appreciated this report and the previous report on the inquiry into police land, which was very systematic. I am impressed by this report because out of 98 pages, there are nearly 10 pages dedicated on issues touching Karamoja, right from page 74 going forward.Firstly, it talks in detail about how human rights violations are being committed by people who are supposed to secure the people of Karamoja. It talks about how cows are rounded up and taken into the barracks, and when you go in the morning, you find they are not there because UPDF and police officers have taken them. It talks about some arrests of those people and makes recommendations on how the police and army should handle those issues. Before I go into detail on that, recently, there were over 500 or 600 uniports that were brought to Karamoja for the police. I was also surprised to see them in Sheema in western Uganda. If you go to Karamoja now, the temperature tends to go above 35 degrees Celsius for most of the time. Right now, it is between 37 and 38 degrees Celsius. How, in God’s name, do you violate the rights of the police? Those things are very hot -(Laughter) - and you build them on a flat place, not even under any tree. In trying to provide accommodation for the police in Karamoja, you are actually abusing them. They cannot survive in those things. At night, they are very cold. I think the army is better off; they build their “ Mama Ingia Pole ” with grass and are very comfortable there. There is a need for an environmental suitability assessment to know what kind of housing you [Mr Kagwera]10859THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023put them in and even what kind of shoes you give to the security forces in Karamoja. They give them these black boots; those ones can quickly fry your feet in Karamoja. That is why we are very comfortable wearing sandals called “Welcome to Karamoja”. (Laughter)  Mr Speaker, these are the ones we wear there. They are very light. This needs common sense; it is to help you understand what to do in that area. (Laughter)We would like to interest the Committee on Human Rights. Apart from inquiring into the reports from the Uganda Human Rights Commission; through you, Mr Speaker, we should give them more mandate to go and inquire on specific issues because they limit themselves to what is given in the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. On this particular issue, I am happy about the inquiry into the issues of Karamoja. I will tell you, Mr Speaker, between 2013 and 2014, there was crop failure across Karamoja but there was no World Food Programme, food or money voted by this House to feed the Karamojong. We did not die. From 2014 up to 2015, there was crop failure and we were with the former minister, the First Lady. We did not ask for any food. In 2018 up to 2019, crops failed again up to last year. Suddenly, people were starving and dying; there was a lot of malnutrition. Old people and children were dying. Why? People said it was because of drought. It was not a drought killing the Karamojong. The biggest problem in Karamoja is insecurity. Because of insecurity, thousands of cattle are being lost to Kenya. Recently in Namalu, the constituency of Hon. Moses Aleper, 800 cows were taken and ended up in Kenya. That was three weeks ago.When you are a Karamojong and you lose your cattle, your children wake up and ask, “Daddy, mummy, we want milk” and you simply look at the dogs and flies. The cows were here; they were 200 but are not there. If this country and the House can give us security for Karamoja, we will not be asking for food. It is shameful; we are proud people.Because of insecurity, we lose cattle. What happens when you lose your cattle? You cannot feed and become malnourished. You – (Member timed out.)Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have not allowed you. Instead, I would like to tell the Sergeant-At-Arms that I can see a pair of shoes around there. (Laughter)  It can be taken to be – Does it belong to someone? (Laughter)  I did not know. Please conclude. MR ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the Karamoja problem is framed as “drought”, then you call for the World Food Programme and other humanitarian agencies. We beg this country and the House to give us a sustainable security strategy that can secure that part of Uganda for the next many years. Our neighbours, the Kenyans, are armed. The Turkana are armed; Somalia is armed; Ethiopia is armed; South Sudan is armed. We want security. If you have five cows today, you can have ten the next year and 15 the following year, and we shall have a high level of nutrition and will feed ourselves. We pray that the solution to Karamoja problems is based on a clear sustainable strategy. Lastly, I was chairman of the Parliament Pension Scheme from 2016 to 2021. Obviously, you should know this, Members. On average, 30 per cent of us will not come back. I paid Shs 90 billion to Members who lost elections. On average, if you have stayed for two terms, which is about Shs 800 million; for others who have stayed for one term, it is Shs 400 million, I signed all the cheques for Shs 90 billion. For Uganda, we budget Shs 38.8 billion. Shame on us and shame on our Government. People have worked for this country, and you budget and say you are thinking about arrears. What if that happens in this House? You lose elections after you have saved your money here and by the time you want it, they tell you that it is not there. 10860STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe issue of violating the rights of those who have come before us and worked for this country is not fair. We should clear the arrears - and the balance now is about Shs 200 billion. Why don’t we get rid of these pension arrears for once and we start afresh? If – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Bhoka?6.58DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the report by the Committee on Human Rights. Thank you, chairperson and your members, for this very important report.The 46 million Ugandans look at us for the progressive realisation of their rights. We have a duty to promote, protect, provide and fulfil them through the various ministries, departments, agencies, and local governments. I would like to speak to the right to health and health care, which is one of the fundamental rights under the Convention on the Social and Cultural Rights. In the Constitution, the right to health is mentioned in the policy objectives. We would like to see the right to health and health care well addressed in the Constitution. Therefore, when we are looking at constitutional review, it is one of the areas that we should address ourselves to. Secondly, the report on the Ministry of Health and the health sector highlights glaring issues. They mentioned the Abuja Declaration that commits the Government to appropriate sufficient resources for the health sector. However, this has to be done within the context of the universal health coverage agenda, which requires, apart from the Abuja Declaration, us, as a Government, to commit ourselves to delivering to our citizens a national health insurance scheme. This scheme will ensure that every Ugandan will be able to access basic health services, intermediate health services, and advanced health services where they are. We promised Ugandans that we would deliver that right. However, to date, we do not know where the draft National Health Insurance Bill is. The second issue I want to address myself to is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; the right of our older persons to social protection mechanisms. We do appreciate the support provided by the Government to the persons who are 80 years and above. In our interaction with the communities, the older persons feel that the money that they are being given at 80 is at a time when they are preparing to go to the grave. Their prayer is that Parliament, and the Government, if possible, reviews their age of eligibility from 80 to at least 65 years. Finally, when we are debating about the human rights records and credentials of our country, one thing I reflect about is the extent to which we have put in measures to ensure that, as Government, we adopt a human rights-based approach to our business. Can we adopt a rights-based approach, as Parliament, in appropriation, legislation, oversight role, as well as in our representation? Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, Hon. Fox Odoi and his team have done their work. Now, when the other committees are processing their budgets, they should reflect this report within their budgets. (Applause)  Otherwise it will stop here. Hon. Fox Odoi’s job stops here; you have to take it up. I am picking the final team quickly – I have revised the ones who have spoken; I am skipping them. I am picking Hon. Bingi, Hon. Mangusho, and PWDs, then I conclude with that – (A Member rose)No, of course, after those Members, I am coming to Government.[Mr Achia]10861THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 20237.03MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. I will address myself to three recommendations. First, that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should universalise the senior citizen grant. In the report, the committee indicated that these funds are released at the parish level. Perhaps, the instructions and guidance to officers releasing the funds may not be clear because in my constituency that is not the case. In fact, during the recent recess, as I was traversing the constituency, many older persons reached out to me and said that they put in a lot of money to move from their residences to points where they are supposed to access the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) funds. Therefore, the guidance and the instructions to officers releasing the funds should be clear - that the funds are released at parish level where any older person can easily access the money.Secondly, I applaud the committee for their recommendation that services of the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions should reach every district. Recently, courts have been extended to different districts and we are lucky that Kyankwanzi was one of them. We got a Magistrate’s Court but there is no State Attorney. The magistrate is only dealing with the civil matters, yet most of our people who are languishing in police cells have criminal issues. When I was reading the report, I saw that the committee indicated that the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions intends to recruit more State Attorneys in the coming financial year. I wonder if it is going to take a year before we get a State Attorney. What will be the fate of those who deserve justice? Finally, the recommendation to increase budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Health is spot on. Of course, we are all aware, honourable members, that currently the Government is not constructing health centres II at parishes as it used to be. Hence, you will find that there are neither health centres II nor health centres III in a subcounty. What is the fate of the population? Specifically, as I speak, I have about four subcounties with no health centres II or health centres III. When you go to the Ministry of Health, of course, they will be preaching the usual gospel of the resource envelope being very small. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have the usual gospel too; the cake is very small. How do we share the cake without looking at the wastage as alluded to by my honourable colleagues -(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Mangusho? 7.06MR SOLOMON ALINGA (NRM, Too County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  For the record, I am Solomon Chelangat Alinga. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sorry, honourable member, but you know I always I mistake you for Hon. Mangusho. It has happened several times. I am very sorry. MR ALINGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for the work well done. I want to focus on one item; that is, the facilitation of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. This enables other people to get services better than those they are getting right now. As we speak now, the upcountry people do not receive these services of human rights.The Uganda Human Rights Commission is within urban centres. For us who come from the Sebei Subregion or Bukwo District, we do not receive people from the Uganda Human Rights Commission. We have had terrible incidents; our people have been chased from 10862STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthe forest and denied land. People are living as squatters. If you go there, you will find that people are dying of poverty, and they have been denied where to stay. I believe that if the Uganda Human Rights Commission was to be facilitated well, they would have reached those areas and our people would have got justice. These people who have been displaced from the forest have over time collided with the Uganda Wildlife Authority rangers. We have been hearing that people are being killed and everything is just swept under the carpet like no one has died. Mr Speaker, I support the committee that the Uganda Human Rights Commission should be facilitated. I request the Committee on Human Rights to try to reach Sebei Subregion to witness this. I request you honourable members to stand with the people of Sebei Subregion. Our people have suffered for quite a very long time. We - Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable member, we shall stand with you. Hon. Joyce Acan - the committee should visit Sebei Subregion because even Hon. Chemonges has been raising issues with me. 7.09MS JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 38, I have seen how the committee has applauded the Government for taking the initiative to improve the livelihood of persons with disabilities and providing them with job quotas. We still have a big violation of human rights for persons with disabilities. This week, Mr Stephen Odokonyero from Atiak Town Council, Amuru District, who has been employed with the local government since 2016 as a human resource personnel. He was in March this year appointed as a Town Clerk. Subsequently, he was requested to change his signature at the bank; dfcu Bank allowed him to change. However, being a partially blind person, he uses a thumbprint, but the investment mortgage bank refused him from using the thumbprint. They wanted him to provide for his personal assistant to sign for him but he has refused. The matter is so hot that I am about to bring a document to your office to give me space on the Floor so that I can properly elaborate on this. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have raised the matter, honourable member. MS JOYCE ACAN: Two months ago, my other colleague raised an issue here about a person without a hand who was denied to get a national identity card by NIRA. It was not until Parliament came out with a strong recommendation, that he was provided with an ID.  When the Committee on Human Rights is making its recommendations, I think there is need to call us, as leaders of PWDs, so that they also hear from us the challenges that this category of people still faces. We still have a lot of challenges that have not been tackled. I thank you.7.13THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Ms Huda Oleru): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the chairperson and members of the Committee on Human Rights for the comprehensive report. Raising these issues allows the Executive to check itself, adopt the resolutions and implement them for the betterment of the citizens of this country. I respond in a way of giving information on two issues that were raised by Members when they were giving their contribution to this debate. First, Hon. Okot-Ogong raised the issue of Amuka  Boys in the Lango Subregion. I take this opportunity to thank those gallant sons who were so patriotic and voluntarily supported UPDF in flushing out Kony from northern Uganda and indeed today the people of northern Uganda can breathe peace. [Mr Alinga]10863THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023The Ministry of Defence and specifically the Chief of Pension and Gratuity has taken the mandate of registering and verifying all our boys who voluntarily helped the UPDF during those bad times; They are verifying and registering them to be considered for ex-gratia. Therefore, what Hon. Okot-Ogong raised is already work-in-progress. Secondly, my brother from Karamoja has just raised an issue, portraying it as if Government is completely doing nothing in Karamoja, which I think is not true. Mr Speaker, you are aware that the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF has just changed the leadership of the UPDF in Karamoja and indeed the bad situation is now under control. The current leadership is doing a good job; therefore, if the chairperson of the Uganda Human Rights Commission gives that recommendation without verifying what the Government has done, within three months, may give another different image. The assurance I am giving to this House is that the Government is in control, new leadership has been put in place, and better things are already going on in Karamoja. However, that does not mean that things are completely okay. There is still a split on a few other issues that are going on but the UPDF is in charge of providing security for the people of Karamoja. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 7.16THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to thank Hon. Fox Odoi for the comprehensive report and the members of the committee for inquiring into the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. And also by extension I thank the Commission for providing periodic reports about the human rights situation in Uganda. First is to assure Members of Parliament and the country that the Government of Uganda respects the human rights of Ugandans and all those who live within Uganda. We pledge to continue protecting the rights of everybody and we do this irrespective of political beliefs, religion, tribe, or ethnic background because all of us are children of the same God. I want to give that assurance. Secondly, as a Government, we are always prepared to account to Ugandans and the international community about this aspect of human rights. That is why, when the Constitution was made, clear provisions were put in to provide for protection and respect for human rights. And also, several institutions, as well as legislation and policies have been put in place to ensure that we respect and protect the rights, not only of Ugandans, but of everybody here. When you look at the reports which have been done and assessments, they indicate that the quality of life in Uganda continues to improve. That means that there is progress and definitely we value the role played by Parliament because we are doing this together since we have to serve our Ugandans. Therefore, the encouragement I give is that let us continue working together to ensure that we improve the situation in this country, including the issue of human rights. The report raises a number of issues, and we take note of them. I think one Member was asking how long will it take for the Government to address and implement the issues being raised. We start immediately because we respect the issues raised in Parliament and I think we have a mechanism for how we report back to Parliament to assess how we have performed. Suffice to say that most of the gaps identified in the report have to do with the budget. Where there are shortcomings and limitations, I think from the report, it is mainly to do with the budget.We are now starting the budgeting season. As the Executive and Parliament, let us work 10864STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTtogether to see that we address most of the issues, which have been raised in the report. We shall be engaging with the sectoral and relevant committees that do the budgeting so that we address these gaps. To quickly comment on some of the specific issues raised by the honourable members, there is a Member who raised an issue about a conference, which is yet to take place where issues of LGBTQ, abortion and others will surface. Our position remains the same. We respect the values for which we stand. We do not believe in and support homosexuality and other related vices, and we do not believe in abortion. Therefore, our stand is very clear. The stand of Parliament, as articulated through the passing of the law, remains the stand of the Government of Uganda. Therefore, even when we go for these international meetings, our stand remains extremely clear and we articulate it. (Applause)We have taken note of the specific concerns raised in the debate; we may not be able to respond to each and every issue. Like the issue raised by Hon. Okot-Ogong regarding the ex-gratia support pledged to the Amuka  fighters as well as the Arrow Boys, that will be followed. Hon. Huda Oleru has made a comment on it. There is an issue of payment of scientists raised by Hon. Kaberuka. To clarify; the position of Government is that we intend to enhance the pay of all workers but we began with the scientists. In the next phase, we shall bring on board those who did arts and humanities –(Interjection)–  Yes, my friend there is laughing. The first phase covered the scientists who include science teachers. Later, the rest of the public servants will also have their pay enhanced. We have communicated this to the public – (Interjections) – No, the enhancement was not only for science teachers but for scientists in Government, including science teachers. Government’s intention is not to cause segregation. We do not promote that war of scientists versus non-scientists. Those who are not scientists have not been forgotten, but we call for patience because they will be considered in the next phase.This also goes to address what he raised that the medical workers in the prisons service have not had their salaries enhanced. I think this willbe addressed to the Minister of Public Service to make sure that it is corrected. The enhancement was for scientists across board, including those in the armed forces. The issue raised by Hon. Muzaale of Buzaaya County about his mistreatment by the law enforcement agents - Multiplex Limited, we shall raise this with the Minister of Kampala, maybe, to cause a meeting with Multiplex Limited so that they can handle people in a humane way. Even when I owe you parking fees, you should not mishandle me. Not only MPs, but all Ugandans should be handled in a humane manner when they are recovering their payments. (Applause)  Otherwise, we do not accept that somebody should be roughed up. Like you said, Mr Speaker, non-payment could be due to different reasons and not because somebody is refusing to pay. Mr Speaker, you clarified on the percentages of the employment opportunities in UNOC. It is true that northern Uganda, for reasons well known to us - because of the war and the civil strife, which was in the region for over 20 years - created a situation where the region lagged behind in terms of development indicators. However, the Government is committed to ensuring that we have accelerated transformation in the region. That is why there are special programmes, which have been designed. Indeed, if you take a scholarly approach, there is what we call the Gini coefficient, which measures inequality. The gap has been narrowing. The north gradually is catching up [Dr Baryomunsi]10865THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 31 OCTOBER 2023with the rest of the country – (Interjection) – Yes, it still has to catch up but the gap is narrowing.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, conclude.DR BARYOMUNSI:  Government is committed to ensuring that there is equitable and balanced development. Regions like the north, which were affected by the war can catch up as fast as possible with the rest of the country. Otherwise, it is never the intention of Government to discriminate or deny employment opportunities or any other services to the people of the north or any other place. As I move towards conclusion, most of the issues were general - like those of pension, health care, access to education, hunger, Karamoja issues; human-wildlife conflicts, ban on kaveera  and environment issues; construction of health centres III, case backlog in the courts and many others. Like I said at the beginning, these are issues to do with the budget and the budgetary constraints. I once again appeal to the honourable members that now that the budgeting season is on, let us engage through our committees. Let us use this report to inform our discussions in the budgeting process, so that we make appropriate provisions to address all these concerns. However, as a Government, we are committed to ensuring that we observe, respect and protect the rights of all Ugandans. I thank the committee once again. MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues for the informative and engaging debate. Permit me to thank, in a very special way, the members of the Committee on Human Rights; my wonderful deputy, Hon. Janepher Mbabazi and the other Members who are present in the House. Mr Speaker, permit me to clarify on only one issue: we have presented to this House over the last one year, the 22nd, 23rd and 24th annual reports of Uganda Human Rights Commission. The reports captured probably all the issues that the Members raised today. You debated those reports and made resolutions. I will request that we always go back and look at the matters we have discussed in the House and resolutions made so that we engage in a very informed way when we come to the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the 25th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the Year 2022 be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable colleagues. Sectoral committees, please when you are doing budgeting, take a human rights approach to budgeting and ensure everything is reflected in the programmes. Reporting on this report is very difficult under Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure because it is so general. The committee will continue monitoring as the sectoral committees handle the budget. Honourable colleagues, I told you that I would guide at the end of the session in relation to the budgeting process which we are starting. We have just finished the accountability cycle and we are now going on to the oversight cycle. The focus is going to be on the implementation of the budget - and the money being released - so that you do not only depend on documents when we start processing the budget but, we will go to the fields, and I will be joining some of the committees in the field. I am ready to come to many of the meetings because this is the only way we shall ensure that the money that we appropriate produces value to our taxpayers. 10866STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTherefore, I am sending the committees on a two-week break which is starting tomorrow. I am going to have a few administrative meetings, business committee meetings and others. However, this is not a break for you to go to your constituencies; it is for all of us to go to the field. Today alone, I have received and cleared 11 requests for committees to go for fieldwork. We said that when we have plenary, you should not be going to the field. Therefore, the committees are stuck because they want to do fieldwork. You are all cleared to go to the field, with the committee chairpersons taking the lead, and we shall look at the performance of the budget. At the end of the day, you will report back. When we return, I will give a chance to each committee to report its findings on the Floor and we see how best it can influence the budgeting process. With that, the House is adjourned to 15 November 2023. (The House rose at 7.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 November 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)  [The Deputy Speaker]