

Wednesday, 7 October 2020

Parliament met at 3.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have just two matters to communicate. The first is from the Parliamentary Pension Scheme; we still have information that a number of Members have not updated their database and the scheme is finding it difficult to work on their pension details.

I would like to thank those Members who have given in their details but we have very many who have provided insufficient information. I do not want to publicize the list but I urge all Members who are under the Parliamentary Pension Scheme to ensure they update their details. Honourable members, you may not take it seriously until something happens - in the past when Members have died, we have had problems of whom to deal with, whom to address letters to and so on. Therefore, please help us and do that.

Secondly, I have also received a complaint from an industrialist that among the members of Parliament, there is one who has taken it upon himself to write to that industrialist to claim breach of certain standards. However, when I read the letter, it was an individual Member of Parliament writing.

I would like to remind members that on issues of Parliament - if you are working as a committee, it is the chairperson of the committee, the Clerk or the Speaker to communicate. No individual member of any committee should take it upon themselves to address agencies outside. Therefore, I am warning you because I will take action against you. Thank you.

3.18
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2015 or thereabouts, this House passed a resolution to establish several universities, among them Busoga, Muni and Bunyoro universities. However, to date, Bunyoro University has not been established. We have raised this matter time and again. We wonder what could have happened or what is happening.

It is my humble prayer that the Government informs us when Bunyoro University will be established; and other universities as per the resolution of this House. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for clarification, the resolution was passed in 2015. It was about Namasagali University, Rwenzori University and Bunyoro University. Ever since we returned to this House, we have been asking the Government to tell us what happened to that resolution but no one is interested.

In the process, those areas are being left behind in so many ways. Therefore, we want answers as soon as we come back from the recess. The Prime Minister should come and give an explanation because when we make resolutions, they are sent to him on behalf of Government.

3.20
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter pertaining to the Uganda Police Force. Ever since the Uganda Police Force was established in 1906 to date, there has been a process of sequencing promotions based on experience and many other things. However, since the Police celebrated their centenary to date, there has not been any promotions in the force. As such, there is serious contention in terms of what should be done. When you look at the way police recruitment is going on - this is almost the third time recruitment is being done and yet we do not see any promotional strategy in the Uganda Police Force. 

We would like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs how they are going to do this because in any civil service, there should always be promotions based on merit, experience, achievements and many other things.

We have heard of new recruitment in the Uganda Police Force recently. What is happening? What is it going to be like? Is it congestion that we need a bypass? What is going to happen? May the Minister of Internal Affairs explain to Ugandans why this is happening in the Uganda Police Force yet it is all going well in the Army –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, speaking of promotions in the police, on several occasions when we interact with them, they complain that even the formula used to determine the officers’ salaries is not clear. You will find a district police commander earning less than an officer in charge of station, or an OC earning more than the Regional Police Commander. The police have equally complained about their salary structure. 

Therefore, I request that when the Minister of Internal Affairs comes, he should put to light the concerns on promotions and he should tell; how do they set the salary structure? On what factors and conditions do they base to have some people earn more than others? Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I would like to confirm that I have received letters, a number of times, from a number of policemen telling me that they have spent 19 or 20 years as constables. Of course as an individual, I cannot do much but I think it speaks to the need for transparency in what is happening. When you join a service, you expect to grow. 

Let the Minister of Internal Affairs come after the recess and update us about this issue.

3.25
Ms franca akello (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come before this House this afternoon to raise a matter of serious concern, which needs urgent attention.

For the whole of this year, electricity has been very irregular in my district, Agago. Since we began receiving rain, power blackouts are the order of the day. No economic activities that need electricity are taking place in the district. We would like to know from the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development what is happening. 

When I tried to inquire from Pader – Abim Community Multipurpose Electricity Cooperatives Society (PACMECS), a local cooperative that manages our electricity line, I was informed that power stops in Puranga. The line that supplies Agago, Omoro, Kitgum, Lamwo and Pader districts is completely off. Normally when it rains and poles fall, they request for poles for replacement. You know that it is the responsibility of REA to supply these poles. 

PACMECS has been requesting REA to give them some emergency poles. They have requested for only 39 poles so that whenever it rains, they are able to replace a few of the poles that fall such that people are able to have power. However, REA has lent a deaf ear to the –(Interruption)

Ms adong: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the Member on the Floor is that power in the entire Acholi sub-region is a problem. We have reached out to Umeme and they say that the transformer, which supplies the whole mid-north to West Nile is only 33 KV – whatever you call it. The one that stops in Lira is 132 KV so, the power that we have is not enough. 

We are permanently on either blackout or load shedding. You cannot have power in the whole of mid-north for a whole week; whether it is the dry or wet season, they will have an excuse to give.

Ms franca akello: In summary, we just see electric poles in the districts that I have mentioned. My district in particular is very badly off. Although this line supplies all the districts that I mentioned and the whole of Acholi sub-region –(Interruption)

Ms amongin: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Franca for giving way. The information I would like to give is in regard to electrification that you have raised on the Floor.

I think this problem cuts across, not only in Northern Uganda, but also in Teso. Particularly, I would like to cite Ngora District. It so happens that we passed a loan here and they erected poles. In the whole of Kapir and Mukura, there are poles but there is no communication in terms of explaining to the beneficiaries when power will be connected.

Previously, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development wrote to this House indicating areas where power would reach. These included areas in Ngora but no action has taken place to date. Therefore, I would like the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come and inform the House on when works will start in those areas and when they will light up areas where they have dropped the poles. It is over a year, the poles are lying all over the place and there is nothing going on. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, we are now moving away from Agago to Ngora and somewhere else.

Ms franca akello: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise guidance. As I conclude, the matter is very serious and needs urgent attention. 

I would like REA – I know we are going on recess and may not be able to come back to this House. I would like the minister in charge of the energy sector to act swiftly on REA so that we receive electricity. For now, the urgent matter is that we need at least 39 poles to handle emergencies so that in case the poles fall, we are able to get power for a few more days.

There are so many other issues; PACMECS has been communicating in writing to REA for certain actions to take place but they have not been able to handle those matters at all. The matters include issues of lines that fall, free connections that we were not able to benefit from moreover Government – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think the issue of power in Northern Uganda is a scandal. We have had many issues here about Gulu, which is always in a blackout. Now, the whole of Agago and the neighbouring districts are in a blackout. Can we know from the Government when we shall have secure power in the North; Gulu, Agago and neighbouring areas? I was hoping that no one would say “West Nile” because it is a nightmare there.

3.32
The minister of state for energy and mineral development (Mineral Development) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to apologise; I thought my colleague had responded to the issue of power in the Acholi sub-region. However, I note that the matter is still outstanding. 

I have been away battling my issues. As you are aware, results for the National Resistance Movement (NRM) primaries had never been announced –

The Speaker: By the way, congratulations, hon. Opendi.

Ms opendi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is only yesterday that we concluded it. I would like to assure the Members - I gave a comprehensive report on the REA activities that are ensuing. There are areas where work was completed and technical commissioning has commenced. It is being done in different districts.

There are also areas where work is just commencing. Maybe when we resume, we will come here with a comprehensive statement on the issue of power in the Acholi sub-region and also give an update on the works that I mentioned last time.

Allow me to assure hon. Franca Akello that I will take up this issue of the 30 poles that she is requesting for with REA and see what can be done as we wait for the next Session. Thank you.

3.33
Mr HASSAN fungaroo (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance, on police brutality when handling civilians and discrimination for those who seem to have broken the law.

On Friday, 25 September 2020 at noon, a five months’ pregnant lady called Salama Moite of about 30 years of age was violently pushed down by the DPC of Obongi, Abel Ruganza. That was during the process of the nomination of local government councillors. Moite was a candidate representing Obongi Town Council and Obongi District Local Council V. 

During nominations, the people escorting a candidate called Ismael Gift Nasu, LC 3 Chairperson for Obongi Town Council, both of whom were members of FDC, seemed not to observe social distance. The DPC personally came and sprayed teargas in the eyes of Salama Moite; he violently pushed her. She fell on her stomach and became unconscious. Thereafter, she was taken to Obongi Health Centre IV to seek for help. 

For fear of prosecutions, the DPC liaised with the people at the health centre and no attention was given to Moite. She was then taken to a private clinic and returned with the results to the health centre but her medical form was confiscated. She was supposed to be referred to a hospital but there was nobody there to write the referral. Therefore, help has been denied to this innocent woman. 

Madam Speaker, should the police be excessively violent when handling people like that; a pregnant woman? More so, a man mishandled a woman when there were women police officers there. We need help. 

As Ugandans and parliamentarians here, we need to protect ourselves against COVID-19. No one should be allowed to bring in the disease. In the elections for the primaries that we went through, particularly of the NRM, people lined up, danced and celebrated without regard to anything called standard operating procedures. When it came to the Opposition, people going for nominations were handled badly. Who is supposed to –(Member timed out.) 

My prayers are that: 

    1. Salama Moite is given access to better health services and justice. 
    2. Abel Ruganza is transferred from Obongi. 
    3. The police should be guided by their seniors on the use of force, particularly during this COVID-19 situation. 
    4. We must have uniformity before the law. There should not be discrimination. 

Members of the Opposition should not be selectively treated harshly under the pretext of fighting against COVID-19 and yet the same area has people from NRM, who go around doing their work, with no regard to these standard operating procedures. Why should we be treated differently? We need answers from the Government. 

I beg to move. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should investigate the complaints raised by hon. Fungaroo and revert to us when we commence in the Second Meeting of the Fifth Session of the 10th Parliament.

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL ON CONFIRMATION OF POSTPONEMENT OF NOMINATION OF PERSONS BY THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION, EARLIER SCHEDULED FOR 12TH AND 13TH OCTOBER 2020 FOR ANOTHER 14 DAYS; AND THE ACTUAL DATES SET FOR CONDUCTING THE FORTHCOMING GENERAL ELECTIONS, AS DIRECTED BY THE HOUSE DURING ITS SITTING HELD ON TUESDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2020

3.38
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, yesterday, I was requested to lay the Statutory Instrument entitled, “The Registration of Persons (Amendment) Regulations, 2020.” I was expected to lay it on behalf of the Minister of Internal Affairs; so, allow me to do that today before I begin. 

On 6 October 2020, I made further clarification to this House on the issues raised by hon. Angeline Osegge, Woman Member of Parliament for Soroti, on 15 September 2020 here in Parliament. It was about the alleged consideration by the Electoral Commission not to nominate persons whose names on the National Identification Cards differ from the names on their academic documents. 

After my statement on 6 October 2020, this House directed that a further statement be made on this. The confirmation of Postponement of nomination of persons by the Electoral Commission, earlier scheduled for 12th and l3th October 2020 for l4 days; and the actual date set for conducting the forthcoming General Elections.

Now, I make the following statement:

Key issues for determining the extension of nomination of Parliamentary Candidates

The Commission launched the Strategic Plan and Roadmap of the 2020/2021 General Elections on 12 December 2018 and it indicated the various key milestones, including Nomination of Parliamentary Candidates, as indicated in Table I below.

    1. Cut-off of Creation and demarcation of new Administrative Units and Local Governments – Thursday, 28 February 20l9.

    2. Enactments/Amendments of enabling laws and Code of Conduct for PPOs – Thursday, 28 February 20l9.

    3. Demarcation of Constituencies and Electoral Areas and Reorganisation of Polling Stations – Monday, 15 April 20l9.

    4. General Update of the Register in each Parish in line with Article 61(1)(e) of the Constitution – Between Wednesday, 20 November 20l9 and Friday, 3 January 2020.

    5. Compilation of Youth/PWDs/Older Persons/Workers Registers in line with Electoral Commission Act, Section 18(1) – between 20 November 20l9 and 03 January 2020.

    6. Cut-off of Update of the National Voters' Register and Compilation of Youth, PWDs, Older Persons and Workers Registers in line with Section 19(7) and Section 19(8)(a) of the Electoral Commission Act – Friday, 3 January 2020.

    7. Display of the National Voters' Register at each Polling Station in line with the Electoral Commission Act, Section 24(1) and Section 25(1) – Between Thursday 19 March, 2020 and Wednesday, 8 April 2020.

    8. Nomination of Candidates for Local Governments including Special Interest Groups in line with Section 119(1) – Monday, 20 July 2020 to Friday, 24 July 2020.

    9. Nomination of candidates (Parliamentary) in line with section 9 of the Electoral Commission’s Act was set to be between Wednesday, 12 August 2020 and Thursday, 13 August 2020.

    10. Nomination of Candidates (Presidential). In line with Section 8 of the Electoral Commission’s Act, was set for 20 August 2020 and 21 August 2020.

    11. Polling period (Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Governments in line with Article 61(2) was set for Monday, 11 January 2021 and Monday, 8 February 2021.

The early launch was to enable the Commission and the stakeholders have adequate time to prepare accordingly.

As can be seen from the table above, the Commission planned to conduct nomination of Parliamentary candidates on 12th and 13th August 2020; this would give the Commission adequate time to:

    i. Print ballot papers and declaration of results forms;

    ii. Pack and dispatch polling materials by 02 January 2021 in time for the polls in compliance with Article 61(2) of the Constitution.

Following the lockdown due to the COVID-19 Pandemic, the Commission issued a revised roadmap on 16 June 2020 whereby the timelines in the original roadmap were adjusted, among which was nomination for Parliamentary Elections, which was adjusted to 12th and 13 October 2020.

It is important to note that the lockdown resulted into reduced timeframes within which the Commission had to execute the electoral activities of the roadmap.

The adjustment did not only affect Parliamentary nominations but also Special Interest Groups, Local Governments as well as Presidential.

In deciding on the extension of nomination of candidates for Parliamentary Elections, at this time, we definitely reduced timeframes due to the COVID-19. It is important to understand the determinants for setting the electoral activities dates and durations in compliance to Article 61(2) of the Constitution.

Import of Section 36

The Registration of Persons Act has been in force since 2015 and the courts of law have pronounced themselves on its implementation.

On a number of occasions, the Commission has alerted and reminded the stakeholders of the effects of the said provision. This has been in the press, interactions with Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament and various stakeholder engagements.

Determinants

The fixing of dates and durations for electoral activities is generally determined by three major factors, namely:

    1. Constitutional directives;
    2. Provisions of Electoral laws; and
    3. Operational capacities and requirements.

Here below are the key determinants for the fixing of the Nomination Dates:

Polling Period

According to Article 61(2) of the Constitution (as amended); the Electoral Commission shall hold Presidential, general Parliamentary and Local Governments Councils elections within the first 30 days of the last 122 days before the expiration of the term of office of the President, Parliament or Local Governments Councils as the case may be.

Further, under Articles 77(3), 105(i) and 181(4) of the Constitution, (as amended), the current term of office of the President, Parliament and Local Governments Councils expires on
12 May 2021.

Given the above Constitutional provisions in line with Article 62, polling day shall be between 10 January 2021 and 8 February 2021, which is the first 30 days of the last 122 days.

Therefore, Article 61(2) sets the destination and hence the bench mark on which all the electoral activities must be premised/based.

It should also be noted that, polling for Presidential and Parliamentary elections takes place on the same day followed by others but within the first 30 days of the last 122 days.

Printing, production and delivery of ballot papers and declaration of result forms to the Electoral Commission warehouse; according to the Uganda Legal framework, the 2020 /2021 general elections for Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Government are by secret ballot, hence the need for ballot papers.

This creates need for production of ballot papers and declaration of result forms for each elective office as indicated below:

    1. Presidential Elections- 19,000,000 ballot papers one position

    2. Directly Elected Members of Parliament- 19,000,000 ballot papers for 296 directly elected

    3. District Women Representatives to Parliament - 19,000,000 ballot papers for 140 positions

    4. District/City Women Councillors forming one third of Councils - 19,000,000 ballot papers for 1375 positions 

    5. District/City Chairpersons - 19,000,000 ballot papers for 140 positions

    6. District/City Directly Elected Councillors - 19,000,000 ballot papers for 2105 positions

    7. Municipality/City Division Chairpersons- 4,500,000 for 53 positions 

    8. Municipality/City Division women councillors forming one third of councils - 4,500,000 for 787 positions

    9. Municipal/City Division Directly Elected Councillors - 4,500,000 for 1147 positions

    10. Sub-county/Town/Municipal Division Chairpersons- 19,000,000 ballot papers for 2013 positions


    11. Sub-county/Town/Municipal Division Directly Elected Councillors- 19,000,000 ballot papers for 10,307 positions. 

For the sub-county/municipal division women councillors, forming one-third of the councils, we need Shs 19 million for the 11,693 positions.

Ballot papers for councillors representing Special Interest Groups (Youth, PWDs, older persons and workers) at local Government councils (districts/city and municipal division), we need 566,100 for the 1,454 positions. 

Ballot papers for councillors representing Special Interest Groups (Youth, PWDs and older persons) at local Government councils (sub-county/town council/municipal divisions), we need Shs 19,208,000 for the 12,078 positions.

The Electoral Commission has to first digitally capture data from the various hard copies of nomination forms submitted by all candidates for the various elective offices in the entire country as indicated in the table above. The capture is required to prepare sample ballot papers and carry out quality assurance to ensure each elective office, as nominated has a correct sample ballot paper. The capture is first done at the district and finalised at the Electoral Commission headquarters with quality assurance, and the whole process requires at least 20 days in case of parliamentary elections. 

With nominations for parliamentary elections set for 12 and 13 October, 2020, the process of capture and quality assurance is planned then on 4 November, 2020. An extension of 14 days would result into this process ending on the 18 November, 2020.

After the capture and quality assurance process, the samples are handed over to the procured service providers for the production and printing of ballot papers and declaration of results forms, which is expected to commence on 8 November, 2020.

Ordinarily, the printing of parliamentary ballot papers and declaration of results forms requires 30 days but due to COVID-l9 lockdown, the Electoral Commission only has 25 days within which these have to be printed and delivered at the commission stores for packaging.

For emphasis, polling days cannot be extended outside the first 30 days of the last 122 days as stipulated in Article 61(2) of the Constitution.

An extension in parliamentary nomination dates would result into late production of ballot papers and declaration of results.

Packaging and dispatch of polling kits

The Electoral Commission requires at least 30 days for packaging of the ballot papers and declaration of results forms for each of the over 34,000 polling stations in the country.

In accordance with Article 6l(2), the polling kits should therefore, be ready for dispatch to district stores by 2  January, 2021.

The Electoral Commission wishes to draw the attention of members to the following: 

    i. The 2020/2021 general elections roadmap was drawn after a serious study of the timelines that would be required to carry out all the different activities.

    ii. The roadmap was made guided by the constitutional provisions that presidential, parliamentary and local government council elections must be held within the first 30 days of the last l22 days of the expiration of the term of the President, Parliament and Local Government Councils. 

    iii. The term of Office of the President, Parliament and Local Government councils are fixed by law (Articles 77(3), 105 and 181 of the Constitution).

Extension of nomination dates for Local Government councils

The nominations of Local Government councils started on 21 September, 2020 and were supposed to end on 1 October, 2020 but the Electoral Commission extended to 5 October, 2020. The Electoral Commission is currently receiving returns from the nomination exercise at the Electoral Commission headquarters.

Women councillors

In the recent amendment of Section 10 and 23 of the Local Government Act, Parliament provided for the election of women councillors for every parish/ward and sub-county/ town council and municipal council.

However, Article 180(2) of the Constitution provides that: “Parliament shall by law prescribe the composition, qualifications, functions and electoral procedures in respect of local government councils, except that- 

(b) One-third of the membership of each local government council shall be reserved for women.”

The view of the Electoral Commission is that the Constitution is the supreme law and the said article has not been amended.

The commission is enjoined to abide by the constitutional provisions to avoid possible litigations to challenge the said Local Government amendment.

Conclusion

For the foregoing reasons, the Electoral Commission is, therefore, unable to extend the nomination dates for the local governments and Parliament as proposed.
I beg to submit.

Madam Speaker, allow me to bring to the attention of Parliament the provision of Article 92 of the Constitution which reads as follows: “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgment of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgment.”

Basing on that, the courts have pronounced themselves in regard to the provisions of Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act. One of our members, hon. Sam Otada Amooti, was first thrown out of Parliament and he came back through a by-election, all based on the provisions of Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act. 

I would urge us to observe the provisions of Article 92 and let the provisions of Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act stand. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Deputy Attorney-General, within the provisions of Article 92, who are the parties?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, the parties are hon. Sam Otada Amooti, the former Member of Parliament for Kibanda North County and hon. Taban Amin who is the current Member of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that this House is interfering in the judgment of those two people?

MR KAFUUZI: No, I am simply saying that the judgment is in line with Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act. The Electoral Commission seeks to enforce the section backed by the findings of court.

THE SPEAKER: Has Parliament passed any law to alter that decision?

MR KAFUUZI: No.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, do not make false allegations about this House.

MR KAFUUZI: Let me clarify, Madam Speaker. It is on the basis of that that we have been unable to propose an amendment to Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the statement. Any comments? 

Honourable Attorney-General, why is it difficult to actually name the date of the election? We are aware about the first 30 days of last 122 days; we all know that but what is it you are hiding? This is the first time we shall go for nominations without knowing the date of election; this is not fair to us.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I put that same question to the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission and he told me that they are enjoined, as Electoral Commission, to announce the polling dates immediately after nominations. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, maybe you have only been in one election; I have been in many elections here. We always go for nominations with a clear date.

4.05
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Attorney-General, for presenting the statement to the House. He has cited the legal implications that may derail this House from making adjustments on the nomination dates for members of Parliament aspirants. He raise three factors. 

One of the factors that he was convinced with is the printing of ballot papers. However, the Attorney-General, being a lawyer, knows that this Parliament has the powers to make adjustments despite the limited time. 

I would like to pray to this House, now that the statement has been made, to agree to make a simple adjustment on the dates for nominations of members of Parliament aspirants; that would be prudent. If the House did that today, we would still be within the days of the law, going by the days he counted. 

The other thing that I wanted the Attorney-General to clarify is: I come from a district where there are two women councillors. In one sub-county, there is only one woman councillor representing. That is the smaller sub county. Then the two bigger sub counties share one woman councillor. The justification has not been clear on why some sub counties have a sole woman councillor yet others have to share a representative. 

Lastly, in regards to what you have just raised, Madam Speaker, there is no way any candidate in Uganda can campaign in darkness. Candidates need to know the time frame within which to conduct their campaigns, in terms of reaching out to the voters and the budget for that campaign. We need to know when exactly elections will take place. It is very important that this is made clear for us to plan for the campaigns. We cannot just campaign on an estimate; that elections will be between January, on this date and February, on the other date. The date has to be definite. I think those clarifications would help Ugandans out there, who are vying to lead their people in the different portfolios, to know how they carry on with their campaigns. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start from where the Deputy Attorney-General stopped. 

The Deputy Attorney-General stated that the date for the election or voting will be announced after nominations have ended. That is okay, but which nominations, parliamentary or presidential? That is important to be cleared because the voting date is the same for members of Parliament and the President. What happens when you nominate members of Parliament? Are they going to start campaigning or not? We must know when the election date is. Failure to do that, there will be a problem. 

The Deputy Attorney-General must make it clear on when they will announce the voting date. If it is after presidential nominations, what happens between the nomination dates for members of Parliament and when the presidential candidates get nominated? That must be very clear.

Yesterday, we asked the Attorney-General, based on the legal challenges that we have regarding people who have issues with their names, to extend nomination by at least 14 days. The arguments advanced by the Attorney-General do not hold water. 

The issue of printing and putting names – the Electoral Commission has a template because they have the constituencies. It is just a matter of attaching the picture and the name of the candidate; the template is there. Are you still working under analogue or digital? In your statement, you have said it is digital inputting. So, what is this that you need? Fourteen days are not a big thing. 
It is, therefore, not true that it is because of the challenges to input because the template is there. It is a simple matter of inputting the nominated candidates. 

Secondly, we have members in the NRM, who up to today have not heard the verdict to their petitions. We do not know whether the announcement of the verdict will be today or tomorrow or Friday. How will such party members be able to organise for nominations on Monday? Let us be serious. Members are here stressed, waiting for a verdict and we only have tomorrow. The rest of the days are public holidays. 

Hon. Deputy Attorney-General, please help this country. An addition of 14 days cannot cost the country much the way it being drummed up here. These are things which the Attorney-General should not shy away from. If there is any reason why you do not want to give us the date for the election, tell us. Otherwise, you cannot just push it to the Electoral Commission. Thank you. 

4.11
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some days back, a Ugandan called Mr Tamale Mirundi used to say that in Uganda everything is possible. He also said that it is only Uganda where you find rats that eat iron bars. (Laughter) 

In the same vein, it is only in the Parliament of Uganda where you find the Attorney-General debating as if what is going on and what he is debating is not in his interest or the interest of the institution he serves but in the interest of a different or outside institution. 

We were clear here; we said that if we cannot change section 36, let us adjust the nomination date. If we rightly have these figures – if I may ask the Attorney-General: on which date in the last elections was he nominated? I think it was 2nd December –(Interjections)– I was equally nominated on the same date –(Interjection)– do not say, “No.” I did mathematics. We were nominated on 2nd December and voted on 18th February. 

Nominations this time round are set for 12th October but that voting will be between 10th January and 8th February. Eighth February and 18th February are 10 days apart yet 12th October to 2nd -
THE SPEAKER: No, it is 10th January to 18th February. 

MR KIBALYA: Okay, but between 12th October to 10th January when we got nominated last time are more than 40 days apart. The figures they have read for us – the ballot papers they need, we are not defying this. However, we are saying that the NRM Workers’ MPs are going to be elected on Saturday. I am an agent. Nomination is on Monday. Assuming there is a petition, what will happen?

In Budiope, they are most likely to repeat elections tomorrow. Friday is a public holiday. Assuming there is a petition - These petitions have taken more than two or three weeks to be heard. 

The laws of Electoral Commission were not cast in stone. Is changing a date too hard to help the people by amending the laws? You are saying it is hard to postpone nominations for a week or two because we have these days and we have to have these figures, ballot papers and so on and so forth. Really? The two Attorneys-General and the Electoral Commission that is answerable to Parliament are here saying it is hard.

Madam Speaker, we have little to say but we need to know whether the Electoral Commission is answerable to a given body. It is very disappointing that we can receive this report. We cannot change much because we can debate but the decision is with you. You need to take it from us that we are disappointed. We cannot believe that you have failed to postpone the nominations. 

We shall go for the nominations as you wish but know it from the bottom of our hearts and back of your minds that we are disappointed that we have a Government that can run like this. We can only come here and be told this; that is hard to simply change the date of nomination.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we have had the President nominated before; they have been nominating the President in October and after a period, they nominate us. We are now getting nominated before the President. Are you not going to print ballot papers for the President who is going to be nominated in November? What is this –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable member, for giving way.

Honourable member, you have stated that we shall go for nominations, as the Attorney-General so wishes. However, we would like to let you know that there are people who will fail because you advised us only yesterday about the deed poll. That is when you gave us concrete information that the deed poll must be done.

We mentioned yesterday that there are people all over Uganda who are planning to be nominated as members of Parliament. They are going to fail because you have adamantly refused to extend the dates for nomination.

Know that there are people who are going to fail. Some of them have even passed through the primaries, they have the flag for their parties but are going to fail because of this rigidity. That is the information I wanted to give you, honourable member.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, hon. Kibalya.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, as we said – because we have been on this issue for more than a week. Last week, the Attorney-General told us that Cabinet had consented and agreed that they were going to amend. This week, he came and said the amendment has failed.

We said if the amendment has failed, give us the nomination date change. He has now come today to tell us that he cannot change. This is where we are and these are the two Attorneys-General we have, Madam Speaker.

4.17
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter that is before us is a very serious one. I would pray that you call for the attention of the Attorney-General and those in charge of organising the elections to take it as such.

On the issue of us demanding to extend nomination dates, my honourable colleague came here and submitted about people who have to use deed polls. That matter is very serious; you need seven days to advertise yourself. I am talking about the minimum in the media or Gazette.

Remember that you still have to go through the process of registering your documents. This process of registering documents is not about going to an office and they put stamps or something. You have to get an assessment from URA. 

Sometimes, the network is off. I tried to do registration on my side. I spent the entire day trying to get an assessment from URA until yesterday when I got it. Now, we are struggling to go to Entebbe. We are not even lodging our documents in this office here; we are driving to Entebbe ourselves.

Attorney-General, are you being considerate to Ugandans? Are you running this election for Ugandans or for yourself?

The other issue is about keeping Ugandans in darkness about the polling date. I happen to have gone to a seminary for six years. They told us that one of the ways in which you identify evil is when there is no openness. When you start seeing a situation where somebody is not open about what is going on, you sense evil. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would pray that these members of Parliament start sensing evil in the statement, which the minister has stated. We are not here to serve Ugandans evil; we are here to state what is right. He should declare the date when we are going to be nominated and when we are going to the polls such that we do not confuse those who are going to vote for us. He said it is between 8th January, 10th and 18th. People will remember 18th as the date for the polls when he fixed a different date or they will come on the 10th. They will get confused. We want and demand for a specific date and it should be communicated today. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.21
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, when we had an opportunity, all Ugandans celebrated when they heard our demand and cry for an extension by a mere fortnight. It is not only in our interests as members of Parliament but in the interest of all Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I am aware that in some constituencies, including one where you have your own, Florence Nambozo, up to today, they do not have a flag bearer. Even the NRM Electoral Commission is still in a very big scenario; none of the contestants was able to access a declaration of results form. What this means is that they are likely to have a by-election. What will happen when others are still in such a dilemma?

Therefore, I do not see why it becomes so hard because the budget they are trying to come up with will remain the same even if the ballot papers are printed today or next week.

Madam Speaker, it would have been a concern for our Government to consider many Ugandans. The lucky ones that have gone through the process have seen how tedious the process is. Others are even using boda-boda cyclists to go to Entebbe in order to avoid the traffic jam. At the end of the day - this is almost end of the week before nominations.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, after nomination what happens? We are declared candidates and then we are caught by the law that whatever you do, you are buying the voters. When you go to a fundraising- because you are already declared a candidate, do we start campaigning immediately or? 

Therefore, I do not doubt my voter who told me that they are not surprised. This is really scientific campaigns and elections where things are happening scientifically. I thank you.

4.23
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Attorney-General for the report he has given us. Unfortunately, the report in my opinion does not even measure to the minimum or basic standards of democracy that the Electoral Commission is supposed to be emphasizing and handling.

Therefore, when I hear from my learned Attorney-General saying that they are unable to extend, I get worried and other people get worried because as my colleague said earlier on that some people are going to be left out, that is a reality and a fact because there is going to be a re-election in Mbale and somewhere in western.

At the same time, the youths and workers are going to have their NRM elections over the weekend. I do not know what is going to happen and for the learned Attorneys-General who are here, I do not know what they are going to tell Ugandans especially those people who have problems or challenges to explain.

That is why I have a problem. I would like them to know that I, as David Abala, representing Ngora County, I am sad. This report here is going to bring problems during the electoral process. At the end of the day, there is going to be a lot of litigation, people are going to sue and the Government of Uganda will lose a lot of money.

My opinion is that as a lay man, I would like to advise them that the decision put in that report should be reversed now and not tomorrow. That is where the problem is.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like these learned friends to know the values of the Electoral Commission: integrity, independence and participation. Now by mere fact that you are not extending you are denying some people from participating.

Remember, one of the basic values of the Electoral Commission is participation and responsiveness but, unfortunately, they are not responding to the demands of Ugandans. That is why I would like them to know that what they are talking about is a challenge. If you look at the minimum standards of the traces of democracy, that bit is being failed by this report here. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal that this report be thrown away and be ignored, and we advise as we move forward that the dates be extended. Why are we against women? 

4.26
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and to thank the learned Deputy Attorney-General and the Attorney-General who are here for the report.

There are three things to consider in this report. One is why have we found ourselves in this situation? When the world was struck with this pandemic, there was a proposal to have these elections postponed and we even had arguments in favour of postponement. 

Madam Speaker, in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, Government came and said they were prepared to have elections. The Electoral Commission said the time is sufficient to have elections and the parties came, FDC and JEEMA, and said we could postpone; and NRM and UPC said no and that they were comfortable with the timing and that the elections should go on.

It is therefore, ironical that the Electoral Commission can at this point in time claim that any kind of extension is unwelcome because of time and yet they undertook to hold the elections within this period.

Secondly, regarding the issue of extension, not long ago, the Electoral Commission has extended the nomination for local governments and it is on record.  The Minister for Local Government was here and informed us how the extension had been undertaken.

Now, these local governments are more than us. How possible could it have been that those local governments’ nominations were postponed and those of Parliament were not? How could that be possible; unless something is hidden?

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, this situation we have found ourselves into, the Electoral Commission may not be entirely to blame because this was beyond their control. I would like to tell you here that the courts themselves have given varying opinions on the issue of names because what the Electoral Commission is demanding now, they have never demanded before.

People are nominating or have been nominated before on the basis of affidavits and statutory declarations without deed polls. They are just implementing the law now because of what the courts have said. 

We have found ourselves in a very difficult situation. I, therefore, would like to propose that if we do not want to exclude people, the dates we are talking about are not dates set by law. There is no date being set by law; what the law sets is the time but not dates. The Electoral Commission can extend the dates as long as we do not go beyond the period set by the law.

Therefore, if the Electoral Commission finds our proposal of two weeks on the higher side, they could propose a week. Otherwise, if we do not work on that extension, you did rightly observe here members, many women are going to be excluded from the nomination process.

I would like to be on record on that because as we speak now, the last Gazette, if I am not mistaken, is coming out tomorrow. There will be no Gazette on Friday, Monday or Tuesday. Therefore, those who are here and their names on the academic papers do not match with names on the voters’ register, they are going to be kept away. Is that what we want? Are we agreeing that women be excluded from that process? Therefore, if we are having it difficult to have the two weeks, let us have either one week or ten days.

Finally, Madam Speaker, this Constitution under Article 67(1), mandates the Electoral Commission to ensure that elections are held at fixed times and notified in advance to the public. The Electoral Commission is saying that they will issue dates for the elections later but the law tells them to issue dates in advance and fixed times.

As we speak, everybody is in a dilemma. Why is it difficult for the Electoral Commission to state when presidential and parliamentary elections are being held? Why is it difficult for the Electoral Commission to say so?

Madam Speaker, I foresee a situation that we are going into an election which will be challenged. Already, there is controversy around the issue of public meetings and campaigns. Let us not have another of exclusion, which is caused by the Electoral Commission itself. Thank you.

The Speaker: I hope the Attorney-General will address us on Section 67(1), on the duties of the Electoral Commission.

4.32
Mr john Baptist nambeshe (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take issue with the learned Attorney-General’s statement on the import of Section 36 of the Registration of Persons’ Act, especially, when it is claimed in the report that the Electoral Commission boasts of holding various stakeholders’ engagement meetings or rather alerting and reminding stakeholders. It is common knowledge that the Electoral Commission have abdicated their responsibility of voter education. 

I wonder whether they have informed people when recently in Kayunga, already the requirement for the deed poll has started biting. A flag bearer for the National Unity Platform (NUP), a one Fefeeka Sserubogo, was turned away by the district registrar for lacking the deed poll even when he presented affidavits. In that much squeezed duration of time, he would not process the required deed poll.

Therefore, it would be a pack of lies if you are claiming that there have been exhaustive stakeholder engagement meetings by the Electoral Commission with the people.

If one of the requirements is that we have to draw our campaign programme and the same Electoral Commission is shy to mention the exact date of elections, how would one draw a programme? It is a requirement on the nomination date.

Therefore, the learned Attorney-General must be compelled to engage further with the Electoral Commission to ensure that there is an extension of nomination dates because already publishing these deed polls in the gazette requires another week. If the last one, as mentioned by hon. Basalirwa, is coming out tomorrow or today, then the next one is expected next week. This definitely would require an extension in the dates of nomination. I submit.

4.35
Mr jonathan odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Article 61, the Electoral Commission is supposed to organise free and fair elections. One of the tenets of free and fair elections is passing adequate information about the election onto the people of Uganda.

The Electoral Commission gave out information on the requirements for one to offer themselves. Among the things they mentioned, and published through press conferences and statements, was that you must be a voter; take papers to National Council for Higher Education and go to Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) if you want to equate results. However, they did not inform the country that you need to change your name if it appears differently from what is on the voters’ register.

My question is; if I go and change my name and get the deed poll, are you going to amend the register that you have? Will the Electoral Commission do it?

Secondly, I am very worried because under Article 137, it is only the Constitutional Court that interprets anything that is inconsistent; whether law or action by Parliament. For the Electoral Commission to sit and say that in their opinion they think that Parliament by providing that women should be represented at parish and sub-counties have contradicted the Constitution without going to the Constitutional Court - I would like to ask both the senior and junior Attorneys-General who are lawyers; is it your opinion that the Electoral Commission now has powers to sit and decide basing on your colour or sex that this one qualifies to be represented or not? 

If Electoral Commission has allocated themselves the power to decide, they will even wake up one day and say, “There’s a constituency with only 200 people so they don’t qualify to have a member of Parliament.” They may also say, “We’ve seen that there are few persons with disabilities in our country and in our opinion, we think the population quota is not enough for that person to come and represent persons with disabilities.” 

My disappointment, and I think the Attorney-General has to take this in good faith, is that you cannot sit and change any law passed by Parliament without going to court. You either come back to us or you implement it as it is.

Lastly, on the issue of civic education, we passed money and gave it to the Electoral Commission. Let them tell us; when did they go out to the entire country telling people that, “If your names are different from what we have in the register, we shall not nominate you?” That is the reason we gave you money to go and sensitise the members of the public.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I would have expected the Electoral Commission (EC), if they were seriously interested in this subject, to advocate for it as they did for the equivalent. They kept on making advertisements that, “If you have got an equivalent certificate, go to UNEB.” They should also have done the same for the names.

4.39
Mr mohammed nsereko (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a matter that affects very many people out there in this field of elective politics and inside.

I would sympathise with the Attorney-General now because the Electoral Commission is the one, which is responsible. We have all the powers to interface with the Electoral Commission here.

I can see pertinent questions being posed, for example, issues of dates that are not clear. When we nominate, the second question is, “Give us your campaign road map.” The answer will be, “I don’t even know the date when I’ll be voted for.”

Madam Speaker, you and this House have all the powers to direct that we interface with the Electoral Commission, for example, through our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs or such a committee or in such a way that you may propose.

We are dealing with a matter of closure of dates. The presumption and dictates of the Constitution is that the Electoral Commission must be independent. As well, it must work hand in hand with the stakeholders.

When it comes to times of budgeting, it comes before us to tell us how much it needs and we have been talking about civic education. Madam Speaker, just like you said when it came to the issue of political parties and holding internal primaries, the Electoral Commission was explicit. It was telling them, “We need all your candidates well prepared here.” This time, it is not possible.

Madam Speaker, we seek your indulgence that in a win-win situation, the adjudication body should come to the people’s representatives so that we present these issues and they tell us theirs. Probably, we come up with an extension in dates that does not necessarily affect them but also does not lock out most people.

My humble prayer is that mere sending the Attorney-General might not get us answers immediately because it is like talking through intermediaries. Let us interface with the Electoral Commission itself, we put these points forward, it brings its own forward then we can come up with a well meaningful solution that will help the public.

You even have powers to open up the bar and invite the Electoral Commission to address this Parliament on that matter so that they look at Women Members of Parliament responding to them and pick our responses in their presence. That will help lift the cross off the backs of the Attorney-General. Thank you.

4.42
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the response. 

Our concern is that the Electoral Commission seems to be taking Ugandans for granted. For the two times I have gone through elections to come to this House, each time I am nominated, I am asked to produce my plan or programme for campaigns. I wonder how we are going to do it this time, when we do not even know the dates of the elections. Which time are we planning against? 

I think it would be prudent for the Electoral Commission to give us the date for the election. The nomination date is fixed - they do not even want to adjust it - but the date for elections is adjustable. Is that fair? I think they need to be fair.  

They have come up with this condition at the last moment. This law was passed in this House and it is very unfair for the Electoral Commission not to extend the time. This is unfair to women. As women of this country, we cannot take it for granted because we know it is the women who take on their husbands’ names; they are the ones that keep changing their names every now and then. 

Maybe the Attorney-General is telling us that they have abandoned the women along the way, that women emancipation is no more, or they want all these women not to come back to Parliament. 

The unique stature of women makes them adopt or change names; they should give adequate time to adjust. We only have one day, which is tomorrow, and you gave us the report yesterday. You know that swearing a deed poll is not something done in one day; we have to run around. 

Therefore, if you really have women at heart in this country – at least, for us, in Parliament, we are able to get the information at once. How about those women in the villages? How about those ones who are yet to come up? They are asking, “Is it true? Which processes do we follow?” Some of them are not even familiar with going to lawyers. 

If you want a free and fair election, you cannot simply come up with a condition at the last hour when someone is going to be nominated. Therefore, we request the Electoral Commission to be a fair and independent Commission that caters for all the interests and circumstances of all the people. We already know that this election of 2021 is going to be held under very unique conditions. Let it be unique so that you also extend the nomination date. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sitting here asking myself how it was possible that in the immediate aftermath of the promulgation of this Constitution, a man called Stephen Akabway organised elections for the whole country successfully with a fixed date. After him, Aziz Kasujja (may his soul rest in peace) equally organised elections and we knew the date before we went for nominations. Dr Kiggundu did the same thing. Why is the chairman of the Electoral Commission keeping this thing as personal property? Why is the date personal property of the judge? No, this is an insult to us.  

4.47
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to summarise what we have been discussing. We are saying to Government that it is not possible to conduct nominations efficiently and effectively without extending the nomination dates, and this is for two reasons, which others have mentioned but I am only re-emphasising them. 

Even when we extend the time for two weeks, it will not affect the road map that you had stated because the two weeks will go up to 26 October and the President is going to be nominated later in November. I believe we are all going to have the ballot papers made on the same date and delivered at the same time. Hence, there is no worry about that. 

We also said that there are other elections taking place over the weekend. What has been happening throughout the country during this time is going to affect the Saturday elections. What will you do when people contest the outcome of the youth and workers elections on Saturday and Sunday? 

How will the people who will have come from elections get the nomination fee paid on Sunday so that they can go for nominations on Monday? We are making a precursor to you that it is pertinent that the extension is made. I have all conviction that it has no financial implication in that aspect. I rest my case. 

4.49
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The doctrine of separation of powers is well articulated; as a legislature, we have powers over certain things. I propose that tomorrow, the entire Electoral Commission – because they said they are very powerful and are over 20 – appear before the legal and parliamentary affairs committee and explain to us why they do not want to extend the dates. We are now focusing on the Attorney-General, speaking on their behalf. However, we would like them to come and explain to the country why it is difficult for them to do this when this is just simple logic. 

There are justifications as to why we need an extension. The issue of women rights is not being taken seriously. I think for the first time, Uganda has demonstrated to the whole world that the issue of gender parity is very serious. Yesterday, we debated this and the justifications are clear. Women are not being given what they deserve. 

Why is it that with this election, it is like the world is ending tomorrow? This is not an existential threat. Madam Speaker, it must happen. We cannot be tested; this is the Parliament of the people of Uganda. Therefore, the Executive must be responsible and sensitive to the interest of the people we represent in this House. I think it goes without saying that our advice and suggestions should be taken with seriousness. I beg to submit. 

4.51
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very clear here that the Electoral Commission has been given good workable alternatives. 

Hon. Asuman Basalirwa from Bugiri Municipality said that if the 14 days are many, the Electoral Commission can consider 10 days. The reason is that registering a deed poll with the Registrar of Companies or advocates can be done in two days. Once you have a deed poll, as you wait for the Gazette, then nominations can be going on, or by the time of the nominations, the Gazette could have come out and people can be allowed to participate freely in this election.

Secondly, I have been participating in campaigns for the last 20 years – three times at Local Council V (LC V) level and later at parliamentary level. I have never gone for nominations without knowing the date for the election; so, what is happening this time is very rare. I am worried that COVID-19 is going to become a serious disaster and elections do not take place - maybe that is why the date is not clearly mentioned here - or any other disaster might befall us and stop elections from taking place.

However, I am aware that people are willing to see these elections take place. Therefore, the Attorney-General should be very clear. As he was giving his explanation, I noticed that he was fidgeting. You know, when you fidget, somebody can read your mind. People will be able to notice that you are saying something that is not so hidden. The Attorney-General should be very clear on the matter of extending these days. If the 14 days are many, make it 10 or 7 days. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.54
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are the cause of the mess we have find ourselves in. Members of Parliament make laws and the Judiciary interprets them. Our main interpreter of the law here is the Attorney-General. 

For all the years, I have been participating in parliamentary elections - if I can give myself as an example. I had two names - I was called Drego - but I abandoned that name in 1974 and I am now called Diri. I have been using this name with my affidavit without any interference. Didn’t the Attorney-General see that as a problem before? Didn’t he advise the Electoral Commission? Is it only recently that they have opened their eyes? 

Also, the time given is very short. I think they realised this about a week ago and they now want me to go and change my name; how long does it take to change my name? If I started on the process tomorrow, by Monday shall I have the name changed? This is impossible!

I would like to say that any law, even the Constitution when it becomes necessary, can be changed. What about this mere regulation by the Electoral Commission? Can’t we change it? Is it impossible to do it? If they changed the dates from August to October 12th and 13th, why can’t they take change further to October 26th, just before the nominations for presidential candidates?

In the past, we used to nominate presidential candidates first and others would follow later. Our campaign period was shorter than the one for the presidential candidates. However, this year, they want us to be nominated first and then campaign for three and half months while presidential candidates will campaign for only three months, which is the reverse.  

Members of Parliament who are lawyers should look for an article in the Constitution, which can be used to cancel the decision of the Electoral Commission. Let us use our powers and call them here to explain why they want to leave women out, especially those who have changed their names. We have the powers; let us call the Electoral Commission here to explain. There is nothing impossible; we have the powers. Thank you very much.

4.58
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The legal minds have spoken and I have listened very carefully. I have also been in this Parliament for a number of years but I have never seen Attorneys-General that are so rigid that they are not even prepared to change. I am really surprised.

Madam Speaker, five years ago, I was nominated on 2 December to participate in the last elections. The Electoral Commission at that time was able to organise free and fair elections, yet we had been nominated in December. How come the present Electoral Commission has decided to fix our nominations on 12 and 13 October and is not willing to extend the nomination dates on grounds that they will not have enough time to complete the exercise? Why was the previous Electoral Commission able to do it even after December?

I have a feeling that the Attorney-General and his deputy are not being sincere; there is something they are trying to hide. That is why they are so rigid and pushing away whatever arguments are being fronted.

I also wonder whether the Electoral Commission anticipated that the Friday this week would be a public holiday. That is also a disadvantage; we cannot work on anything on Friday. I do not know whether they considered this because if they had it in mind, then they would have very genuine reasons for extending the nomination date from 12th to another date.

Lastly, I am just wondering what is magical about these dates - 12th and 13th. Are these dates from heaven that we must stick to them? If that is not the case, then I do not see any reasons as to why the Attorney-General and his deputy cannot ask for an extension of these nomination dates. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.00 
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened carefully and my understanding is that for the two weeks we have been here, we have not got what we have been asking for. Therefore, I request the Attorney-General to give us a straightforward answer as to whether what we are pushing for is not for the people and whether we are just creating it as Members of Parliament.

While the Electoral Commission is independent, we depend on each other. This problem is all over the country. That is why we are trying to tell the Electoral Commission to cure it at the right time but they are saying they cannot do it. So, is it our problem or a problem of the country? Can we understand this so that we are at par with you, knowing that we are pushing for something that is not a problem?

Secondly, I request the Attorney-General to clarify whether it is right for me, Ababiku Jesca, to be nominated without knowing when the voting date is. This is so confusing. We have been telling the Electoral Commission and Government that we need this date set but consistently, this has not come out. Attorney-General, help us to understand whether what we are pushing for does not matter.

We have pleaded and there are two options: One, let us look at the legislation; two, we should look at having an extension. I strongly believe that for all the candidates who are vying for parliamentary positions, no one is complaining about time. We are still in October. Even if we were set to be nominated in November, no one would complain because those who have primaries have been with the people. Therefore, where is the shortage of time going to arise? 

I think the Electoral Commission is not being fair to us. I would like to support the proposal made by the Member of Parliament for Kampala that we need to interface with the Electoral Commission. We have been using the Attorney-General’s office or Cabinet as a messenger and this is also causing mistrust. 

Attorney-General, I do not believe that you presented our views, and this mistrust is building up. Last week, it was there and this week, it is going on. Therefore, I support the proposal that we need to interface with the Electoral Commission so that they put their case on the record, because we are predicting negative effects on what is supposed to take place. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.04
The minister of state for energy and mineral development (Mineral Development) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sympathise with the Attorney-General and his deputy because this is a matter that we are not just raising today. The Deputy Attorney-General has been here over the issue of the women councillors’ representation in the local government councils. He has been here over the issue of names that may differ from academic documents. He has also been here on the issue of the extension of the nomination dates. 

The last time, Parliament asked him to interface with the Electoral Commission and give a response to these issues. Reading through the response from my colleague, I note two things. One, the Electoral Commission is not ready to go with what this House had proposed. This is because the conclusion given is that the Electoral Commission is unable to extend the nomination dates for both the local governments and Parliament, as proposed and reasons were given for that.

I am a candidate and I am going to get nominated. For all the elections that I have been participating in, as mentioned by the other Members, we have been going for nominations knowing the actual election date. I will be vying for the women’s seat and I have over 500 polling stations. We need to plan and have resources for those polling agents who will be there to guard our votes.

Madam Speaker, when a report comes and it is clearly stating the timelines - I would like to refer you to this report. They are saying that by 8 November 2020, they are expected to have handled the procurement of the service providers, and the production of printing ballot papers and declaration forms will commence. When you go ahead, they mention the packing and dispatch of polling kits. We are being told that in compliance with Article 61(2) of the Constitution, the polling kits should be ready for dispatch to the districts by 2 January 2021. You are dispatching polling kits –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have one minute.

MS OPENDI: You are dispatching polling kits to my district by 2 January 2021 and you have indicated timelines when these activities will take place. If polling kits are coming to my district by 2 January 2021, can I know when these polling kits are supposed to be used? What is difficult with fixing a date? 

If the Electoral Commission has told us that between 8 and 10 February - What is wrong with simply saying by 30th and then we all know that by 30 January 2021, we shall be going to the polls? What is so hard with this? Some of us fix our money for polling agents so that we do not face challenges. We need polling agents to be facilitated on the polling day - giving them lunch to guard our votes. If you do not give me a date, I may run into danger. 

My problem is that we seem to be debating here in futility. I do not know whether this House is going to be prorogued today and if it is prorogued, we shall have nominations on Monday. I therefore think it would be important for us to go by the proposal that the committee interfaces with the Electoral Commission and it reports back to the House tomorrow, if the House is not prorogued today, so that we can see a way forward. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I would like to ask the Attorney-General to give his response. When you tell me that you are going to bring the polling kits on 2 January 2021, are they for display or for people to know that the kits are there? If you bring the polling kits on 2 January 2021, what do we do with them as you decide? 

I have a ruling to make on one of the issues before you come in. This is an insult to the people of Uganda; you cannot make us run in darkness. It cannot be a secret of one person. This commission is not different from other commissions. Having said that, Attorney-General, I would like you to respond to the issue of the powers of Parliament on review of representation. However, I will start with a small brief. 

When we were considering the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2019, the Chairperson of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, hon. Pamela Kamugo, moved an amendment to sections 10 and 23 of the Local Governments Act to remove the reservation of one-third of the seats of the council for women, and to require that each electoral area in the local government council is represented by a woman representative. These amendments were passed by the House and are contained in sections 2 and 4 of the Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2020.

The Electoral Commission has indicated challenges in implementing the Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2020, cognisant of the requirement under Article 180 of the Constitution. The Electoral Commission argues that the amendments to sections 10(1)(e) and 23 of the Local Governments Act, obligating each council in the local government structure to be represented by women councillors exceeding one-third of the council, contravenes Article 180(2)(b) of the Constitution.

I believe that the Electoral Commission used the same Constitution we do and they are alive to the rights and obligations of the state to empower women to participate in decision making. Therefore, it cannot be that if you make a small change, you are violating the Constitution and the world will go mad. 

However, I would like to go to the representation itself. The 1995 Constitution obligates Government to take affirmative action for marginalised groups, including women. This is under Articles 32 and 33 of the Constitution. Notwithstanding that, when it comes to woman representation in local governments, Article 180(2)(b) reserves one-third of the membership of each local government council to be for women. The threshold for women representation was also reflected in sections 10 and 23 of the Local Governments Act. 

Whereas the Constitution reserved one-third of the seats for membership of each local government council to be for women, Article 180(2)(d) of the Constitution empowers Parliament to review the threshold. It says, “Parliament shall exercise similar powers of review as stipulated in Article 78(2) of this Constitution, in relation to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this clause”. Paragraphs (b) and (c) of that clause state thus: 

“(b) one-third of the membership of each local government council shall be reserved for women; 
(c) any law enacted by virtue of this article shall provide for affirmative action for all marginalised groups…”

Paragraph (d) then states that Parliament shall exercise similar powers of review, as I have already stated. To that end, therefore, the powers are already with us and we are free to use them. 

I would also like to read Article 78(2) in full- 

“Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under clause (1)(b) and (c) of this article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it.”

In exercise of the powers of Parliament under Article 180(2)(d), Parliament is therefore required to review the threshold of female representation in local government councils, and in so doing, this Parliament may, in relation to the local government, retain the existing, increase – like we did – or abolish altogether. 

The practice adopted by Parliament in reviewing the representation of special interest groups under Article 78(2) of the Constitution is through a resolution of Parliament followed by an amendment to the parliamentary elections law. Indeed, this very year, we reviewed the special interest groups. We brought it by motion and introduced a Bill to bring in the elderly people. We reviewed it right here in this very House. 

In conclusion, therefore, in this regard, I want the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission to know that the amendments made to sections 10 and 23 of the Local Governments Act were made pursuant to the powers granted to the Parliament under Article 180(2)(d) of the Constitution. In exercising those powers, Parliament may increase representation and the threshold beyond the one-third previously prescribed. We have that power. We can abolish the representation or abolish the threshold altogether, or we can maintain the representation. 

The reviews of this representation or the threshold need not be effected through an amendment to the Constitution. We do not need the Constitution. What we did was sufficient because we already have the powers. So, I do not want to hear any more that Parliament contravened the Constitution, because we did not.

Attorney-General, you can now present your thoughts.

5.16
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and all the honourable Members of Parliament present this afternoon. I think there are about three issues that seem to form the crux of this afternoon’s debate culminating from yesterday’s debate.

One is the deed poll and whether that can be extended or changed. That was one of the issues. The second issue, Madam Speaker, as I was listening, is the one you have just elaborated about whether the change in women representation is constitutional or not and whether or not this Parliament has the powers to do so. That is the second issue that I noticed. 

The third issue that was very prominent was the one of certainty of the date. Members kept on asking why they cannot be given the date since they were being given the date in advance in the past. There was also the issue of the extension of the nomination date. 

In brief, those were the three items. Because there were many people who presented, I thought that I should first summarise them. I will answer a few, hon. Kafuuzi may answer a few of the others, and then, Madam Speaker, you will decide on which direction we should take. 

Hon. Kibalya said that he was very disappointed that we are doing things in vain. That is, of course, not true. Hon. Kamateeka said that the deed poll issue has been alive and it did not start yesterday. That is true. 

Hon. Tinkasiimire said that he had been in the seminary and that when you do not see people, then it is a sign of darkness. Is he still here? (Interjections) I wanted to respond to him when he is still here. He said it is darkness. I can see why he left the seminary. 

Hon. Okupa said that the NRM are still doing their election petitions right now, some even up to this weekend. He asked what will happen to them. 

Hon. Basalirwa said that since local government elections were postponed, why not parliamentary. On the extension for nomination, he asked why the nomination dates cannot be extended from 12th and 13th for two weeks, or at the very least for ten days or one week.

Hon. Adong Lilly hurt me because she asked why we do not like women. This is not true; we like them very much. Hon. Orot asked that we try for seven or 10 days. Hon. Kalule Ssengo said that the AGs are very rigid. It is not true. We are members of this House. 

By way of answering, I will start by answering hon. Ababiku Jesca of Adjumani, who said that they now mistrust us, the Attorneys-General. I wish to displace that mistrust. We are Members of the august House, we take our responsibilities very seriously but the Constitution enjoins us to try and interpret as best we can, without fear or favour, the law as it is.

Madam Speaker, who herself is a seasoned lawyer, has already spoken about that aspect of the special interest groups and the amendments that, as you recall, we brought and we did them by motion. 

The issue was, yesterday when we adjourned, we went and interacted with the Electoral Commission with all the concerns of this House, starting with the one for the extension of the nomination dates. The explanations they gave us are the ones that have been uploaded, which the Deputy Attorney-General read. These, generally speaking, were not only related to the acquisition of election materials, but as they explained to us, also about organisation. 

They said that the process of election at all the 34,000 polling stations takes time to organise. Part of the explanation was that they need some certainty on the day in order to concentrate on organising. 

As they explained to us, they have postponed this before. They said that the postponements cannot be indefinite. The explanation was not only on acquisition of materials but also on actual organisation of the elections. 

They gave us the example of the local Government councils, which a Member raised here, that the nominations started on 21 September 2020 and were supposed to end on 1 October 2020. They extended that to 5 October 2020. 

They also said that these days we are talking about - the nominations of members of Parliament - were supposed to have been on 10 August 2020 but they said that this too was extended to the 12th – (interjections) If Members will allow; on the question of the specificity of the dates, that why can’t we be given the specific date? Why is it being kept a secret? First of all, for hon. Ababiku, there is no reason for us to keep the date a secret; at least the Attorney-General’s chamber. Absolutely no reason.

However, they referred us to – First of all, under the Parliamentary Elections Act, section 18(1)says:

“The Commission shall, as soon as practicable, after nomination days, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a day to be known as the polling day and the time and place where each returning officer will tally.”

That is what the Parliamentary Elections Act section 18(1) says. 

The Presidential –(Interjections)– Hon. Okupa, if you allow me to finish –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Attorney-General what the Electoral Commission Chairperson or officials told him, regarding that issue, which he is quoting. Do you mean that the previous chairpersons were not alive to that, because they were able to give the dates by the time we got nominated?

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you for that point of clarification. I will go straight to the Presidential Elections Act. Section 16 of the Presidential Elections Act states as follows:
“The Commission shall, as soon as practicable, after nomination days, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a day to be known as a polling day.”

Both the Presidential Elections Act and Parliamentary Elections Act state clearly that the polling day shall be given, after the nominations. (Interjections) I just read the law, hon. Okupa; not formed by me. That is the explanation that was given to us.

On the question of the deed poll, just for clarity, this is not a question that has arisen right now. Apparently, in the 2015/2016 elections, there were many issues on the question about names of aspiring candidates. There were very many issues, which were even challenged in our Judiciary. That was the point that hon. Kafuuzi made earlier. This matter went up to the Supreme Court and it was decided that all married people, on the basis that marriage is undertaken by choice, are enjoined to change their names by deed poll. 

It is simply the way it is. I cannot run away from that. That is the position and the point being that the issue of the deed poll has been there and has been challenged –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Attorney-General. I would like you to clarify on the matter of the deed poll. Today is Thursday and we were told yesterday by your deputy that it requires at least three days for one to process this.

Today is Wednesday, tomorrow is Thursday and Friday is a public holiday. Nominations begin on Monday and Tuesday. Almost everybody who is affected by this matter has been waiting for what will come out of these discussions. 

With the path you are taking, what will be the fate of these women who are affected? For instance, I am Akello Judith Franca and married to Mr Opira Jimmy. My other documents now have Akella Judith Franca Opira. The other ones have Akello Judith Franca. Between today and Monday, what should be my fate?

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, honourable member. Your fate is secure because it is what hon. Kafuuzi laid on the Table earlier this evening - the regulations. Those allow you, by statutory declaration, to change in the circumstances where your names – as you have just said – are now misarranged. Those are the regulations that he has just laid. You can rearrange the names, which are misarranged.

If you are changing hon. Jackson Kafuuzi to become Jackson Kibirige, that is what requires a deed poll. This does not affect you.

Honourable member, I appreciate. You are saying that on Friday, it is a public holiday. My job here is to tell you what the law is. Even those people who are waiting for the discussions are waiting for them, one way or the other. It is not that they are waiting for the discussion on the basis that it is going to go one way. It is one way or the other.

The only thing that we can do is to follow the Constitution. That is why you heard the Speaker saying that under the Constitution, there is provision for these amendments by motion. We all refer to the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, having said that – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Honourable minister, thank you for giving way. Can you be specific? Most of the women who are here - some of them were here in the previous Parliament. What hon. Franca Akello is raising, I am sure several other members of Parliament should have raised the same question.

Can you be specific that those who had used that name in the last election, which name is also carried on the current NIRA card, which they used for the last election; all they need is simply a statutory declaration; pure and simple English.

However, if you are now going to make it legal and we do not understand it - simply be specific that those who had used the names of their husbands and the same name is carried on the current card of NIRA do not need to worry about the deed poll.

Please, simply make it like that and make sure that you tell the Electoral Commission not to harass the women who are going to be candidates and are bearing the husbands’ name and that husbands’ name is contained on the NIRA card, which they will use for voting purposes.

Simply be clear.

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, hon. Ogwal. We had that discussion with you yesterday and I referred you to the regulations. I will now read them as they are. Regulation No.2(b) states “A person who wishes to update his or her particulars in the register;

    a) to change the order of names
    b) to correct the error of names,
    c) to omit nicknames,
    d) to add names appearing on his or her birth certificate issued before 1 January 2016 or his or her passport issued before 2014,
    e) to clarify on initials appearing on the register or to omit initials or to add any name represented by an initial or on the register, or
    f) to clarify on vernacular versions of names – shall present to the authority a statutory declaration  made under the Statutory Declarations Act accompanied by a birth certificate, passport or any other academic document to verify the change required to be made.” 

That is what the Registration of Persons was trying to cure.

Madam Speaker, I tried to explain the rationale. With your kindness, you can guide on how to move on. If there is something that I have not clarified on, hon. Kafuuzi can clarify further.

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, we are discussing a very important issue. I would like the Attorney-General in his wisdom - Parliament has seen the problems in nominations on 12 and 13 October 2020. You are reasoning that you interfaced with the Electoral Commission. Do you think adding either a week or ten days by law is impossible?

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, the classification I would like to hear from the Attorney-General is according to the previous elections in 2016. The nominations were on 2 and 3 December, 2015 for parliamentary and presidential elections and we had the elections on 18 February 2016, which was a duration of 45 days for the preparation of all the election materials. 

What is it then, and I thought that is what the Attorney-General was going to clarify on, what has fundamentally changed that we now require a over 120 days?

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I like the responses of the Attorney-General, the lawyer he is. He has been listening to all the members of Parliament and I expected to be precise in terms of - because the contentious issue is the adjustment of the days of nominations.

Honourable Attorney-General, we only have tomorrow because nominations are on Monday and Tuesday. Despite all the legal issues that you have raised, Parliament believes that an adjustment of a few days is very possible. We need to take a decision today because we have the mandate.

Honourable Attorney-General, you were to represent us to the Electoral Commission in terms of mediation so that we come out with a harmonised plan, which you did not. Therefore, the clarification we want now is what makes it extremely impossible for a few days of an extension. Reason being that you are explaining the deed polls, the affidavit and all those issues, which are not known by other Ugandans who are contesting and we are here as their representatives.

Giving an extension of a few days would help you and the country to sort out all those queries so that we progress well in terms of the coming elections.

Honourable Attorney-General, before I match out, I would like to hear what makes it extremely impossible to have an extension. If you cannot respond, can’t this House take a position and say as Parliament, we adopt that an extension on the nomination days be granted for the next ten days so that especially the women participants are not left out of this game. We are very curious about that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General has quoted the law regarding the deed polls but when it came to the extension of nomination days, I did not see any constitutionality or any article quoted that deters us from extending the nomination date.

I was waiting to hear from him that it is cast in stone and it is by law under a specific article. What is this that you cannot hear and assert yourself? You are the Attorney-General of Uganda. We want you to talk like the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda. The Electoral Commission is under you and so, we would like to hear that.

Secondly, hon. Tinkasiimire here raised an issue. He hinted on something, which the Attorney-General is not picking well but his deputy could have picked, on the challenges people have been having.

You could have seen an advert run yesterday by MTN, Airtel and Stanbic Bank on the challenges that have been on the network. There has been a challenge and people are finding it difficult doing transactions. 

However, it is not limited to MTN, Airtel and Stanbic. It is also a problem in Uganda Revenue Authority. Some people have been trying to make payments and I know amongst us, there are people who have not yet paid due to that challenge. Isn’t that a measure to consider that you give people an extension, in addition to the gender issues?

Madam Speaker, if this issue cannot be concluded here, can you use your power and summon the Attorney-General, the Electoral Commission and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, so that it is solved? This business of us looking like failures and we are relying on the Attorney-General as a messenger and he comes to say, this is according to the Electoral Commission - 

Nevertheless, let him clarify on these issues and challenges people are facing in making the payment. With those, he should be able to explain to us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, before you come back, I have had time to look at section 18 of the Parliamentary Elections Act and section 16 of the Presidential Elections Act. I do not see the intention why dates should be a secret until it is gazetted.

This provision obligates the Electoral Commission to publish the day and also the tallying centres. That is why they say they shall appoint the polling day but it does not mean you should keep it a secret and then you say, “Now, I am going to give the date.” They should give us the date. They are only required to put the date in the gazette and not to keep it secret.

Therefore, that excuse of section 18 of the Parliamentary Elections Act and section 16 of the Presidential Elections Act is irrelevant. That is to say officially that I have now announced to the world. 

MS AVUR: Madam Speaker, our Attorney-General here and his Deputy are very much aware why the Electoral Commission is giving itself flexibility of leaving us in the dark and leaving it very comfortable for them to determine election dates of either 8 or 10 January 2021. They are very flexible with themselves but they do not want to be with Ugandans on the issue of the extension. 

Why aren’t you explaining to us? Why does the Electoral Commission find it very comfortable to be flexible on when they can let us know when the elections are going to take place but they cannot be with Parliament of Uganda on the extension? People’s representatives are requesting for a mere extension of just two weeks. 

Why are you with them in their comfort zone and not trying to feel what Ugandans are going through about coming up with a specific date, yet, that would help them plan to finish their other activities and fit in the programme? Here we are, stuck but they cannot be flexible. (Interjections)

mr byaruhanga: Madam Speaker, I need protection.

The Speaker: Allow the Attorney-General to present.

mr byaruhanga: Thank you very much but he is my friend. Hon. Okupa and other honourable colleagues, to answer your questions directly about the law vis-à-vis the nomination date, the law does not talk about the extension. It only talks about the nomination date. 

My answer is that there is no law that I know of that casts the nomination date in stone. If you were listening, for those issues, which were legal in nature, they are the only ones that I responded to legally. The Speaker has just responded to the two sections I referred to.

On the extension of the nomination date and hon. Kafuuzi’s statement that the Electoral Communication’s main issue was not necessarily the other attendant issues of procurements, I explained here that their contention was one of organisation time. Hon. Okupa, I spent time; you would have heard me explaining very clearly about that. 

They talked of “operations” in terms of organising. You remember I even said that they made reference to two extensions that they had given, one on local Governments and the other on parliamentary elections.

Having said that, I have already said that the Rt Hon. Speaker will guide on how you would like us to move from that. Otherwise, I was only duty-bound to tell you the legal parameters. That is what I am supposed to do. That is why I spoke about the deed poll and that matter had been traversed in courts. 

I talked about the law and the parliamentary and presidential elections and the Speaker has just responded to that. She has also spoken about the one of women representation.

What I have said will suffice in the context of the response. We will now refer to the Speaker to make the appropriate orders. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you, Attorney-General and honourable members. This matter for now remains unresolved, yet, it is a matter of grave public concern. Therefore, I am directing the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission to appear before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs tomorrow so that this matter can be discussed and they give us a solution. It seems we are not on the same page, yet, a decision made here can affect many lives and livelihoods in this country.

Therefore, let the Chairperson of the committee, together with the Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General and his team meet tomorrow and give us a position. I know we have the National Prayer Breakfast and other things. There are many things happening tomorrow but we shall give you information after the committee has met.

Hon. Attorney-General, you know that nominations are on Monday and Tuesday. Will anybody die if they are moved to may be Thursday and Friday of the same week? It is just incredible how these people say, 12th and 13th are cast in stone.

Mr byaruhanga: Madam Speaker, I think you interacted with the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission yourself –

The Speaker: On telephone.

Mr byaruhanga: Yes. To be honest, I had hoped that that interaction would have helped to resolve this issue. Tomorrow looks like – because of these time frames - if you would kindly accept my advice that you ask him to come and see you in the morning. I am looking at tomorrow Thursday and I think it has some national obligations of which you are party. You could ask him to come and see you tomorrow or even this evening. 

I will be very honest. I talked to him during the session and – may be, if you talk to him then you can present to us the outcome on the basis that that particular aspect is not cast in stone.

Of course if not, we will appear tomorrow for the meeting but it might be a good idea that you have a chat with him. 

The Speaker: Okay. I will take the effort to have a meeting with him, probably very early and then advise you. However, let us still keep the meeting. If we agree, then we do not need it. Let us keep both. I will arrange to see him but also keep the meeting that he should meet you later in the day.

I do not see the ministers on items 3(ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii). Let us have item 4.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ADDENDUM TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 2, FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/21

5.50
The Minister state for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay an Addendum to the Supplementary Schedule 2 for the financial year 2020/2021.

The Speaker: It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF BANK OF UGANDA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2020

5.51 
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission, I wish to lay a Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Bank of Uganda for the year ended 30 June 2020. 

The Speaker: It is sent to the Public Accounts Committee and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, I raised a matter directed to the Deputy Attorney-General. I do not know where he has gone. The matter was regarding the elections that are going to take place on Saturday. There were concerned candidates of about 10 districts who raised the issue that some districts only had male delegates and no women. This was mainly in the eastern part of the country but this could have also happened in other regions. 

The Deputy Attorney-General promised to come and explain how he would sort out that problem because the elections for the elderly are on Saturday.

THE SPEAKER: In some districts, the entire committee of the People With Disability consists of men.

5.53
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, is hon. Okupa saying that it was the choice of those districts not to have women? Didn’t they present themselves? You cannot go to her home and tell her to come and present herself. That is why I am asking if it was by their own choice or not. Were they affirmatively or negatively excluded? Hon. Okupa talked about some places where there were only men and no women. 

5.54
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not know that that matter was coming up. I wrote to the Electoral Commission and I have not yet got their response on the matter. 

I remember you had raised an issue of special interest groups; the elderly. You said that the women had been left out and so, I wrote to the Electoral Commission. In the same vein, hon. Anthony Akol had also raised an issue to do with disenfranchisement of the people of Apaa, after which I wrote to the Electoral Commission. I did not know the matter was coming up and I have not picked the response. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I know the candidates also approached your office after I raised the matter. This afternoon, I stopped them and told them that we are going to get a reply because they had come again. I told them that the matter was going to be handled in the House. They are concerned because elections are going to take place on Saturday. 

However, if up to today, that has not been – They came to us with the voters’ register of the delegates and we do not know how that happened because that is what we had expected to get from your response. What could have happened in those districts where they only ended up having men, yet, there is a requirement that there must be a third of women representatives? 

Today, they came again to find out what will happen on Saturday. Are we going to continue with elections when a third of the districts in the eastern region do not have women delegates? What could have happened? When they are conducting elections, they build from the lower levels. What could have happened? There could have been an explanation. 

Attorney-General, it is not that they are not there. We just needed an official communication regarding that and we must take this seriously. There was a law you passed recently; a month or two ago. This is the situation we are in and the candidates are concerned and rightfully so. 

MR NSEREKO: Before the learned Attorney-General takes the Floor, there has been a suggestion – the whole country is watching – that with your powers, Madam Speaker, you engage the Electoral Commission at that level. This has been the song every other day. When you engage the Electoral Commission at that level, we will await your guidance before we engage with them tomorrow. 

Our prayer is that, as you have ruled, you engage wisely with the Electoral Commission and you allay the fears of the entire public so that we come up with a win-win situation that shall help us. We so pray, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I have already agreed that between now and tomorrow morning, I will meet him. If we agree, there is no need to meet the committee. If we do not, then we will have to meet the committee. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, yesterday, there was an article in the Daily Monitor where a one Owere was castigating Parliament for delaying to pass the NSSF (Amendment) Bill. 

I told him to stop castigating Parliament because before he speaks, he must get the facts. I told him that it was not Parliament but the Ministries of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Finance, Planning and Economic Development that have always failed. We only remained with two Articles to sort out. 

I would like to put it on record that the workers out there must know that it is not Parliament, the Speaker or members of Parliament letting them down. We are ready, even now. However, because we want to move in harmony, Government once again has failed us. 

Due to this COVID-19, the workers out there were hoping that possibly, this would be a stimulus for them. Now, we are getting to nominations, elections and campaigns and I do not know when this will be done. 

I would like to put this on record so that those who think that Parliament is delaying them get to know from now that it is Government, it is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development failing them and not Parliament of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would just like to put on record that last time we agreed that the mover of that Bill is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Therefore, he must complete that Bill. I do not see him and I did not see him yesterday. It is not the House. We are here and we are ready but the owner of the Bill is not here.

I do not see the mover of items 6 and 7. For items 8, 9 and 10, I understand they are actually not ready. 

Honourable members, today’s adjournment is going to be difficult. We have some supplementaries and tax laws that need to be addressed. Depending on when the nominations are, we shall call you back for just one day after nominations to deal with the Tax Revenue Bill and supplementaries. For now, let us just adjourn sine die. We shall call you even at short notice. 

Honourable members, House is adjourned. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.01 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
