

Tuesday, 2 October 2018

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I wish to remind you that the 20th National Prayer Breakfast shall be held on Monday at Hotel Africana, Nile Hall, beginning at 7.00 a.m. You are all invited to attend. This announcement has been made a few times before. Please, be there and we stand together and pray to the Almighty God for more blessings for our country and our people.

On Thursday, this House will be going on recess to enable you prepare for Independence Day and all the other activities that you need to do while you are not engaged here. I will be making that announcement on Thursday evening after the sitting. When I do that, I will also communicate what date we will be returning to proceed with the business of Parliament.

The purpose of announcing this now is to let you know that we have to do what we must today, tomorrow and Thursday as we prepare to leave our business at a good position, so that when we come back, we can continue from there. Therefore, we should do what needs to be done before we go on recess. So, let us double our efforts. Committees that are ready with their reports should come forward and we shall process their reports in the next two to three days. 

Let me announce that the honourable member for Masindi District, hon. Jalia Bintu, was elected Chairperson of the Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union at the 44th Annual General Meeting, which was held on 28 September 2018 at the Grand Imperial Hotel. (Applause) Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union is the apex body, which brings together a total of 1,252 Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisations (SACCOs) in the country. She is the first woman to hold this office. (Applause) 

She is heavily involved in the Parliamentary SACCO and I think that it was from that platform that she launched her candidature to take over the Uganda Cooperative Savings and Credit Union. Congratulations and thank you very much. That is why our cooperative savings in Parliament, which I encourage all of you to join, is operating very well; it is because of the reputation of people like hon. Jalia Bintu.

There were Members who had requested to bring some urgent issues, including the Member for Kampala Central.

2.05
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance that is looming in the city. 

It is true that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) is mandated by this Parliament, through legislation, to verify goods through the Pre-Export Verification of Conformity (PVoC), so that all standards of goods that enter into this country are acceptable. However, what is looming today is that over 100,000 traders in the city have threatened to go on a sit-down strike as result of the following: Over 5000 containers of goods are stuck at Mombasa Port and others at the various ports where they are supposed to be verified because of unwarranted delays. 

These people walk into banks and acquire loans at very high interest rates. Any impediment to trade for our traders in East Africa definitely means a destruction of their capital. Aware that people access capital at a very expensive rate in Uganda, any delay in getting their stock to the shops in Uganda is an impediment to their trade and their profitability. 

Mr Speaker, you clearly said that this is a House of justice where we come or walk into to acquire solutions. Briefly, these are the reasons as to why these people have decided to close their shops in order to seek redress:

1. 	After having these goods pre-verified in the different areas, there is re-verification. They are ordered to pay taxes, which are within the law, but after payment of taxes they are asked to do re-verification in some cases. 

This has become a den of corrupt officials. When someone has imported goods - some even import in groupage because not all of them have capital to import a full container of goods - when they arrive, they are told to pay taxes upfront. After payment of taxes, UNBS officials will arrive and wave them down and ask them to re-verify the goods. Imagine, an individual pays tax but after that, they are told that these goods do not conform to the standards and they are burnt.

2. 	The verification centres are only three. People import from all destinations in the world but at the moment we have India, United Arab Emirates and China. People import from the United Kingdom, United States of America, Vietnam, Thailand and many destinations but they have no chance to have their goods pre-verified. On arrival, they are given a penalty from UNBS for each piece. Let us say you have imported about 20,000 pieces of clothes, each piece is verified at Shs 150,000. This is untenable profit-wise and in business. 

Mr Speaker, if such issues continue in the arena of business, we shall not only lose taxes but we shall also discourage people from importing goods that are not manufactured in Uganda. Even the stand that UNBS states as the standard has no benchmark. They arrive at someone’s container and tell them “This is the shirt we want.” There is no benchmark shirt, garment, shoe or bag. If we do not go ahead to educate our traders on what is best for our society but continue to push them to the wall, we shall drive many out of business, lose taxes and lose the employment for our people.
	
In order to avert this, our prayer is that this should be suspended for at least six months, until these traders are sensitised on what standards are required and pre-verification centres are increased in the different destinations where importation is done. After that, we can carry on with the process. We are not anti-consumer protection; we are pro-consumer protection, but we are also not anti-business in this city. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue is on standards, quality and taxes. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) is responsible for assessing and collection of taxes. Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) is responsible for ensuring that what we bring in the country meets the standards of the country.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that we are in the process of putting in place tax stamps to assess the value of the taxes that ought to –(Interruption)
		
MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The minister was requested to stand and respond to the prayers of the traders who are buying goods using borrowed money yet the goods that they sell are not verified; they are only given certificates. The traders are suffering yet the minister is just taking us through taxation. Therefore, is the minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think all those issues were included. It included issues of pre-verification and all the other issues relating to taxation. So, let the minister answer. If there is deficiency in what he says, then you can ask supplementary questions.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought I should give a preamble before I give the answer.

Mr Speaker, what I was saying is that we are putting in place a system that will remove this inconvenience that hon. Nsereko has just presented. However, I would like to promise this House - I wish to come here and speak with confidence and even give you statistics. May I request this House to allow me to, first of all, get the details which hon. Nsereko talked about and then verify them so that when I come here, I can give you a position that I know very well.

Mr Speaker, I want to commit to this House to the fact that we do not want to inconvenience our traders at all. That is not our intention. That is why I am saying that the new system, which we are developing, should be able to get rid of what he has just raised. 
	
Mr Speaker, I beg to be given an opportunity to come back to this House next week with full details.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have heard that the traders will go on strike tomorrow. So, in the meantime, what happens?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I did not get you very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member has said that the traders are going on strike tomorrow.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, may I inform this House that for about a week, I have been on treatment and out of circulation. I heard someone say that I was bedridden. I want to report that I was not bedridden; I am hard and kicking. 

It should have been my colleague, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, to respond to this matter. However, I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to the traders - (Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to speak. I would like to raise a procedural point. The issue raised by hon. Nsereko is very important. However, I have observed that the minister did not get the question very well. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to  first get out and have some discussions on the issue and then he comes back to give us a concrete answer, so that people can listen and we go with a, b, c and d before our people close their shops? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what the minister was about to say. (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With due respect, I request that I should be given a chance –(Interjections)- Not one hour. I cannot get all the information in one hour; I would be deceiving this House. Give me a chance to go and dig out all the information and come back to the House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do you tell the traders in the meantime?

MR KASAIJA: I am appealing to the traders to be patient with us. We have never said something that we have negated on. All I am saying is that the traders should give us an opportunity to examine their problem so that we can provide an answer to this House on how we are going to sort it out. Thank you.

2.18
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Land measuring approximately 30 acres, belonging to the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre (NAGRC), located in Entebbe, has been fenced off by seemingly highly connected encroachers. I physically visited this land over the weekend and I vividly saw bouncers guarding it. In addition, there is a chain-linked barbed wire fence that has been put to seal off this Government land.
	
Employees, who appeared helpless, have been denied access to the only water pump, which supplies water to human beings and animals in this centre. In fact, some animals were reportedly killed by bouncers after they forcefully went into the sealed off piece of land.

Mr Speaker, we all know the importance of NAGRC and the fact that agriculture is the backbone of our economy. Therefore, if land belonging to Government entities under Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) can easily be taken away like this, isn’t that a big threat to agriculture and our economy?

Mr Speaker, I would like Government to explain the status and future of this animal resources centre, most importantly this this piece of land at Entebbe. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Anybody from Government?

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we request that you give us some time so that we get the agriculture minister to explain this issue before the sitting ends today. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we go to the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF UGANDA’S PUBLIC DEBT

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, as   requested by this House, the following is the status of Uganda’s indebtedness. 

Status of Public debt 

As at end of June 2018, Uganda’s total public debt stock (domestic and external) amounted to US$ 10.7 billion, equivalent to Shs 41,326.1 billion. Out of this, external debt disbursed and outstanding accounts for 67.2 per cent, that is, US$ 7.2 billion or Shs 27,939.9 billion, while domestic debt contributes 32.4 per cent, an equivalent of US$ 3.5 billion. 

The present value of public debt to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) increased from 27.4 per cent as at the end June 2017, to 30.8 per cent in June 2018. The net present value of debt is a nominal amount of debt outstanding minus the sum of all future debt service obligations. 

I would like to inform this House about the creditor composition. A greater share of Uganda’s debt disbursed and outstanding is sourced from multilateral creditors like the World Bank, the African Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank and it accounts for 68.2 per cent, which is non-concessional in nature. Bilateral creditors from Japan, France and China account for 31.1 per cent and commercial banks contribute only 0.7 per cent of the total external debt portfolio as at the end of June 2018.

The share of Treasury Bills to Treasury Bonds has improved to a ratio of 26 to 74 in June 2018, from a ratio of 31 to 69 in June 2016, achieving the target share of Treasury Bills to Treasury Bonds of 30 to 70 under the 2013-2018 Public Debt Management Framework. It is important to note that the larger the share of long-term instruments, the less the strain on the budget because it will mean less interest expense in the short run.

Mr Speaker, 92 per cent of Uganda’s stock of external debt is in four major currencies - US dollars, Chinese Yuan, Japanese Yen and Euros - whereas the domestic debt, on the other hand, is all denominated in Uganda shillings. 

The Composition of Debt per Sector
The biggest beneficiaries of debt financing by sector are energy, works, agriculture, which is consistent with the Government strategy to reduce the cost of doing business, developing infrastructure to boost growth and energy for the support of industrial development. This contributes 86 per cent. Therefore, the total debt to the energy, roads and works sectors contributes 86 per cent to our total debt.

Interest Rate for External Debt

A bigger proportion of Uganda’s debt disbursed and outstanding –(Interruption)

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is presenting a very important statement but it is a bit difficult for us to follow because this statement has not been uploaded on our iPads. We cannot really take in all the information he is giving in order to comprehend. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have reached paragraph No.7; can we pause it there? Clerk, can you ensure that this document is uploaded on the iPads. We will continue from there. Let us pause at paragraph No.7 and proceed with other business while we upload this on the system. Thank you. Let us go to the next item.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ELIZABETH KARUNGI ON THE BROKEN BRIDGE IN NYAMIRAMA SUBCOUNTY IN KANUNGU DISTRICT

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the sitting of Parliament on 24 July 2018, hon. Karungi Elizabeth Beikirize, Woman Representative, Kanungu District, raised a concern over a broken bridge in Nyamirama Subcounty that has hindered transport between Kanungu and Rukungiri districts and cost human lives.

Allow me to respond as follows: It has been established that the bridge site lies along the Nyamirama-Rushaka Road in Kanungu District. This 11.2 kilometre road is part of the community access road network and was constructed under the Community Access Infrastructure Improvement Project (CAIIP), which was implemented by the Ministry of Local Government in financial year 2015/2016 to district road standard.

The site is at the border between Kanungu and Rukungiri districts, where the two districts are separated by River Ntungwa. The width of the river at this point is estimated to be about 15 metres. There is no existing engineering crossing but rather there have been timber logs that the locals have been using to cross the river. Unfortunately, the recent flash floods that the country has been experiencing washed away the timber logs.

Our strategy to bridging this area: During the month of August 2018, the ministry sent engineers to carry out detailed field inspections, with a view of establishing the likely scope and cost of the works to provide for a suitable bridging intervention at the site.

Mr Speaker, given the fact that the budget for the financial year 2018/2019 is already being implemented with constraints to the ministry’s budget, no work is expected to be carried out at this site. However, when the final designs and cost estimates are finalised, the bridge will, together with several others already designed but with no funding yet, be considered in the subsequent financial years. All this will depend on the availability of adequate funds to cover the bridging demand.

I wish to inform Parliament that the need for bridging interventions on road networks countrywide is immense. My ministry is doing the best it can with the limited available resources. Indeed, I appreciate the recent increase in my ministry’s budget. However, for proper impact, special projects will be needed to address the stock of aging bridge structures as well as new bridging requirements. I intend to bring proposals for funding of these bridge projects in the near future for your approval and I request for your support when the requests for funding are tabled. I beg to respond.

2.31
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response. However, it is so discouraging and very unfortunate because more than ten people have drowned in that big river. I am frustrated. What are we doing here then? There is also a health centre, which the people of Rukungiri go to, and they have to cross the river. Women have really suffered on that bridge. 

Maybe I request that we consider this bridge for next financial year. I have heard there are some other bridges but also make this a priority because we have lost so many children so far. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to respond to that appeal?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern of the honourable colleague is genuine. It is unfortunate that lives are being lost. It is quite absurd that even our people cannot access the health facility that is within their vicinity. 

However, as I said, and humbly continue to say, this is not an issue of repairing because there is no engineering aspect at all. When CAIIP did this work, they never worked on this bridge. They just put logs, which were washed away. Therefore, our engineers are trying to look at the design and estimates. It is against that background that we can make an informed decision on the amount of money, which we may try to look around for and work on the bridge. However, the real answer that I can give is to inform the country that we can plan for it next financial year. If we can find resources within the system and it is manageable - A width of 15 metres is not quite small; it requires a substantial amount of money, which requires proper planning. Thank you.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. PIUS WAKABI ON THE FOUR MISSING PEOPLE AT MURCHISON FALLS NATIONAL PARK WHO WERE ALLEGEDLY KILLED BY GAME RANGERS

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Geoffrey Kiwanda): Mr Speaker, I have a question on the Order Paper and I am ready to answer it. The question was asked by hon. Pius Wakabi, the Member of Parliament for Bughaya County. It was about the four missing people at Murchison Falls National Park.

Allegations that four people went missing are very serious ones. We take it with utmost seriousness and such allegations are also investigated. If such cases are brought on board, we have to go to court. Killing of people is a serious criminal offence that cannot be administratively resolved without court.

We have not heard of any such allegations of recent. I request the honourable member to help us with details on this matter and also report such cases to the police for proper investigations and possible prosecution. The last time we heard of such allegations was in 2013 in which it was alleged that rangers in Murchison Falls killed people in the park. This matter was strongly investigated by the police but no evidence was found –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Works and Transport stood here to answer questions - (Interjections)– Yes, I am raising a procedural issue. His answer was without any hoax. He said the bridge they had constructed using logs had been washed away and he said, “We are planning”. Should people stop moving because they are planning? As if the Ministry of Works and Transport woke up yesterday and realised a bridge was required there. 

The Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is now saying that if the honourable Member of Parliament could give him details, they would investigate. This is a question you have even put on paper and you come to Parliament to ask for more details! When you were writing, why didn’t you ask for that information?

Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is whether it makes any sense for this Parliament to sit here and listen to these kinds of answers from ministers. You are asked a question about people who are dying and you say “we are planning”. Another question is asked about people who are missing, you say “I need more answers”. What did you come to do here today? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the minister walked in, the question had already been read and passed. It was out of his insistence that he was ready with the answer that I allowed him to proceed to answer the question. However, immediately he started answering the question, he said he needed more answers. He said he did not really have an answer. 

Therefore, you are not ready to answer this question because you cannot answer a question by saying, “I need more information from the honourable member who raised it.” If you are not ready with the response to the question, you can consult with the Member and then you come and give the response later. Do you have the response? Please, proceed.

MR KIWANDA: The answer is that there is no such - We have done the investigation. There is – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the matter, honourable? Is it a point of order?

MS BINTU: Yes, this is a point of order, Mr Speaker. The minister has just stated that the last time when they investigated, they established that the rangers did not kill people in the Murchison Falls National Park. It is the same ministry, when those people killed one of my people, who came and testified and some of these rangers are still in custody. Is the honourable minister in order to confuse this House that rangers have never been found guilty when they have been killing people in Murchison Falls National Park?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now you have been reminded.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I was quoting the civil suit that we had in 2013 - that is what the honourable member is talking about - where we had Jawotho John Bosco vs Uganda Wildlife Authority regarding the same matter. This suit was dismissed by his Lordship Albert Rugadya Atwooki on 2 March 2016. Of course, we had discussed but we went to court and it was dismissed. 

Therefore, it is not true that rangers have killed and kidnapped people in Murchison Falls National Park. However, this does not stop honourable members from coming with any evidence that they have. The ministry and Uganda Wildlife Authority carried out thorough investigations, but if there is any evidence that can be provided, we shall not close that door. (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, it is quite sad to see Ugandans suffering. In Katerera, for example, a ranger found one of the young boys who had gone to the national park. Instead of killing him, he cut off his two legs and left him to die there. 

Mr Speaker, it is like a policy for these people to kill people in the national park. We do not say that people should go poaching but if they are caught, let them be brought before the law. Is the minister in order to keep on lying that rangers are not killing people when we have evidence? A one Yoramu in Kakale, for example, had his legs cut off before he was left to die there. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, don’t you think you need to do more research on these matters before you respond?

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, these are new cases. I was answering a specific question. The honourable member is raising an issue from Katerera. I would not have come prepared for that. However, I promise this House - 

We still have a lot of issues to do with human-wildlife conflict. I requested for time on this Floor of Parliament. We are coming up with comprehensive human-wildlife conflict mitigation measures that I will lay before the House. However, this time I came specifically to answer a question from the honourable member. I know that other honourable members have issues, but I cannot answer them because I am not prepared for them; I was just prepared for this particular question, Mr Speaker.

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, we must take this country as very important when we are deliberating here. We cannot watch a situation where an institution of the state can launch an attack on the citizens of this country, to the magnitude of cutting off their limbs, and the minister in charge just says that he was only responding to a specific issue. We expect the ministers, when they come to respond to matters that affect their institutions, to respond with a national outlook.

Above all, Mr Speaker, when you look at the matter that has been raised, it touches the human rights aspect -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your point of procedure?

MR OCHEN: The procedural matter I am raising is: Is the minister procedurally right to respond to issues of human rights as if they are not of paramount importance? Is it procedurally right when he abuses the rights of the people? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this item was raised under rule 46 - urgent matters - by hon. Wakabi. It was about four missing people at Murchison Falls National Park who were allegedly killed by game rangers. It was a specific question raised as an urgent matter, and the answer to that should have been specific if it had been given on that day. That is why the minister is saying that he has come here to deal with a specific question. Of course, other issues have also come up.

Ordinarily, the matters raised by hon. Katoto and all the other issues that were not part of the question would not be entertained, procedurally. This is because when you ask a question, it is only the Member who raised the question that is entitled to ask a supplementary question because it is specific to what the Member has raised. However, this does not underrate the importance of all the other issues that have affected people who are neighbouring these conservation places. 

Therefore, the minister was proceeding well to deal with the specific matter on the Order Paper but not ignoring whatever else that was being brought forward. Ordinarily, the minister should have dealt with this issue squarely since he came prepared for it. However, I have also not seen the evidence of your preparation for this, honourable minister. If you are, why don’t you deal with this and we move?

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, as you have mentioned, we do not take any allegations lightly. We know what we go through as a country concerning the issue of human-wildlife conflict –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural point following the submissions made by the honourable minister and also various questions, which have emerged from Members and even from us who have not spoken. In my constituency, there is an area called Muhoro where we have chimpanzees on somebody’s private land. Every time he goes to dig around, they leave his land and go and attack people. They have killed very many children.

Therefore, whereas I am cognisant of the fact that he is dealing with a specific matter today, isn’t it procedurally right, at this particular time when these issues have all come up, for your Chair to prevail over the honourable minister and ask him to return to the House in a week or less to address all these matters? This is because whereas he is promising comprehensive policy action, we are interested in him answering these matters to the satisfaction of our constituents. That is the guidance I am seeking, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, each time I give a ruling or guidance, I hope that Members are listening. I have said that this is a specific question about four people who are missing in Murchison Falls National Park. The minister has not yet even answered that. The honourable member who raised the issue is entitled to a proper response because he represents those people. He asked the question, can we give him his right to get a response from the minister on that issue? If Members have other issues, they can raise them but you cannot start raising procedural matters even when the minister has not finished answering the question.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The answer to the question is that the ministry and Uganda Wildlife Authority investigated this allegation concerning the four people and found no truth in it. The information I have is that no ranger was involved at all in either kidnapping or killing the four people in Murchison Falls National Park as it was alleged in the question that I am answering.
2.52
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister has attempted to answer my question. However, he was quoted in the media saying that probably these people were eaten by animals, so I expected him to tell me whether they were eaten by crocodiles or hippos, which he has not done. Recently, more people were killed in Queen Elizabeth National Park -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you are entitled to is a supplementary question about the issue you raised. 

MR WAKABI: He has not answered my question and so I still insist that the minister should come back with a proper answer. Those people are still missing and the public still insists that the missing people went to the national park but did not come back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have been advised on the pending issue. 

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. OKIN P.P. OJARA ON THE GRABBING OF 692 ACRES OF LAND IN HIS CONSTITUENCY BY SOME MEMBERS OF THE UPDF

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col Charles Engola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the 26th Sitting of the First Meeting of the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday, 18 September 2018, hon. P.P. Ojara, MP, Chua County West, raised concern over the grabbing of 692 acres of land in his constituency by some Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) personnel. He sought an explanation from Government for this.

Following his concern, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and UPDF’s top leadership constituted an investigation team to carry out investigations into the alleged land grabbing by UPDF personnel in Chua West County. The report of the investigation team that went to the ground indicates that there is no single personnel involved in land grabbing in Chua West County as alleged by hon. Okin P.P. Ojara. However, we wish to call upon the honourable member to furnish us with his evidence in case he has got contrary information to ours and then we shall investigate the matter further and report back.

In conclusion, I wish to state that the UPDF is a law abiding institution, which is committed to playing its role as provided in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda –(Interjections)– I thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am sure that the minister is not going to run away. The moment you mentioned “procedure”, his duty was to sit down - that is what I know to be the practice - and not to say goodbye in order to evade responsibility.

I have immense respect for the minister but in his proceedings, as he was explaining, nowhere did we hear him say that the Member of Parliament who raised the issue was consulted by this committee he instituted in order to furnish them with information. I am saying this with a heavy heart because this is how we lose the debate. The Member who raised the issue was not invited to furnish them with the information so that they could follow. That shows you the nature and quality of investigation –(Interjections)– I do not want to say the quality of ministers because at least I know he is good quality by our standards. (Laughter) Therefore, are we proceeding well –(Interjections)– No, we are not going to import standards - (Interruption)

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, the decorum that must be exhibited in this House presupposes that we respect each other and regard everybody here equal. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to imagine that there are some ministers who do not meet standards set by him?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My following of what transpired is that there was some comment on standards and then the honourable member said, “No, my minister, by our standards, is perfect”. He then went on to say that we cannot import standards; our standards are ours. Do you want me to say that our standards are not ours? What should I say? Should I say that there are standards that are not our standards that we should use? 

Honourable members, on this issue of points of procedure and points of order, – I have said this many times but let me say it again - a point of procedure takes precedence over a point of order only when they are raised at the same time. It does not mean that when somebody has already risen on a point of procedure and there is a violation of order, you cannot call on a point of order. It is only when they are raised at the same time that precedence is given to the point of procedure. Please, 
I hope it is the last time I am correcting this impression. 

MR SSEGGONA: Would it not be procedurally correct for the minister to tell us who they consulted, other than the Member, who raised the issue? Otherwise, it would be treated as if we, in Government, cover up for the officers that are implicated in matters of this nature. 

As an officer of Government, I am deeply concerned about the quality of investigations that are conducted by the Executive when issues involving soldiers have been raised on the Floor. This is not something that you can easily sweep under the carpet. He then says, in conclusion, that he would invite the honourable member, if he has any contrary information, to give it to him. Find you where? Ministers are found in Parliament. If information is given, then the next thing is to get the information from the Member and not to go to the field where he is not then you start saying, “We want to be informed”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister said that they constituted a committee comprising of the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs and UPDF. That committee was sent to the field. I do not know which field but they were sent to the field. They came back and said that there was no such a thing that can confirm the allegation raised by hon. Okin P.P. He further said that if the honourable member has any contrary information to that effect, he can raise it. As we always say, hon. Okin P.P, Member for Chua West, has a right to a supplementary question. 

3.03
MR P.P. OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I am quite aware that in this Parliament, we need to talk matters of fact and figures. I would like to inform the honourable minister that I do not believe that at any one point, it has been my nature to come and tell a lie before this Parliament. 

Indeed, on 8 May 2018, I raised two pertinent issues concerning the issue of land in Chua County - not only in Chua West - and Kitgum District. The first issue was the establishment of a barracks in Akwang Subcounty where, fraudulently, the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs, together with a lawyer from Ogik and Company Advocates, acquired additional land, to the tune of 192 acres, to be added to land that belongs to the barracks. This land is occupied by over 60 households. They are now very worried that they are going to be displaced and they have nowhere to go.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable, we use rules - supplementary question.

MR OKIN: Mr Speaker, is the minister aware that additional land of 192 acres, which is contested by the community, is being added to the army barracks land?

Secondly, is the minister aware that four square miles of land in Orom Subcounty are being grabbed to start a barracks against Orom Subcounty and Kitgum District Local Government council resolutions? 

Thirdly, is the minister aware that he was present in Orom Subcounty, using a chopper and intimidating people on the issue of these four square miles of land? Is he aware that at one time, he was in Orom intimidating people on that note? I rest my case, Mr Speaker.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col Charles Engola): I am not aware of any land which has been grabbed from Chua Subcounty; I am not aware of any land which has been grabbed from Orom Subcounty by Uganda Peoples Defence Forces. Furthermore, I am not aware of going to intimidate any human being –(Laughter)- in the whole of Kitgum District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you not aware or you do not remember?  	 

COL ENGOLA: Mr Speaker, I am not aware of that. (Laughter)

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. BINTU JALIA LUKUMU ON THE NATIONAL ROLL-OUT OF THE SOCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANT FOR EMPOWERMENT (SAGE)
                   
3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE)(Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Mr Speaker, I wish to respond to the issue raised by hon. Jalia Bintu, Woman Representative, Masindi District, on the national rollout of the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment(SAGE). 

You may recall that during the budget discussion for financial year 2018/2019, this august House, this august House recommended that the funds for the national rollout of SAGE should be provided for in the budget. However, funds were not provided.

Mr Speaker, on the day of reading the budget for the financial year 2018/2019, you raised a concern and directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make a statement to this august House on funding for the national rollout of SAGE. Subsequently, you recall that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a statement on the matter and it was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Consequently, the ministry interfaced with the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and made a submission on the various alternatives and options for the national rollout of SAGE. The proposal was to start from age 65 years and above, at a cost of Shs 373 billion per year, to 80 years and above at a cost of Shs 142 billion per year. 	 

Consultations between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development are ongoing on the issue of the national rollout of SAGE. I am confident that the ongoing discussions and consultations under the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development will yield a common position, which will be presented to this House by the chair of the committee. 

I would like to thank hon. Jalia Bintu for raising the issue of national importance on the rollout of SAGE, which we have all been advocating for. However, I beg to submit that we should wait for the committee to conclude its report on the matter of the rollout and we shall be able to discuss their report exhaustively as Parliament. I beg to submit.

3.11
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Mr Speaker, I have listened attentively to the minister and I have heard the proposal she has made that we wait for the committee to come up with a report. However, I do not know when the committee is going to present that report. The districts that have not benefited have been waiting for such a long time and we feel that the Government is abrogating our equal rights and opportunities.

Why is it that in Masindi District specifically, and other districts, the elderly are not benefiting? I would like to know when the committee is going to present the report. It should not be an excuse by the honourable minister that we wait for the committee to come up with a report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committee are we referring to? Our own committee? Chair?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to inform you that we are making very good progress in relation to the report on this matter. We have consulted several stakeholders, including the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and many others. 

On the question as to when the report is coming, we have one hurdle and we need your input to resolve this difficulty. In a few minutes from now, I will ask you to ask one important person to come here and tell us when we shall get something.

About four weeks ago, we had a meeting with the Minister of Finance and in this meeting, we agreed on the position to be adopted. We also asked the minister to go and put into writing – to commit himself in writing. In that meeting, the minister said, “Okay, I agree with this formula”, and all of us were comfortable. The minister was supposed to get back to us in a week’s time. We have counted; the first week went with no response, the second, third, fourth and now this is the fifth week - (Laughter) 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that our report is ready but it would be a nicer report if we came to this august House with a commitment from the finance minister. If the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development produces that written commitment, we would be able to produce the report within two or three hours’ time. We now need a commitment from the Minister of Finance. We had a very good meeting and the minister promised something in writing. We need it now. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, please order the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us our answer and we shall produce the report within two or three hours. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chair, wouldn’t it be better if you brought the report to Parliament and raised those issues and then we ask the Minister of Finance to respond to them, rather than raising them now when we have nothing to discuss?

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, we accept your guidance. Originally, Members felt more comfortable reporting to the House together with a commitment from the Minister of Finance. With your new ruling, however, we are going to produce our report this week. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we are going to item No. 6. The last time we were here, on Thursday, the issue that stopped our proceedings was that the House was not properly constituted to be able to take a decision. Now we want to establish whether the House can take a decision by ascertaining how many we are. If we are okay, then we will proceed to committee stage to finish with this business. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2018
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we go to committee stage, I need to establish that we have the right numbers. Honourable members, those of you who are not in the Chamber, please come in so that we can establish the numbers and then we see how to proceed. 

Honourable members, I have been advised by the Clerk that the number we have now is 196 Members. I hope that this number does not include ex officio Members, who do not vote. Honourable members, the 196 Members do not include the learned Attorney-General, who is the only ex officio Member in the Chamber right now. 

Honourable members, this House is constituted in a way that it can take a decision. So, we proceed to the next stage. I had already announced last week and a decision was taken that this vote will be taken by show of hands. (Applause)  Clerk, call the item. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2018

Clause 2
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 2 is an amendment of Act 11 of 2014. There was an amendment proposed on Thursday to this effect: “The Excise Duty Act, 2014, in this Act referred to as the principal Act is amended in Schedule 2, Part 1, by deleting paragraph (f) of item 13.” That is the amendment being proposed. I am now going to put the question to that amendment and the vote will be taken one at a time.

I now put the question that those in favour of the amendment raise their hands.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please raise your hands and keep them still so that they can be counted; stop shaking your hands. Let me state it again. The question I am putting is to the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Ndorwa to amend this Bill by deleting clause (f) in the Act.

Honourable members, there is enough space in the House. Let me explain. This Bill proposes to amend paragraph (f) of the Act by changing the amount of one per cent to 0.5 per cent. That is what is in this Bill. However, the amendment being proposed by hon. Niwagaba is that the whole of paragraph (f) should be deleted all together. 
 
Honourable members, this is the effect. The effect will be that we no longer have to consider the amendment as proposed by the Bill because the clause itself, the paragraph that brings this in existence would have been deleted. Now, let me put the question again.

The question I am going to put is that paragraph (f) of the Act be deleted. It is not voice voting. Honourable members, those in favour of the amendment by the honourable member for Ndorwa East, hon. Niwagaba, please put up your hands. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the results are as follow. Those abstaining are zero. Those in support of the motion are 101. Those against the motion are 136. 

Honourable members, please resume your seats. Honourable members, please find places to sit and that includes the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence. Can we have some order please? 

That is why I was calling for calm during the vote. So, the votes that have been cast are as I have given you in the results. Zero abstention. Those for the motion are 101 and those against are 136. So, the total number is- Honourable members, by the time I verified quorum and came and sat down, other Members came in including hon. Cecilia Atim. Please, I am not going to entertain that. Honourable members, can you sit down, please? Can we have order? 

Honourable members, let us do it this way. There is no point of procedure entertained at this time. We have voted and those are the results. We would like the record to be clear because I personally witnessed some misconduct in the course of the voting. There are Members I pointed at and if they want me to mention their names, I can. There was some misconduct in the course of the voting. So, we are going to vote by roll call and tally. 

Please, sit. Order, Members! Can we have some order? So, we are going to take this vote by roll call and tally. Honourable members, the rules, as amended, say the door should be locked. However, you can see that the way the numbers are, if you say we lock the door, we will lock some Members out.

This voting is going to be by roll call and tally where each Member will stand on a microphone and announce his or her vote. Order!

I now put the question to the amendment and voting starts now. Can I state the motion again? The question I put for your vote is for the deletion of paragraph (f) of the Act in those clauses, as proposed by hon. Niwagaba. That is the motion I am putting to vote. (Interjections)

Honourable members, voting is going on now and it is by roll call and tally. Any Member who is anywhere should come and be able to vote. We will not be able to close the doors and the reason is simple; the members are too many and some are outside. Okay? We will not be able to close the door.

No please, I have a problem with that vote. Do not make me say it on record. Do not let me put it on record. Therefore, voting starts now to that motion. Please start.

(Voting by roll call and tally.)

Hon. Jesca Ababiku 			No
Hon. Charles Abacanon 			-
Hon. David Abala			Yes
Hon. Cuthbert Mirembe Abigaba - No
Hon. Christine Ayo Achen			-
Hon. Remigio Achia			No
Hon. Terence Achia			No
Hon. Sarah Opendi Achieng		No
Hon. Lucy Otim Achiro			Yes 
Hon. James Acidri			Yes
Hon. Julius Bua Acon			No
Hon. Anna Ebaju Adeke 			Yes
Hon. Hellen Adoa			No
Hon. Moses Adome 			-
Hon. Lilly Adong			Yes
Hon. Abbas Mugisha Agaba		-
Hon. Maria Goretti Ajilo			No
Hon. Paul Akamba			Yes
Hon. Prossy Akampulira 			Yes
Hon. Judith Franca Akello		-
Hon. Lucy Akello			Yes
Hon. Rose Lilly Akello			-
Hon. Silvia Akello			-
Hon. James Michael Akena 		Yes
Hon. Anthony Akol			Yes
Hon. Maxwell Akora		-
Hon. Lawrence Akugizibwe		No
Hon. Violet Adome Akurut		-
Hon. Margaret Aachilla Aleper		No
Hon. Tom Aza Alero			-
Hon. Moses Ali		No
Hon. Odria Alioni 			-
Hon. Santa Alum			Yes
Hon. Faith Alupo			-
Hon. Judith Alyek 			No
Hon. Agnes Ameede			-
Hon. Susan Amero			Yes
Hon. Monicah Amoding			Yes 
Hon. Annita Annet Among			-
Hon. Betty Ongom Amongi		-
Hon. Jacquiline Amongin		No
Hon. Paul Amoru		No
Hon. Doreen Amule		No
Hon. Fred Angella		-
Hon. Moses Angundru		-
Hon. Fredrick Angura 		No
Hon. Evelyn Anite		No
Hon. Esther Davinia Anyakun 		-
Hon. Joshua Anywarach 			Yes
Hon. Silas Aogon			Yes
Hon. Betty Ocan Aol			Yes
Hon. Jacqueline Rama Aol			No
Hon. Gabriel Ajedra Aridru 		No
Hon. Herbert Ariko			Yes
Hon. Rwakajara Arinaitwe			-
Hon. Gordon Arinda			-
Hon. Paul Nsabimana Asaba		-
Hon. Hellen Asamo			Yes
Hon. Everlyne Buregyeya Asiimwe	-
Hon. Elly Elias Asiku 			No
Hon. Brenda Suubi Asinde			-
Hon. Benard Atiku			Yes
Hon. Beatrice Anywar Atim		-
Hon. Joy Ongom Atim			Yes
Hon. Cecilia Ogwal Atim			Yes
Hon. Jacklet Atuhaire		-
Hon. Stella Atyang		-
Hon. Jane Pacuto Avur			No
Hon. Betty Engola Awor			No
Hon. Rose Atima Ayaka			No
Hon. Jastine Ayebazibwe			No
Hon. Michael Ayepa			No
Hon. Tonny Ayoo			Yes
Hon. Dorothy Nshaija Azairwe		No
Hon.  James Baba			-
Hon. Margaret Baba Diri			No
Hon. Judith Babirye			-
Hon. Sarah Kityo Babirye			No
Hon. Mary Kabanda Babirye		-
Hon. Veronica Kadogo Babirye		-
Hon. Gordon Bafaki			No
Hon. Aggrey Henry Bagiire		No
Hon. John Ngobi Bagoole			No
Hon. Spellanza Muhenda Baguma -
Hon. David Bahati			No
Hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke		-
Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi 		-
Hon. Moses Grace Balyeku	No
Hon. Betty Bamukwatsa			Yes
Hon. Anifa Kawooya Bangirana	 -
Hon. Andrew Aja Baryayanga		Yes
Hon. Chris Baryomunsi			-
Hon. Asuman Basalirwa  			Yes
Hon. Fred Baseke  		Yes
Hon. Lawrence Bategeka 			No
Hon. Syda Namirembe Bbumba 	–
Hon. Josephine Babungi Bebona –
Hon. Norah Nyendwoha Bigirwa -
Hon. Jalia Lukumu Bintu 			No
Hon. Stephen Mukitale Biraahwa – 
Hon. Carolyn Nanyondo Birungi -
Hon. Sam Bitangaro  			No
Hon. Lawrence Songa Biyika 		–
Hon. Micheal Iga Bukenya			No
Hon. Alex Musingo Burundo		No
Hon. Mary Karooro Busingye  		No
Hon. Tom Butime  		No
Hon. Nsaba Buturo  			No
Hon. Fred Kyakulaga Bwino 		No
Hon. John Byabagambi  			No
Hon. Abraham Byandala 			No
Hon. Alex Byarugaba  			No
Lt Col Flavia Byekwaso  			No
Hon. Sam Byibesho  			Yes
Hon. Franco Robert Centenary 		Yes
Hon. Rukiya Chekamondo 			No
Hon. Lydia Chekwel 			No
Hon. Reuben Paul Chelimo		- 
Hon. Everlyn Chemutai  			Yes
Hon. Sam Cheptoris  			No
Hon. Geofrey Dhamuzungu  		No 
Hon. Zaitun Driwaru  			No
Hon. Simon D’Ujanga 			- 
Hon. Angel Mark Dulu 			No 		
Hon. Musa Francis Ecweru  		No
Hon. Janepher Nantume Egunyu	- 
Hon. Kenneth Eitunganane 		Yes
Hon. Cosmas Elotu 			No
Hon. Isaac Etuuka 			- 
Hon. Hassan Kaps Fungaroo 		- 
Hon. Richard Muhumuza Gafabusa Yes
Hon. Dennis Ssozi Galabuzi 		- 
Hon. Francis Gonahasa 			Yes
Hon. David Gumisiriza Guma 		No
Hon. Fredrick Ngobi Gume 		- 
Hon. Hashim Sulaiman 			No
Hon. John Bosco Ikojo 			No
Hon. Charles Ilukor 			No
Hon. Veronica Eragu Isala 		No
Hon. Isaac Isanga Musumba 		No
Hon. Tophace Kaahwa 			- 
Hon. Herbert Kabafunzaki 		- 
Hon. Rose Kabagyenyi 			-  
Hon. Sheila Mwine Kabaije 		No
Hon. Michael Kabaziguruka 		- 
Hon. Robert Ssekitoleko Kafeero - 
Hon. Jackson Kafuuzi 			– 
Hon. Moses Kahima 			No
Hon. Helen Kahunde 			Yes
Hon. Aston Peterson Kajara 		- 
Hon. Rosette Mutambi Kajungu 	No
Hon. James Kakooza 			No
Hon. Joseph Kakooza 			No
Hon. Christopher Kalemba 		- 
Hon. Jovrine Kyomukama Kaliisa - 
Hon. Emmanuel Ssengo Kalule 		No  
Hon. Andrew Kiiza Kaluya 		- 
Hon. John Nizeyimana Kamara 		- 
Hon. Jovah Kamateeka 			No
Hon. Pamela Kamugo 			Yes
Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu 			- 
Hon. Caroline Kamusiime 			- 
Hon. Pentagon Kamusiime 		Yes
Hon. Stephen Kangwagye 			No
Hon. David Karubanga 			No
Hon. Gerald Karuhanga 			- 
Hon. Elizabeth Karungi 			- 
Hon. Matia Kasaija 			No
Hon. Moses Kasibante 			Yes
Hon. Atwooki Kasirivu 			No
Hon. Robert Kasolo 			- 
Hon. Ibrahim Kasozi 			Yes
Hon. Joseph Muyomba Kasozi 		- 
Hon. Robert Sebunya Kasule 		No 
Hon. Patrick Kasumba 			No
Hon. Loy Katali 			Yes 
Hon. Lubwama Kato 			Yes
Hon. Hatwib Katoto 			No
Hon. Wamala Katumba 			No
Hon. Abdu Katuntu 			Yes
Hon. Hood Katuramu 			- 
Hon. Godfrey Katusabe 			- 
Hon. Ruth Katushabe 			Yes 
Hon. Oliver Katwesigye 			Yes
Hon. Pauline Kemirembe 			Yes
Hon. Grace Kesande 			Yes
Hon. Justine Khainza 			Yes
Hon. Henry Kibalya 			Yes
Hon. Ronald Kibuule 			- 
Hon. Ernest Kiiza 			No
Hon. Stella Kiiza 			- 
Hon. Winfred Kiiza 			Yes
Hon. Herbert Kinobere 			No
Hon. Christopher Kipterit 		- 
Hon. Stephen Kisa 			- 
Hon. Noeline Basemera Kisembo No
Hon. Aboud Kitatta 			- 
Hon. Mary Goretti Kitutu 		- 
Hon. Godfrey Kiwanda 			No
Hon. Keefa Kiwanuka 			No
Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi 			Yes
Hon. Moses Kizige 			No
Hon. Lyandro Komakech 			Yes
Hon. Margaret Komuhangi 		- 
Lt Gen. Ivan Koreta 			-	
Col Felix Kulayigye 			No
Hon. Nsamba Kumama 			No
Hon. Agnes Kunihira 			- 
Hon. Peace Kanyesigye Kusasira -
Maj. Gen. Pecos Kuteesa 			No
Hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa 		-
Hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny 		No
Hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi  Yes
Hon. Amelia Kyambadde 			- 
Hon. Haruna Kyeyune 			-
Capt. Susan Lakot 			No
Hon. Catherine Lamwaka 			-
Hon. Margret Lamwaka 			- 
Hon. Molly Lanyero 			No
Hon. Peter Lokeris 			No
Hon. Samson Lokeris 			No
Hon. John Baptist Lokii			No
Hon. Peter Abraham Lokii 		- 
Hon. Simon Lokodo 			No
Hon. Albert Lokoru 			No
Hon. Hillary Lokwang 			No
Hon. C.D Oketayot Lowila 		Yes
Hon. Medard Sseggona Lubega 	Yes
Hon. Kenneth Lubogo 			-
Hon. Nelson Lufafa 			Yes
Hon. Amos Lugoloobi 			No
Hon. David Kalwanga Lukyamuzi Yes
Hon. Semakula Luttamaguzi 		Yes
Hon. Sam Lyomoki 			Yes
Hon. Geoffrey Macho 			Yes
Hon. Ishma Mafabi 			No
Hon. Julius Maganda 			No
Hon. Raphael Magyezi 			-
Hon. Henry Kamya Makumbi 		No
Hon. Amos Mandera 			- 
Hon. Lawrence Mangusho 			No
Hon. Apollo Masika 			No
Hon. Michael Mawanda 			No
Hon. Stephen Mayende 			-
Hon. Muyanja Mbabaali 			No
Hon. Janepher Kyomuhendo Mbabazi 	Yes
Hon. Mbaju Jackson - 
Hon. Mbalibula Christopher - 
Hon. Mbayo Esther 			No
Hon. Mbeiza Margaret - 
Hon. Mbogo Kezekia - 
Hon. Mbwatekamwa Gaffa  		Yes
Hon. Migadde Robert    Yes 
Hon. Mirembe Lydia Daphine 		Yes
Hon. Moriku Joyce Kaducu -
Hon. Mpuuga Mathias  			Yes
Hon. Mudukoi Fred Oduchu 		Yes
Hon. Mugabe Kahonda Dononzio  	Yes
Hon. Mugema Peter  			Yes 
Hon. Mugeni Milly  			No 
Hon. Mugoya Gaster -  
Hon. Mugume Roland  			Yes
Hon. Mugisa Muhanga Margaret - 
Hon. Muheirwe Daniel  			No
Hon. Muhindo Harold  			Yes
Hon. Mukasa Julius Opondo  		Yes
Hon. Mukasa Wilson Muruli - 
Hon. Mukisa Robina Hope - 
Hon. Mukoda Zabwe - 
Hon. Mukula Francis  			No
Hon. Mulindwa Isaac Ssozi  		Yes
Hon. Munyagwa Mubarak Sserunga - 		  
Hon. Musana Eric  		Yes
Hon. Musasizi Henry  			No 
Hon. Musoke Paul Sebulime - 
Hon. Musoke Robert - 
Hon. Mutebi David Ronnie - 
Hon. Mutebi Noah Wanzala 		No 
Hon. Mutonyi Rose Masaba  		No 
Hon. Mutuuzo Peace 			No
Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi Muhammad  	Yes
Hon. Muyanja Johnson Ssenyonga  	Yes 
Hon. Muyingo John Chrysostom 	No
Hon. Mwesige Adolf Kasaija  		No
Hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana  		No
Hon. Mwesigye Fred  			No
Hon. Mwijukye Francis  			Yes
Hon. Mwine Mpaka  			Yes
Hon. Mwiru Paul  			Yes
Hon. Nabakooba Judith - 
Hon. Nabayiga Idah  			Yes
Hon. Nabbanja Robinah - 
Hon. Nabulindo Jane Kwoba  		Yes
Hon. Naggayi Nabilah Sempala -  		
Hon. Nagwomu Moses Musamba – 
Hon. Naigaga Mariam 			Yes
Hon. Najjuma Sarah 			Yes 
Hon. Nakate Lillian  			No 
Hon. Nakawunde Sarah  			Yes
Hon. Nakayenze Connie  			Yes 
Hon. Nalule Safia 			- 
Hon. Namayanja Florence  		Yes
Hon. Nambeshe John Baptist  		Yes
Hon. Namoe Stella  		No
Hon. Namuganza Persis  			No
Hon. Namugwanya Benny  		No
Hon. Namujju Cissy  			Yes
Hon. Namukhula Grace  		-		
Hon. Namuyangu Jenipher  		No
Hon. Nandala-Mafabi Nathan  		Yes
Hon. Nankabirwa Ann 		- 		
Hon. Nankabirwa Ruth  			No
Hon. Seninde Rosemary  			No
Hon. Nantaba Ida - 	
Hon. Nanyondo Veronica  		Yes
Hon. Nauwat Rosemary  			No
Hon. Nayebale Sylivia 		- 		
Hon. Ndamira Catheline  		Yes
Hon. Ndeezi Alex  			No
Hon. Ngabirano Charles  		No
Hon. Ninsiima Boaz 		- 			
Hon. Kaberuka James	 		Yes
Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred  			Yes
Hon. Nokrach William 		- 
Hon. Nsamba Patrick	 	Yes
Hon. Nsereko Muhammad  		Yes
Hon. Nsubuga Simeo  			No
Hon. Ntende Robert  			Yes
Hon. Nyakecho Annet  			No
Hon. Nyiira Zerubabel  			No
Hon. Nzoghu William		Yes
Hon. Onek Hillary 		- 
Hon. Obiga Kania  		No
Hon. Oboth Jacob 		- 
Hon. Obua Denis  		No
Hon. Ocan Patrick  			Yes
Hon. Ocen Peter  		Yes
Hon. Ochen Julius  			Yes
Hon. Odonga Otto 		- 		
Hon. Odongo Jeje 		- 
Hon. Odur Jack		- 	
Hon. Odur Jonathan  		Yes
Hon. Ofwono Apollo 		- 		
Hon. Ogama Ismail 		- 
Hon. Ogenga Latigo 		-
Hon. Ogong Okot Felix 		-
Hon. Oguzu Lee Denis 		-
Hon. Ogwang Peter  		No
Hon. Okabe Patrick 		-
Hon. Okello Anthony  			No
Hon. Okello Bonny 		-
Hon. Okello Engola Charles  	No
Hon. Okin PP Ojara  		Yes
Hon. Okori-Moe Janet  			No
Hon. Okot Peter  		Yes
Hon. Okumu Ronald Reagan	-
Hon. Okupa Elijah  			Yes
Hon. Okwir Samuel 		-
Hon. Olanya Gilbert  			Yes
Hon. Olega Ashraf  			No
Hon. Omony Oscar 		-
Hon. Ongalo Obote Clement  		No
Hon. Ongiertho Emmanuel  		Yes
Hon. Onyango Gideon -
Hon. Onzima Godfrey  			No
Hon. Opolot Patrick Isiagi  		Yes
Hon. Opolot Jacob Richard  		No
Hon. Orot Ismail 			No
Hon. Oryem Okello Henry		-
Hon. Osegge Angeline 		-
Hon. Oseku Richard		-
Hon. Osoru Mourine		-  
Hon. Othieno Okoth Richard  		No
Hon. Otto Makmot Edward 	-
Hon. Oula George  		No
Hon. Ouma George Abott 		-
Hon. Oyet Simon 		-
Hon. Ruhunda Alex		-
Hon. Rwaburindora Bishanga Tarsis  No
Hon. Rwabushaija Margret		-
Hon. Rwabwogo Sylvia  			Yes
Hon. Rwakimari Beatrice  		No
Hon. Rwakoojo Robina  			No
Hon. Rwamirama Bright  			No
Hon. Rwemulikya Ibanda 		-
Hon. Sabiiti Denis 			Yes
Hon. Sebaggala Latif  			Yes
Hon. Seguya Lubyayi John Bosco -
Hon. Sekindi Aisha  			No
Hon. Sematimba Peter  			No
Hon. Silwany Solomon  			No
Hon. Sizomu Gershom		-
Hon. Soyekwo Kenneth  			No
Hon. Sebikali Yoweri  			No
Hon. Sekabiito Joseph 		-
Hon. Ssekandi Edward  	-	No
Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore 		-
Hon. Ssembatya Edward 		-
Hon. Ssempala Emmanuel 	- 	Yes
Hon. Ssempijja Vincent 		- 	No
Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim 		- 	Yes
Hon. Ssemuli Anthony 		- 	Yes
Hon. Ssentongo Robinah 		- 	Yes
Hon. Sewanyana Aloizious		- 	Yes
Hon. Ssewungu Joseph 		- 	Yes
Hon. Suubi Kyinyamatama		-
Hon. Taaka Agnes 		-
Hon. Taban Amin 		- 	Yes
Hon. Takirwa Francis 		- 	No
Hon. Tayebwa Thomas 		- 	Yes
Hon. Timuzigu Michael 		-
Hon. Tinkasiimire Barnabas 	- 	Yes
Hon. Tumuheirwe Fred 		- 	Yes
Hon. Tumuramye Genensio 	- 	No
Hon. Tumusiime Rosemary 	- 	No
Hon. Tumwebaze Frank 		- 	No
Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda 		- 	No
Hon. Tumwine Anne 		-
Hon. Tumwine Elly 		- 	No
Hon. Turyahikayo Paula 		- 	No
Hon. Tusiime Michael 		- 	No
Hon. Twesigye John 		- 	No
Hon. Twesigye Nathan 		- 	No
Hon. Twinamasiko Onesimus 	- 	Yes 
Hon. Kaissiano Wadri 		- 	Yes
Hon. Waira Kyewalabye 		- 	Yes
Hon. Wakabi Pius 		- 	Yes
Hon. Waluswaka James 		- 	No
Hon. Wamala Florence 		-
Hon. Walyomu Moses 		- 	Yes
Hon. Wamanga Wamai 		-
Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi 		- 	No
Hon. Watenga Godfrey 		-
Hon. Watongola Rehema 		- 	No
Hon. Wekomba Sarah 		-
Hon. Werikhe Michael 		- 	No
Hon. Woboya Vicent 		- 	No
Hon. Yaguma Wilberforce		-
Hon. Zaake Francis 		-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are Members who are in the House but have not been able to vote yet. Can we go through those and conclude? 

Hon. Kasozi Joseph Muyomba 	– 	No
Hon. Among Anita 	- 	No
Hon. Kawooya Anifa 	– 	No
Hon. Naggayi Nabilah 	- 	Yes
Hon. Kibuule Ronald	- 	No
Hon. Asinde Brenda 	– 	Yes
Hon. Angella Fred 	– 	No
Hon. Lamwaka Catherine 		– 	No
Hon. Nambozo Florence 		– 	No

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Any other Member who has not taken the vote? (Interjection)- Omoro County does not have a vote. (Laughter) - He only announces the votes. 

Honourable members, there were three kinds of votes; those in favour, those against and those abstaining. The total number of votes is 288. Those in favour of the motion are 124 and those against are 164. (Applause) The “Nos” have it.

MR ODUR: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment to read: the Exercise Duty Act, 2014 in this Act referred to as the principal Act is amended in schedule 2 part (1) by substituting for paragraph (f) of item 13, the following; Mobile money transactions on withdrawal of cash, instead of the 0.5, I am proposing an amendment of 0.05. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the rules of amendments are as follows: when a Bill is called for amendment, all the proposed amendments are submitted and then the Speaker starts processing them from the one farthest from the subject coming towards what is presented. After a decision on proposal for amendment has been taken, there cannot be further proposals for amendments. 

Therefore, the time that you should have proposed that amendment should have been during the time when the proposal to remove paragraph (f) was made. You should have said you have another amendment to propose. That would have been proposed together because that would have been nearer. We cannot entertain further amendment on this particular clause at this time.

Honourable members, I now put the question to clause 2 as it is. We will now use voice voting. I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2018” and passed it with no amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2018

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2018”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. It has been a clear show of interest and a decision has been made. We stand with that decision. Can we go back to item 3?

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and pupils of Modernity Day and Boarding Nursery and Primary School in Busiki County, Namutumba District, represented by hon. Paul Akamba and Mariam Naigaga. They are here to observe the proceedings. Oh! They have gone.

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we had reached paragraph seven of the statement on the status of Uganda’s indebtedness.
 
Mr Speaker, as I said, the four largest beneficiaries of debt financing by sectors are energy, works, agriculture and water, which is consistent with the Government’s strategy to reduce the cost of doing business and developing infrastructure to boost growth as well as energy to support industrial development.

Mr Speaker, I would like to also update Members on the interest rate type for external debt. The bigger proportion of Uganda’s debt -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR BAHATI: Ninety two per cent of our external debt was contracted at fixed interest rates while the variable interest rates and no interest rates constitute 7 per cent and 1 per cent respectively of the total external debt disbursed and outstanding as at June 2018.

Most of the variable rate debt from bilateral creditors is from China while the African Development Bank dominates the variable rate debt from multilateral creditors.

Mr Speaker, Government of Uganda’s major explicit contingent liabilities arise from loan guarantees whose exposure stood at $53 million, as at June 2018, representing 0.19 per cent of GDP. This indicates a 33.5 per cent increase in exposure from $39.6 million in June 2017. The increase is attributed to the recently issued guarantee to Islamic University in Uganda of $13.79 million.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, we complained about this statement not being uploaded –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has already been uploaded on the i-Pads. Proceed, honourable minister.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, state owned enterprises constitute the larger share of the guarantee exposure amounting to 68 per cent, which is equivalent to $36 million of the total exposure, while the private institutions constituted the remaining 32 per cent equivalent to $16.85 million. The largest beneficiary of this guarantee is the Uganda Development Bank. This is part of contingence liability where we offer guarantees to these institutions.

I would like to now talk about public debt trends and its sustainability. Over the last 10 years, the stock of public debt has steadily grown from $2.9 billion in 2006/2007, when the country benefited from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) to $10.7 billion as at June 2018. This accounts for a nominal increase of $7.8 billion since then. 

Over the last 10 years, the Government budget priorities have grown to 22 per cent of our GDP. This has necessitated an increase in the level of Government debt since our tax revenue effort has remained stagnant over the same period. It has been at 13 per cent and is now at 14.35 per cent. Our expenditure request is increasing yet our tax base is not growing at the same rate, meaning that we have a deficit of close to 7 trillion over the years. This has left Government with no option other than by debt to finance its programmes in order to achieve its objectives as set out in the National Development Plan and the NRM Manifesto. 

The increase in external borrowing has been mainly to fund infrastructure projects. As I said, the infrastructure projects constitute 86 per cent of the external debt that we have contracted over time.  	

Mr Speaker, our public debt stood at 38.6 per cent of GDP in March 2018 and it is likely to rise slightly, as we incur more debts to finance Government infrastructure priorities. We are committed to ensuring that our public debt does not exceed the 50 per cent threshold that we agreed upon with other sister East African countries.

Mr Speaker, we have tried to compare our debt status with other countries. As you can clearly see, over the years, Uganda is almost the lowest in the region in terms of indebtedness. We intend to maintain this up to 2023 and we hope that by then, the situation would have changed because we would have started getting our oil from the ground. 

The figure shows where we are with Burundi, South Sudan, Kenya, Ethiopia, Rwanda and Tanzania and we are still at the lowest. This has not even shown other countries like the United States of America which is at 70 per cent.

In conclusion, we have attached the detailed report, which we laid on the Table here a few months ago. It has detailed information on each and every loan we have acquired and the financial performance. We hope that at an appropriate time, this House will call upon the sector ministries to come here and go through loan by loan so that the whole House knows where we stand.
	
This afternoon, the point we would like to make is that we are still within our debt sustainability framework. We are very cautious as we contract these loans. We are also working hard to boost our domestic revenue mobilisation - Actually, we want to thank all Members who have participated in this afternoon’s debate and have passed yet another measure to help us boost our reviews. Otherwise, the more revenue we collect, the less we borrow and the less interest we pay.

I thank you for listening to the ministry’s statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, the genesis of this particular statement is not a typical ministerial statement. Under our Rules of Procedure, it arose from a question arising from the debate on these loans. The honourable member for Buliisa raised this issue strongly and actually, there was even doubt as to whether the report on debt sustainability had ever been presented to Parliament. 
	
I recalled that on 1st April this year when the budget was being presented, this document was also laid on the Table here. An explanation was required from the minister to elaborate to the House what that document says and the minister has just done so. Therefore, if we are going to have some short clarification questions, that would be okay.

However, the statement of the minister should now help us in the debate on whichever loans will be coming again. That is the kind of instruction that we need from the minister but we will have some short interventions and then see how to proceed. I will start with the Member from Kira Municipality.

5.50
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think part of the problem is that sometimes – and I do not want to fault anyone – we do not use the information provided by Government. Every year, I receive a more comprehensive report on loans that is always laid by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Unfortunately, the Committee on National Economy does not process this report for consideration of Parliament. As a result, each time the minister responsible for borrowing comes here vending another request to borrow, then the same questions are raised.

Mr Speaker, as you guided, I would like to ask the honourable minister and I will give an example; Rwanda, as a Government, is advertising on the t-shirts of Arsenal players, “Visit Rwanda.” The people of the United Kingdom were incensed at why a country that they give money could bring back the same taxpayers’ money and luxuriously display it on the jerseys of Arsenal Football Club.

The question I would like to ask is a question of prudence. Hon. Bahati may say that I have just lost in a poll but Parliament has just decided to revise the tax. I would like to ask the same question that taxpayers in UK asked; whether as an individual, you are comfortable with a Government that borrows right, left and centre.

If you look at the report the honourable chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented here just on the money we have borrowed from commercial banks on Treasury Memoranda and Bonds, in the budget, we are going to pay about Shs 2.4 trillion in interest – Shs 4.7 trillion on the money we picked from commercial banks. 

I would like to limit it to the commercial banks –(Interjections)– You can take the figure that you know. The point is after borrowing this money, we see the Head of State throwing money at every youth group he finds - money you cannot account for – yet you are a country that borrows and has to pay interest on the money you are borrowing and then you see the Head of State in Bwaise. How many are you? You can have this. In Kireka, how many are you? 

I am addressing the issue of prudence. I remember I proposed a motion here on provision of transport to people who are working for the State. This Government agreed that it was a very good proposal; they would study it and then come back. I was even invited to the Ministry of Public Service for consultation. I did not know that the intention was to kill it.

Just the money we spend on transport in your own budget - every year, you spend more than Shs 150 billion on buying fuel for these vehicles. I see some of our colleagues now even have sharp shooters so we must provide fuel and a driver. We spend Shs 100 billion on maintaining these vehicles and we spend Shs 180 billion every year. Then, on purchase of new vehicles r, we spend. 

The total that you spend on transport without paying drivers comes to about Shs 500 billion. In fact, you do not have to go and tax the poor people who are receiving money. You just have to be prudent on the way you use money. The other day, someone reported here that hon. Bahati was hiding in a police patrol vehicle. He has his own car but he is in a police patrol car. (Laughter)

Therefore, the moment we continue using money the way we use it, we shall not stop going to borrow from commercial banks every day. Now, almost every minister, including those that we do not even know - and I think they cannot be a target because no one knows them - also has convoys of three vehicles, same way as it is in Nigeria.

Finally, and I remember raising this matter some time back but the minister of finance brushed it off. In Nigeria, when they present a budget, they also present the amount of money that they are going to borrow as a lump sum so that Parliament does not have to process these requests you come vending here every day; this is for food; now this is for this.

I remember in the last financial year, the President of Nigeria presented a request to borrow $20 billion and said that the money was to finance part of the budget but also, I think, to start an airline. Therefore, can I make the same request again? Hon. Bahati you look “shabby” coming here every day to vend another request to borrow. Why don’t you, as you present your budget the same way you presented a report on our debt status, come with a consolidated request to Parliament, indicating the amount of money you want to borrow to finance the budget.

The questions we keep asking you are questions that are unnecessary. The moment you appear here “shabby,” we are going to ask you the same questions. You can put these requests together because financing is not going to happen in two weeks. The financers will make money available; consolidate them. 

Mr Speaker, I think I will make a request to go and speak to Cabinet –(Laughter)– because the way you appear here, you look like people who are extremely disorganised and I do not mean to insult anyone. I am just expressing – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, my Chief Whip. The information I would like to give is whenever there is a loan request - say we want to borrow $20 million for item X - the sharks out there who would bid for that job will know that the money they borrowed is $20 million dollars. Therefore, the bid will be near $20 million. If this money were in a basket and you called for bids, maybe that job could be for even $2 million or $5 million. 

The information I would like to give is that as soon as we pass a loan here, the first people to celebrate are those who sit on the bench behind there. Then the sharks out there who are going to bid will bid around there. Nowadays, they form cartels and it is Ugandans who lose because we pay that money in form of taxes. That is why you are even taxing mobile money to fund such leakages in the budget. That was the information I wanted to give.

MR SSEMUJJU: Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to invite the minister to reassure us on the money that we are borrowing from China and many of the projects that they are doing, including where they are going to build road tolls and begin collecting money. 

Like I said here, Tanzania did not want to benefit from Chinese financing to do their railway because it was extremely expensive. I am happy that last time when the Minister of Works and Transport was presenting, he said the prices are being reconsidered. This is because you cannot do one kilometre at $5 million and Tanzania does it at $3.5 million.

We are going to use very big words to describe you and you will be “angry” because you misbehave, you beat people, you have put the military on the streets and you have problems of abuse of human rights that are going to be raised by other lenders. You have therefore found China to be the easier one because they will not ask how many people you are terrorising on the streets.

Can you tell us whether our children will be able – because hon. Matia Kasaija is nearly the age of my father; he may not be around in 43 years when our children are paying these debts. Can you reassure us that our children will be able to pay the burden you are creating, especially the Chinese debt?

6.00
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the minister for this very detailed statement on our state of indebtedness. Many people think that debt is bad. Actually, debt is good. If you are a Member of Parliament who has no debt, you are doing nothing. You should have some debts because it means you have some ideas you are investing in. If you fear debts, you are not developing. Any country can grow out of debt. 

Mr Speaker, whereas our level of indebtedness is under 50 per cent, which is the convergence rate for East Africa, I have two concerns and I have raised them on a number of occasions. We borrow money in this country; for example, we borrowed $85 million in November 2013 to construct the Nakapiripirit-Muyembe Road. It is now five years down the road since that money was borrowed –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, hon. Remigio Achia got up and said borrowing is very good. A few minutes ago, he supported the Mobile Money Tax. He is saying five years down the road, they have not constructed the road he needs most yet he was sent here to represent his people. Is hon. Remigio Achia in order to support a loan which is not being utilised and yet he says borrowing is very good?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the abuse of the point of procedure is not good procedure. If you borrow money and it is mismanaged, it does not mean borrowing is bad. It simply means the management of your borrowed money is the one that is bad. That is the point he is making. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road construction, I just came back recently from Austria to sign that loan request. We have not received the money yet because there are a few things which the lender wanted us to fulfil. First of all, they wanted to make sure we had the money to compensate the owners of the land for the right of way. We had not been able to raise this money. We have been able to raise it and soon, the loan will become effective –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, do I respond to such comments? He is interrupting my - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose to give information. Please, give the information and resume your seat. 

MR KASAIJA: We are now soon coming. Hon. Remigio Achia, I would like to assure you that you soon will see the tractors working on that road to make it nice and passable. Thank you.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: What hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised is my exact question. Why does Government come to this House unprepared with projects, which are not appraised or valued? That was the question asked by hon. Nandala-Mafabi; you ask Parliament to borrow money and we do accept the request - I was a member of the Committee on National Economy – and it takes another five years for a few things to be done.

In the meantime, we face problems of interest payment. We have a minister for investment; why don’t we have turnkey projects or appraised projects using our money – the money used to compensate people? Why don’t we develop projects – for instance every June when you read the budget, you can tell us the roads that you are going to tarmac. Why do you put those roads in the budget without doing an appraisal and design so that you know the costs? 

In the case of Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road, it turned out to that there were no design plans. We borrowed $85 million, and it turned out that we needed $170 million. The minister privately told us that they needed to bring another request to Parliament to top up the money we had borrowed. This is the kind of inefficiency I am talking about. 

Why doesn’t the ministry in charge of investment do an appraisal for projects before we go out to source for funding so that by the time this Parliament approves a loan, it is ready for implementation? It is probably contracted out and it is ready for the contract to be signed. 

On the question of debt, whereas we appreciate that we are below 38 per cent, honourable minister, we also need to look at the debt volatility. It has risen even in the recent past. Whereas our debt, in dollar terms, is low due to the depreciation of the Uganda Shilling and appreciation of the dollar, for the same $350 billion, you may have to pay $385 billion because the shilling has weakened from Shs 3,500 to Shs 3,860. 

We cannot relax on debt because there are two issues; the issues of efficiency and accomplishment of projects. I am happy that some of the projects in the Energy and Transport sectors get completed. However, we do not get reports on projects from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

I wish the minister could also provide us with the list of loans, how much we have borrowed and how much interest we are paying. Why don’t we also get reports on the performance of these loans? This Parliament should get reports on an annual basis. It is even in our Public Finance Management Act that this Parliament should get reports on the performance of each of these loans.

I have seen the Committee on Budget and asked them to let me modal some solar project. It is our responsibility to go and find out. However, shouldn’t the ministry be responsible to also present to us reports on how far we have gone with the implementation and performance in these loans? We cannot go on borrowing, which is important because it supports our budget for infrastructure; but, report to us also on the performance of these loans. We have got a good report now on how much debt we have and how much we have borrowed. 

However, have we got the report on how far we have used this money, where we have used it and what percentage we have used and what debt we are paying for that project? What is the percentage of completion of each of these projects including compensating those who need to be compensated? 

Mr Speaker, there are quite a number of issues beyond debt figures that we are receiving here. We needed every loan to be brought here for us to understand how far we have implemented them. There are so many loans in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I am told the ministry is performing at under 43 per cent in a number of projects. The success rate is very low. I think that is why the growth rate in the agriculture sector is below 2 per cent because the money we borrow in this Parliament is not being used properly or not used at all.

Therefore, I pray that the ministers responsible for some of these loans bring to this Parliament the performance of these loans. That is the only way we can go ahead –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Information, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First wait. Honourable members, don’t we have committees? We do not want this House to look the way you want it to because we have committees that are supposed to be handling these things. These things are submitted with the ministerial policy statements. This is the debate we should have - no they never do, it is always there.

They say when you want to hide things from some of us, put it in writing. That is what we should avoid because those things are there in black and white but we never bring them as substantial points of discussion in this House. Those status issues are there. Why don’t we extract them and make them issues? 

Why don’t the committees go and ask those questions about non-performance of loans instead of having these quarrels with ministers and elders, why don’t we deal with these issues as well?

It now looks like we are not very organised when we begin raising these issues. I am saying this because I just had an induction meeting with the chairpersons. This issue should not be arising in the House. They should come in the reports and we deal with them there.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, can I conclude? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I am aware that the Committee on National Economy has requested the minister to give them a report on the performance of loans. I hope the executive committee can bring those reports for our discussion on the Floor of the House. Thank you very much.

6.11
MR PATRICK ISIAGI (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the minister for bringing this report on the debt status. However, the table on page five looks like it is trying to tell us that we are performing better than Kenya and Ethiopia.

It is not very clear what we have in the Y-axis; it is dollars or percentages? Otherwise, I would be happy if you clarified for us, honourable minister - if we perform better than Kenya; give us the debt ratio to GDP for Kenya to avoid misleading us. A poor man cannot borrow to a certain extent like a rich man, so give us that clarification.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to also clarify for us the domestic borrowing. It has come out that the playing field is narrowed down to banks and very few other sources for domestic borrowing. When are you going to widen the participation? 

You have just refused to remove taxes from mobile money yet I believe it would have helped us; even a person in Kachumbala or Omoro after selling their goat or cow can participate in these Treasury Bills using the mobile money platform. Therefore, when are you getting those initiatives to widen our internal debt participation?

Honourable minister, I can give you an example from the pie chart you have given showing the composition of the sectors, if it is true that we are borrowing for infrastructure; you see, some countries borrow for pensions. A country like Zambia borrowed and put money to beef up their pension and paid out without returns generated to them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
        
6.14
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, related to the statement presented by the minister; in the Financial Year 2016/2017, the Committee on National Economy under the Chair of hon. Syda Bbumba presented a report on the Floor of Parliament on the same subject; the status of our indebtedness as a country.

In that report, among others, they made observations on the following: 
    1. They observed that the stock of our external debt for both public and private sector stood at 41.4 per cent of GDP.
    2. They further observed that it will take us 94 years, according to their calculations, to repay the existing stock of debt as a country.
    3. The committee further observed that for the Financial Year 2016/2017, the debt owed to China increased from 3.3 per cent to 20.3 per cent.
    4. They also observed that the International Development Association of the World Bank is Uganda’s biggest creditor but the share in public debt was on the decrease.

Fundamentally, they recommended that the Government of the Republic of Uganda should slowly but surely withdraw from loans and increase on the sources of tax revenue and I think we are handling this recommendation in the affirmative.

However, I would like to find out from the minister whether the facts and figures and the statements made on the observations and not the recommendations have improved overtime ever since this report on the same subject matter was tabled in this House. Thank you.

6.17
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is just a simple question to the minister. In his five-page statement, he is not telling Ugandans of the average longest or shortest loan period.

At one time, I was having tea with my children and we ended up discussing - I think they were picking these issues from the newspapers - they started asking me funny questions; you are in Parliament, while there, ask President Museveni, - they gave him another name which I do not want to bring here - (Interjection)– no, they are informed, they know what is going on.

They said, “Ask him, why he borrows money he is sure he is not going to pay by himself or his own children and he thinks we, your children, are the ones going to pay these loans.” You ask him that question –(Interjection)– one is 16 years and the other is 17 years. They are young but they can ask those very serious questions.

As much as it is a public I felt challenged as much as it was an innocent discussion; I felt touched. That we are here managing a public enterprise and we are borrowing recklessly for some other people to pay. 

Of course they have also read and heard over social media and television that Amin left no debt for this country and they were asking how he managed this. Can this President also manage this?

Therefore, since I have the opportunity to ask his minister, I am sure my children and my voters will be very happy to receive an answer from the honourable minister who presented the statement – (Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: (Expunged) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when using the microphone, you have to be mindful about what you say in response to the comments that are coming from outside because they are not on record. The record will capture that you asked the Speaker to be silent and yet you were referring to somebody who was not on record. 

It is within the decency of this House that remarks of that nature cannot be entertained on our public record. The entire statement of the honourable member should therefore be expunged from the record.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I take the information to the extent you have -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not have the whole afternoon to yourself.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: The fundamental question I would like to raise to the honourable minister concerning the loans that he is taking is that at least he should have been kind enough to show us that he is worth a benefit of doubt regarding the Shs 41 trillion. He tried to hide and said that it was Shs 41 billion yet he had borrowed Shs 41 trillion.

Let him tell us whether he has a good record of either paying a particular loan and what that particular loan has done, so as to assure Ugandans that these loans - when the honourable member from Pian keeps voting against the people –(Interjections)– you already have an issue of a loan that was passed on the Floor of the House but it is not helping your people –(Interruption)

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, hon. Tinkasiimire and I have been friends for the last 15 years in this Parliament. I am perturbed by his memory loss. I have represented the people of Pian County in this Parliament for the last 15 years. I pray that you recover your memory. Is it in order for a close friend to forget his friend’s constituency?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We all have different memory capacities. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Since you said I do not have the entire afternoon, I stated the reason I had forgotten his constituency. Certainly, I know his names and title –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Tinkasiimire to insist, thrice, that the honourable member whom he said is his friend voted against the will of the people yet the Member himself voted but nobody has attacked him? Is he in order to say that the honourable member for Pian voted against his people yet he has ably represented his people for 15 years now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the challenge that I face when presiding here is how we kill debate. This matter is so serious and we would have wanted and really wished that a serious debate would ensue from this statement. Just see the way we are proceeding now; we make this issue look so trivial yet it is important. 

Honourable members, to save us, let me do this: I am referring this statement of the minister to the committee because there are no recommendations made here. The committee can go, have discussions with the people, come back and make recommendations about how we can proceed with these issues and then we take a decision based on that. This debate is taking us nowhere.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE TO RULE 142

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that this matter was referred by the President back to Parliament to reconsider some issues. I am advised that the Speaker had read the content of the letter of the President but the motion for it to refer the actual letter and the assent copy of the Bill has not yet been moved. That is why we are asking the minister to move so that we can formally refer this matter to the committee which should come back in 14 days. That is what the rules say and then we shall see how to proceed with this. 

Therefore, the motion is that this House reconsiders the Bill under rule 142 of the Rules of Procedures of the Parliament of Uganda as returned by the President. If you are not ready, we can have it tomorrow.  

Do you have the necessary documents - the copy of the letter and the assent copy that was sent to the President? If you do not have it, honourable minister, it is a short thing; we can do it tomorrow. 

Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 October 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

