
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 26 October 2021

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I welcome you to the new week and thank God that we are here, ready to transact business on behalf of the people of this country.

Let us go straight to business and it will start by the urgent matters that honourable members would like to raise –(Mr Ssemujju rose_)- Procedure?

Mr ssemujju: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising relates to our two colleagues: hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Ssegirinya. As you are aware, they were granted bail but rearrested violently.

Mr Speaker, when I came here I was given the Constitution and I took an oath to defend it. These two colleagues have been denied bail because the Head of State has been threatening everybody that he wants them to be in prison, yet they were granted bail under the Constitution because they are presumed to be innocent.

The procedural issue I am raising, in more specific terms, is that, if the Constitution has been overthrown and the Judiciary is going to be intimidated to work on the orders of the Head of State –(Interjection)- and he does not know. Tomorrow, you are going to be a victim. I was in the same prison cell with hon. Jim Muhwezi. You will be there yourself.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising –[Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Muhwezi: “Order!”] –

The Speaker: Point of order. I keep saying that point of procedure takes precedence only when they are raised at the same time with point of order. It does not mean that when you rise on a point of procedure and violate any order, you cannot be called to order.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I give colleagues due respect and expect the same from them. Hon. Ssemujju Nganda has made it a habit. I do not know whether my name is sweet or he is being paid for mentioning my name. (Laughter) Whatever he debates upon –

The Speaker: You rose on a point of order. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Yes. This is a preamble, Mr Speaker. Whether it is relevant or irrelevant, he has to bring in my name. Is he in order to be in the habit of referring to me when it is not necessary?  I never do the same. I have all grounds to talk about him but I cannot because I know he is a Member of Parliament representing the people of Kira.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, what has he said this time? (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: He has said nothing. (Laughter)

The Speaker: Do you expect me to rule him out of order for saying nothing? (Laughter) 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: He has mentioned my name when there is no point. My name is very important. I have worked very hard for it so it should be used only when there is an important substance. Therefore, is he in order to mention it whenever he has nothing to say?

The Speaker: Honourable members, the honourable minister has said the person he is putting to order said nothing. Now, how do I rule him out of order? (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, the point is – 

THE SPEAKER: He mentioned your name.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI:  I do not mind my name being mentioned when there is a point but when he is saying nothing, he should not involve my name. (Laughter)

The Speaker: Hon. Ssemujju, please, say something. Do not say nothing. (Laughter)

Mr ssemujju: Mr Speaker, history is like that. There will be an episode that you do not like. I was in B2 in Murchison Bay in Luzira, having been arrested for walking. When I arrived there - the list remains, by the way. Those Luzira fellows keep records. They showed me where Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, Captain Mike Mukula and also hon. Jim Muhwezi Katugugu used to sleep. That is the history of B2 in Luzira. They remember details of everybody. 

If you want me to say something, they said that when people are released, they leave their belongings for others but you went and picked back a two-inch mattress. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, before I was interrupted, the procedural issue I was raising relates to our respect for the Constitution. I was given the Constitution the day I arrived here as Member of Parliament of the Eleventh Parliament. I took an oath to protect the Constitution. The Judiciary now works under the intimidation that “if you release people, you are in trouble”. That threat has been issued publically.

Mr Speaker, that being one of the oaths that I took on the day I became a Member of this Parliament – the procedural issue I am raising, needing your guidance as head of this institution, is what do we do after finding ourselves in those circumstances?

The Speaker: Honourable member – there is nothing like that in the rules. I used to practice law. I remember handling a case in Jinja before the then Justice Mukiibi. I applied for bail three times and it was denied three times. In the last application I made, the judge started marking my affidavits for grammar. I asked him, “Sir, are we now in an English grammar class? Or are we still a court?” He laughed and said, “Anyway, bail is denied.” 

I made several applications but I will just give you two examples. I made another application for a police officer I was defending before Justice Katutsi in the High Court here. In the presence of other lawyers, he told me, “Mr Oulanyah, I have not actually been addressed on a bail application to that extent. The angle you have taken today is very impressive but bail is denied.” He laughed and all of us laughed because the events at hand were shocking. 

It is constitutional to grant bail and it is also constitutional to deny it. Let us not politicise these matters sometimes, please. Let us accord respect to the institutions that function within the Constitution independently. That is what the Constitution instructs. Let us play our bit as well without imposing undue pressure on other agents of Government. 

We try our best behind the scenes to see that things are happening but when we meet in public like this, what message do we send to the rest of the country about our respect or disrespect thereof of some institutions of Government? It might be good for us to try and always keep within our mandate. Thank you. 

Let me deal with substantive matters and not procedural matters for now.

2.26 
MR DAVID SSERUKENYA (NUP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance. Mr Speaker, it was at 4.00 a.m. this morning when a fire broke out at CHOGM, one of the places at Makindye-Ssabagabo. It left 20 people homeless and they have nothing to eat.

My prayer is that the office of the Prime Minister responds immediately and comes to the rescue of these people with items like temporary structures, beddings, something to eat and clothing. Thank you very much. 

2.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter was brought to our attention today in our top management meeting. A team has been sent on ground to carry out an assessment of what kind of support we can give to the people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.28 
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. As we are all aware, over the last one and a half years, we have been going through a very difficult situation with COVID-19 globally.

However, I would like to draw the attention of this House to the situation in Soroti. We have had quite an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases. You may have heard it over social media but the reality on the ground is that Soroti deserves special attention because the number of COVID-19 cases is rising. This has affected mothers and women. 

Over the last 24 hours, I got a report from the district authorities, where I was told that we recorded about 24 cases. I have also heard reports from what the Village Health Teams have said, who are doing a very good job, of the spontaneous cases in the villages. 

I, therefore, raise this issue to seek for special attention of the situation in Soroti, particularly to help the support teams and the health teams.

Otherwise, if this situation is left unattended to, that particular area may become a centre for further increase of the COVID-19 cases. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

2.30
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, it is true that Government received reports that COVID-19 cases are on the rise in Teso and Lango subregions. We are working with the teams on ground to look at the support we can give them and move in quickly. 
However, the Minister of Health will be here on Thursday to update Parliament on the vaccination exercise. She will comprehensively answer this issue. I request the honourable member to here. 

In the meantime, I am going to relay the information to her so that more support is given to the team in Soroti. Thank you. 

2.32 
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on an urgent matter regarding the people of Wakyato Subcounty in Kalagala Parish in my constituency, Nakaseke Central County, which suffered from destructive rainstorms on 23 October 2021. 

Kalagala Parish was affected. Hectares of crops were ravaged, livestock and poultry died, banana plantations and two houses were destroyed. This was an insult added to an injury because this particular area has been grappling with land grabbing characterised by a slow economic activity. A number of farmers had acquired agricultural loans from banks. The little they had is also now gone, Mr Speaker. 

I pray that the office of the Prime Minister intervenes to assess the situation and accordingly, comes to the rescue of my constituents with food, seeds and any other remedies that they may determine from their assessment. The magnitude of destruction experienced is worrying and it is likely to trigger food shortage and ineffective livelihood. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

2.34 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister is going to link up with the Nakaseke District Disaster Management Committee and ensure that, indeed, this is handled adequately.

Mr Speaker, lately, we have been sending food to most of the constituencies. Food is on the way for those that have not yet received it. We are trying to ensure that we handle these disasters as soon as we can. Thank you. 

2.35
MR RUKAARI MWESIGWA (NRM, Mbarara North Division, Mbarara City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance. Like my colleague from Makindye, yesterday Mbarara City traders faced a tragedy when their property was destroyed by fire. 

The fire started at around 2.00 a.m. Unfortunately, we did not have fire-fighting machines. The only one we have is down. So, we had to get one from Bushenyi. 

Mr Speaker, property worth billions of shillings was destroyed. Some of the traders had loans and they have petitioned us as area Members of Parliament. For some small-scale traders, it is their only life and the numbers of affected people are almost 100.

As an entrepreneur, I would like to recommend that instead of crying to Government for equipment and machinery, like other communities especially in the US, you find that each state has voluntary fire brigade paid for by the neighbourhood families. If you allow, at a later stage, instead of us losing our property, we should have an enabling law. If you recall, when Gen. Katumba was the Inspector General of Police, he started this process through industrial area where business people bought their own mobile police trucks, which indeed helped them very much. 

However, because there was no enabling law, contradictious came up. You would find a big person – for example, an industrialist – buys a pickup truck and the next day is involved in a police case and it becomes difficult to have him arrested.

My first prayer is that the Office of the Prime Minister intervenes and gives relief, if possible, in terms of shelter and cash.

Secondly, the Ministry of Finance should see how they can give a waiver, if possible, through Uganda Revenue Authority so that these business people can be comfortable in this tragedy. 
I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

3.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, this is one of the issues which we discussed in today’s top management – the devastation was very much. The only positive we got from that side is that the building was insured; so, at least some of the affected traders will be compensated.

However, a team led by the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, hon. Esther Anyakun, is leaving for Mbarara tomorrow to make an assessment and see which kind of support we can give to the traders. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very. 

MR ZAAKE: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I have is about one of colleagues, hon. Ssegirinya. This morning, he was moved from Murchison Bay Hospital to Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

According to the Prisons authorities, he is receiving some treatment called “massage” from Mulago but he is handcuffed on one of the beds. I think this is unfair for a Member of Parliament to be treated in that manner yet he is entitled to be treated by this House. I think Parliament is not proceeding correctly when one of us is suffering and rotting in Mulago at the hands of the prisons authorities.

Mr Speaker, through your guidance, I think we can get a way of helping our Member. He is rotting away in Mulago and not receiving treatment, yet he requires specialised treatment. I am talking about this because it has happened to me before and I know what it means. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, procedural matters are about procedures in the House. Anything outside this place and not related to a matter going on in this House cannot be a procedural matter for the House or for the decision of the Speaker; those become administrative issues, in which case you just come to the Speaker and we talk about it and we see what we can do. It cannot be a procedural matter. 

Next item on the Order Paper. [Hon. Zaake rose_]

THE SPEAKER: I am saying it with great respect to you, hon. Zaake, that it is not a procedural matter. It is an administrative issue, which you come to the Speaker and we find a solution on how to handle it. How do you expect me to rule on the matter? Is it a procedural matter? It has been brought to my attention and I am saying we handle it administratively, as Parliament.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF TRAFFIC CONTROL IN KAMPALA CITY
 
2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Improvement of Traffic Control in Kampala City presented to Parliament.

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister presented business for the succeeding week that required a response from the Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs on the improvement of traffic control in Kampala City. 

I wish to submit as follows:

Kampala Capital City and the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area – which extends to areas of Wakiso, Mpigi, Mukono, Entebbe, among other areas – covers an area of 1,000 square kilometres and is the commercial and industrial centre of Uganda, contributing over 70 per cent of the national industrial production and 60 per cent of the GDP of Uganda (according to the National Development Plan III).

Previous studies and plans, including the Kampala Urban Traffic Improvement Plan (KUTIP, 20l3), the National Transport Master Plan (2008-2023) which includes the Master Plan for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, have shown that traffic congestion is a big problem in the city.

The Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area is rapidly growing and is characterised by the following:

(a) 	A population annual growth rate estimated at 4.1 per cent with a daytime population of approximately 3.5 million, of which, 70 per cent use public transport and mainly road transport. The above has resulted into an explosive growth in vehicular population (boda bodas and motor vehicles).

(b) 	A transport system that consists of mainly; heavy good vehicles, taxis, motorcycles, private vehicles, bicycles, minibuses, buses and non-motorised (walking). 

Taxis (or matatus) account for 21 per cent of the number of vehicles in Kampala, transporting about 82.6 per cent of the passengers.

Private vehicles contribute 36.6 per cent of the vehicles in Kampala, transporting about 8.8 per cent of passengers. While 42.4 per cent are motor cycles (boda bodas) and only transport 8.5 per cent of the passengers in the city.

(c) 	It is also characterised by poor transport infrastructure: Kampala City alone has approximately 2,110 kilometres of road network. However, only 642 kilometres are paved, while 1,460 kilometres are still unpaved.

Mr Speaker, in terms of vehicle capacity, Kampala’s road network was constructed for less than 100,000 vehicles in the 1960s and yet today, over 400,000 vehicles use the same roads. The roads in Kampala and the Greater Kampala Metropolitan area are narrow and this is worsened by the fact that they do not segregate traffic. Largely, there are no specific lanes for specific vehicles. 

The public transport by taxi (matatu) originates mainly from the taxi parks, which are located in the central business district. In addition, the unregulated movement of heavy goods’ vehicles, motorcycles or boda boda and tukutukus in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan area has also added insult to injury. 

Mr Speaker, the city is also characterised by poor facilities for non-motorised transport; walking and cycling. Largely, we do not have walkways or cycling lanes. Bad road usage is very common; by drivers and riders, who do not observe traffic rules and keep switching lanes among other problems, let alone the insults they howl at you if you just try to warn them.

The characteristics mentioned above are also invariably linked to other indirect factors such as land use patterns, employment patterns, income levels, car ownership trends, infrastructure investment and regional economic dynamics. Traffic congestion continues to remain a major public policy issue resulting in massive delays, lost productivity and economic losses, insecurity, pollution, and road incidents, including accidents that sometimes result in permanent injuries and death. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to call upon Members to get interested in the pie chart to show them the categorisation of our roads, which I have just mentioned.

Traffic congestion has the following effects: 

    i) Congestion causes high and fluctuating fares in public transport. The most affected persons are the low-income earners, making up more than 40 per cent of Greater Kampala Metropolitan area population. These spend more than 20 per cent of their gross income on transport. 

    ii) It also increases the cost of doing business in the city. The distribution costs of finished products is approximately 10 per cent of production, which is against the best or the maximum best practices of four per cent due to traffic jams and congestion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to summarise this, since we have them on the iPads?

MR KYOFATOGABYE: Thank you very much, for your guidance –(Interruption)

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In governing Uganda, we have the Constitution. I refer you to Chapter 11, Articles 176, 177, 178 and many others that provides for decentralisation as a basis for the governance of this country. 

In addition, this Parliament gave Kampala, including other districts, enabling laws to implement what is provided for under the Constitution. For this matter, I refer you to the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) Act. The minister before us has a full council at KCCA and the KCCA law was brought back here for amendment so that we could clearly define how governance in the capital city should be run.

The procedural matter I am raising is: Is the minister giving us a report of what they discussed at KCCA? Procedurally, are we moving well when the minister now comes here to tell stories of lamentation about the running of the capital city? I do not know what he expects us to do instead of going to get approval of the council. Maybe, out of courtesy, he comes back here and tells us. 

Mr Speaker, are we procedurally right when we take over matters for local governance and we discuss them here in total contravention of the Constitution of Uganda, the KCCA Act and the Local Government Act? In Mukono, we have a council. We do not expect the minister to come here and take decisions on behalf of the urban authorities of Mukono. My question is: are we moving well? Do we intend to take over the responsibilities of the KCCA Council that we have just given a new law to clarify on how business should be handled in the capital city? 

Mr Speaker, I beg that you guide me.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, you are very right; we are not proceeding well. Even the housing of the statement itself is not part of what the Rules of Procedures anticipated. 

Last week, we received a statement on the tarmacking of the taxi park. I think we can do better. However, we had to finish this because in the wisdom of the Government, it had been somehow put as business for next week and so, in the business for next week, they listed stuff like this. That is what was listed as business for next week. Therefore, they have come in this form and shape –(Laughter)– are you ululating –(Laughter)– then why don’t you do it properly except the rules will not allow you. 

Honourable minister, please try and summarise because if we are to go through this entire statement in this form, it will not help us much. Therefore, you fulfil your obligation on the instructions that were given, give a summary and lay the document at the Table and we see how to proceed.

It was initiated by the leaders of this House, not the presiding officers, that this statement should come in this form. However, I agree with the honourable member for Mukono Municipality that we would not be proceeding properly in this form. 

Honourable minister, would you like to summarise? 

MR OSHABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister was proceeding with a statement to which you indicated that we are not proceeding well. When you ask him to come and summarise the same, are we really proceeding well. 

THE SPEAKER: The rules are not clear on that and where the rules are not clear it becomes the prerogative of the Speaker to give guidance. (Laughter) I have just done that. Please, summarise and wind up. 

MR KYOFATOGABYE: Mr Speaker, the initiatives, which my ministry, in collaboration with other relevant MDAs are doing to improve transport are as follows:

    1. Gazetting of stages and stops for boda bodas, taxis and buses;
    2. We will work with the leadership of taxis to thoroughly develop and implement fixed routes;
    3. Gradually introduce fair collection systems starting with bus transport for the benefit of passengers;
    4. Create and define five public transport zones, namely:
    a) The Neutral zone
    b) Eastern zone
    c) Northern Zone
    d) Western Zone and
    e)  Southern Zone. 

The central business district area will be a neutral zone where public transport vehicles of a particular type from the other four zones shall meet.

In conclusion, fully eradicating traffic congestion is neither feasible nor an affordable goal in economically dynamic urban areas like the greater Kampala metropolitan area. However, much can be done to reduce its occurrence and lessen its impact on roadway users within the city. 

As much as there are many possible measures that can be deployed to mitigate congestion, there are no single perfect solutions best suited to addressing congestion. A combination of strategies is more effective in managing urban congestion in Kampala. Long term congestion outcomes can only be delivered through a well framed process that addresses congestion in all aspects of the metropolitan area. 

Mr Speaker, that day when we left, I had three questions to respond to. I beg you to allow me respond to them and we finish the three papers regarding Kampala. 

Regarding the question of how much revenue from the property tax has gone to road construction in the city –(Interjections) I beg to complete the responses, which I left hanging that day. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it the same statement? 

MR KYOFATOGABYE: No, it is the previous statement. 

THE SPEAKER: No, please. 

MR KYOFATOGABYE: With that, Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am surprised to see hon. Ssewungu and hon. Silwany standing up to debate. - How do you seek clarification on something you said was not proceeding properly? -  If it is procedure, you say, “procedure” and I deal with it. 

For now, let us close this matter of the honourable minister. -  Can I finish with this matter, hon. Solomon Silwany, please?

Honourable minister, this is good. We will refer all these matters to the committee responsible for this so they can see how to use these statements to enrich some of the statements they will be bringing to this House for some decisions. Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a procedural matter. We always come up as a House and raise questions and issues, like in the case of the minister that has just been presented here about Kampala. 

If I were in the minister’s shoes and Parliament had asked me to come and give a statement – 

THE SPEAKER: Parliament did not. Please, resume your seat. (Laughter) I gave you the background.

MR SILWANY: But – 

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to go into the details of how this statement came but Parliament did not. These things are done. Let us leave them that way. Next item - 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO SIGN AND RATIFY THE TREATY ON THE PROHIBITION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS

3.00
MR MAPENDUZI OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Mr Speaker, allow me to begin by thanking you for giving me the opportunity this afternoon to present this Motion. 

This Motion comes under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. It is a Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to sign and ratify the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons.

“WHEREAS Article 123(l) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 empowers the President or a person authorised by the President to make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organisation or body, in respect of any matter;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted the Ratification of Treaties Act, Cap. 204 to provide for the procedure for ratification of treaties in accordance with Article 123 of the Constitution;

NOTING THAT the Ratification of Treaties Act, Cap. 204 provides that a treaty can be ratified by either Cabinet or Parliament and further stipulates that the instrument of ratification of a treaty shall be signed, sealed and deposited by the minister responsible for foreign affairs;

RECALLING THAT in 2017, the United Nations General Assembly adopted resolution 71/258 directing the United Nations conference to negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading towards their total elimination;

FURTHER RECALLING THAT on 7 July 2017, “The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly and entered into force on 22 January 2021;

NOTING THAT The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons is the first legally binding international agreement to comprehensively prohibit nuclear weapons and has to date been acceded to and ratified by 56 States of the United Nations; 

CONCERNED that whereas Uganda actively participated in the negotiations leading to the formulation of the treaty and was among the 122 States that approved the idea to prohibit and eliminate nuclear weapons and voted in favour of the adoption of the treaty by the UN General Assembly, Uganda has not yet signed or ratified on the prohibition of nuclear weapons;

RECOGNISING that the delay by Uganda to sign and ratify the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons diminishes Uganda’s standing on the International stage, where Uganda is recognised as a model country in handling matters of international concern and is celebrated as a country that has served the international community with dedication in maintaining international peace and security, as well as standing for the ideals and possessing a sense of mission reflected in the United Nations Charter;

COGNISANT that the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons assures durable world peace, prohibits nuclear arms race between countries and safeguards mankind by prohibiting State parties from developing, testing, producing, manufacturing, acquiring, stockpiling, stationing, installing, deploying, transferring or receiving nuclear weapons or any other nuclear explosive;

FURTHER COGNISANT that the first historical meeting of the State parties to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons is scheduled for 22 March 2022 in New York and for Uganda to be represented at that meeting, Uganda ought to have signed, ratified and deposited the ratification instrument at the United Nations in New York by 22 December 2021;

FIRMLY CONVINCED that the signing and ratification of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons will be a positive step for Uganda since it will enable Uganda access assistance including environmental remediation from the State parties that test or use nuclear weapons;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament urges the Government to sign and ratify the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.” 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Jonam County, Member for Tororo North County, Member for Tororo District, Member for Amolatar District, Member for Burahya County, Member for Bwamba County, Member for Kabula County and Member for Masindi District. Honourable member, would you like to speak to your motion that is duly seconded? 

MR OJARA MAPENDUZI: Mr Speaker, it is the responsibility of each one of us to make every possible effort to make the world safe and secure. Nuclear weapons are the most dangerous weapons on the planet earth. Only one can destroy a whole city, potentially killing millions and jeopardising the natural environment and lives of future generations through its long term catastrophic effects. The dangers of such, therefore, arise from their very existence.

It is important to note that our country has had a bad history. However, it is also important to recognise that Uganda has had a significant impact in terms of playing its role globally in ensuring world peace. It is, therefore, my hope that honourable colleagues will see the need and importance of supporting this motion so that the Government can proceed to have the ratification and the signing. Thank you, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Seconder of the motion.

3.08
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to state that as a country, we may have our own issues here but like the mover of the motion stated, Uganda is known globally as one of the countries that promote global peace. This motion comes in, to reinforce that. As a seconder of the motion, I call upon this House to urge the Government to sign and ratify this treaty. 

We all know the dangers of nuclear weapons. Colleagues, we are not talking about the items for manufacturing nuclear weapons. We do not want them to be used as elements of war. However, we know that some of the items can be used for good things. In this motion, we are specifically stating that our Government signs and ratifies that because we do not want it to become an instrument of war. 

I want to emphasise that the effects of nuclear weapons are very many and are adverse. I want to also give one other example. In Belarus, some items were arrested at a port. The items stayed in the port for quite some time but unfortunately, the items burst and caused extensive deaths to people. This is one example of how dangerous this is. 

Mr Speaker, one of the cases the world knows about is in Japan at the end of World War II. Do we know that within one hour of that bomb blast, about 76,000 died and many more died afterwards? This is the kind of situation we are saying as a country, and which the promoters of global peace do not want to go to. 

As I said, the effects of nuclear weapons are adverse. For instance, people who are exposed to nuclear radiation eventually experience DNA distortion. There are situations of organ failure, including bone marrow, acute radiation illnesses, leading to early death. There are situations where even the germ cells in us – when we talk about the germ cells, we mean the sperms and ovaries; they are also disorganised and come out in the children that we produce. That is part of the long term effect we are talking about. Some of those effects eventually result into cancer in many people.

In terms of our environment, we know that in the Sub-Saharan Africa, for instance, most of our economies are still dependent on agriculture, which is also mainly dependent on the natural climate and weather. Therefore, any disturbances can cause an extensive damage to our economy and the livelihood of our people. Over all, that will impact and undermine the sustainable development agenda.

Nevertheless, I rise to support this motion and I beg to move.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is for a Motion for the Resolution of Parliament urging Government to sign and ratify the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons to be adopted by this House, and debate starts now.

3.14
Mr denis oguzu (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion. I think it is an ambitious motion, which is not informed by facts. 

Uganda is a developing country that is not a threat to any neighbours. The access to electricity in this country is only about 20 or 22 per cent. We must invest in research and nuclear energy is a potential investment area and it will require Uganda to stockpile some nuclear materials. 

Therefore, to suggest without a socio-economic impact assessment, that Uganda should go into ratifying - I think this is a security issue. It should have been studied by the security organs properly before we can commit our nation to this kind of treaty. 

I would appeal to honourable members not just to be excited. Nuclear treaties are negotiated to curb ambitions of super powers. What do you want to curb in Uganda? What is your motivation for this kind of motion? I think we need a proper study into this before we can commit Uganda to it. 

I think our leaders have not been silent for nothing. They have been quiet because they are still studying it. Therefore, in the absence of such a study honourable members do not be lured into delving into matters people have not properly understood. Thank you. (Laughter)

3.17
Mr Patrick nsamba (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We, as a country in 2019, were informed by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development that we have high deposits for uranium. At that time, the ministry indicated that they were going to use it for power generation.

Around 2020, there came a documentary, which most of us must have watched, carrying information that North Korea has a nuclear plant in Kalangala. That documentary went viral on social media and many of us could have watched it.

When such a matter comes on the Floor, it is my humble opinion that the minister responsible first responds to some of these questions: first, how are we going to use our uranium deposits? Secondly, why haven’t we signed the protocol? Why hasn’t the minister come to Parliament for ratification?

They should also respond to that serious allegation that we have a nuclear plant in Kalangala because Parliament needs to hear from Government what their plan is. Why are they hesitant to sign a protocol that says, “We shall never use nuclear power for any purpose?”

We need to hear from Government for us to know what they are up to. Why aren’t they signing or ratifying it and what are they using the uranium deposits that we have in this country for? Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, to redirect this: it is about the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons; it is very clear! So, whether you are using it for power, it is not about this motion. It is about nuclear weapons and so, let us proceed that way.

3.20
Mr Dicksons kateshumbwa (NRM, Shema Municipality, Shema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been wondering about the motivation and urgency behind it because I know that this treaty has had about 86 countries sign it. Many other countries have not. In the East African Community, only Tanzania has signed it.

I think the movers of this motion need to go back and engage Government to find out what the reasons for the delay are. What is the hurry? Is this treaty in line with our Atomic Energy Council objectives? 

I do not want to question the motivation behind this motion but I think it needs to be referred back. Members need to do more research and engage Government to find out perhaps why Uganda and many other countries in the East African Community have not ratified it. We might be here debating yet we need to first hear from Government on why they have delayed signing it.

Otherwise, we are also wondering why many, especially developed countries, are seated on the fence about this treaty. They promote it but when it comes to ratification, they are not doing it. Why? What is the motivation behind our rush to urge Government to ratify it? I beg to submit.

3.22
Mr martin muzaale (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion before us - ideally the honourable minister for security, before you go –(Laughter)- I thought it is important that you speak about this motion because we are talking about something that we do not understand very well, yet we have a minister for security here. 

Therefore, I am asking the minister for security –(Interjections)– the General is here. Okay. They should both speak about this so that they can guide us on this motion. Thank you.

3.23
MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I stand here to support the motion. A nuclear weapon is just a bomb or missile that uses nuclear energy to cause an explosion and death. As a people’s representative, this motion is here to prohibit anything that can explode anytime and kill our people. 

On 22 January 2021, the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons was entered into force as the first instrument of international humanitarian law to mitigate the catastrophic human consequences of using and testing nuclear weapons. 

Mr Speaker, notably, this treaty requires states to help victims of nuclear testing and use, clear contaminated areas and that any use of nuclear weapons – regardless of its rationale – is not acceptable world over. 

The countries that have ratified this treaty stand very strong in terms of the international understanding of the law. As a people’s representative – on anything that affects the lives of my people – I urge this House to support the motion that our country becomes the 55th in the world to ratify this treaty so that in an event of any explosion or anything in our country, it stands a better chance of being treated as one of the states that recognises nuclear weapons as a catastrophic issue to humanity. I thank you. 

3.25
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I thank you and I would like to thank the mover and seconder of the Motion. I would also like to join Members to implore the House not to support this Motion.
 
As we stand today, as a county, we have very many urgent challenges. For us to come to Parliament to say that we are in urgent need – as much as it is good to block nuclear weapons, for us to bring this debate at this time –  people are dying of COVID-19, we have issues of insecurity –(Interruption) 

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order following the manner of debate by my brother, hon. Silwany. For any business to get to the House, it must have passed through your office and the Business Committee, where some of us are allowed to sit because we are chairpersons of committees. 

The Commissioner, hon. Silwany, has come here to tell the world that unuseful information found its way to Parliament. Wouldn’t it indict you, Mr Speaker? This is because every matter on the Order Paper was properly considered by you before it came here. 

Is hon. Silwany in order to continue misleading this House that it is headed by a person who cannot know the  priorities of this country and that the Rt Hon. Speaker is not properly occupying his office as a gatekeeper to guard against irrelevancies? Should he continue being a Commissioner, while failing to honour the office of the Speaker? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is not in order for a Member of Parliament to incite the Speaker against another Member? (Laughter) 

However, the matter you raised is solid and correct. By the time these matters come to this House, you either debate them or not; you either know how to debate them or not. If you do not know, just shut up. (Laughter)  

Our laws and rules prohibit us from discussion in fear and anticipation. We discuss these things for the general good of the people of this country. Are they under threat from any use of nuclear weapons anywhere? We have Ugandans in the USA, Tokyo, China – everywhere, all over the globe, there are Ugandans. Do we face any threats of nuclear weapons? Should we respond like other countries have? That should be the debate. If you have nothing to say, honourable members, do not rise. Would you like to speak properly now? (Laughter) 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was driving my point and hon. Nambooze was trying to cut it short and give a false impression. 

What I was saying was that - and I would like honourable members to listen carefully - much as it is important for us to talk about the prohibition of nuclear weapons, I was asking Members: is it something that is very urgent as of today? This is my debate; should we, as Members of Parliament, support it now? I am imploring Members of Parliament who are for and against the motion. 

On behalf of the people of Bukooli Central, I think this is something, which is not very urgent. This Parliament should be looking at issues that are more urgent than nuclear weapons and then, we look at this at a later time. I beg to submit. 

3.31
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I would like to join my colleague from Maracha to state that we have the Minister of Security in this country. For us, civilian Members of Parliament, to come here with unguided excitements and rush into –(Interjections)- This is a matter that  should have come from the Executive. We have members of security and the Minister of Security in this House but we come here to ask Parliament to ask the Government to sign this treaty! 

The other day, I was interacting with the Minister of Security-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, were you here when I was making the guidance? 

MR EBWALU: Yes

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then you might have to sit down because you are taking us back.

3.33
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. You need not be a Minister for Security to understand the dangers of nuclear weapons; a nuclear weapon is synonymous with the war and you do not need to be a soldier to know the effects of war. 

The mover of the motion and the seconder put it clearly giving the background of Japan and other countries and how the world has suffered because of nuclear weapons.

Mr Speaker, I believe that the motion was moved in good faith. In addition, what affects America affects Uganda - as you have guided - because we are in a global village. Therefore, for someone to say that let those other big countries do their part and we just look on – they are not correct.

Mr Speaker, if America is at war with, say, Japan, Uganda will be affected directly or indirectly. Therefore, to say that we should not debate or we should not give it the time it deserves is not correct because this is an urgent matter that we must treat as such.

Maybe, where I agree with colleagues is that the Minister should come and add something then we move. However, nuclear weapons are deadly and bad for this world, for Uganda, and other countries alike. To say that Members do not understand it is demeaning to Members of Parliament because any sensible Member of Parliament - let me stop there, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, doctor.

3.34
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know for sure that one of the countries from which we can procure a nuclear weapon is the USA. Looking at the Congressional Budget Office, they estimate that a single weapon, perhaps the smallest, would cost about $17 billion; that is money that we do not have. Even when we are to save, it would take us years to get this kind of money. 

However, over and above that, maintaining a nuclear weapon is expensive, disposing of waste in the event that we would not use it for the period that is supposed to be used is extremely expensive because they do this in a sea and Uganda is not surrounded by any sea.

Mr Speaker, I am overwhelmed with this motion to the extent that it seems like sitting in a sub-county meeting where councillors are debating whether to buy a plane or helicopter for their LC III Chairperson.
 
I believe that the countries that are pushing us towards signing this treaty want to build up numbers. Let us look for the incentives behind the signing, we discuss them; whether they are reducing our debt burden and then we can sign. Thank you. I beg to submit.

3.36
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Uganda as a country voted in favour of adopting this particular treaty at the UN Conference in 2017, although it has not yet ratified.

Therefore, the fact that delegates, who represented this country at the conference, voted in favour of this particular treaty, is reason enough for us as Members of Parliament to support this motion. (Applause)

We are supporting this motion and urging Government. If Government feels otherwise, it will come back to us as Parliament and they tell us that although we supported it, we have now changed but we do not know the reasons.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, I just want to appeal to you, Members. Currently, we are struggling with bombs everywhere. Tomorrow, you never know those nuclear weapons may find their way here.

This particular motion being moved is not being moved in vain.
It is urging Government; I looked at the statistics; by March, a number of countries - they were 86 - had ratified and that is not a small number.

We all know that nuclear weapons have adverse effects if they are not controlled. In Nagasaki and Hiroshima, we lost over 200,000 people; I was still a young girl in school but I remember clearly, that is when we started hearing about the nuclear weapons.

THE SPEAKER: In 1945, you were in school? (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: No, I read the history when I was in secondary school and that is when I started hearing about the Hiroshima and Nagasaki issue. 

Mr Speaker, the effects of nuclear weapons can be adverse. This particular motion is well intentioned. We all know that the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons technology; the objective really is to promote cooperation in a peaceful way. There can be nuclear technology but it must be used in a peaceful and controlled way.

Mr Speaker, I wanted to move a motion - I do not know, I saw, the front bench people pushing the Minister. These treaties mainly concern the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who is supposed to be moving once a decision has been made. At such conferences, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is supposed to bring this to Cabinet, which approves and then it comes to the Floor. 

Mr Speaker, I want to move that we send this particular motion to the relevant committee so that the committee can interface with the relevant Government ministries to understand why since 2017, they have not yet ratified and then they can report back to the House and then we adopt it, if need be. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, may we understand that not all treaties should come to Parliament to complete the ratification process; we adopted the dual system of ratification. Cabinet ratifies treaties that do not affect our Constitution and it ends there so we receive only for information where necessary. Treaties that seek to alter the foundation of our Constitution or in some way suggest an amendment to the Constitution, those treaties can only be ratified by Parliament.

I think there was a case in point of the Rome Statute, which created the International Criminal Court. It discussed immunities and privileges of leaders of countries. So when it came, the ratification had to be done by Parliament and the exception on the issue of immunity had to be created by Parliament in the law. Therefore, that is the system that we adopted as a country.

However, there is a motion that had been proposed by the Member for Tororo District that instead of discussing it without sufficient background and interaction, it might be a good idea to refer this matter to the committee responsible for this to interrogate it further and interact with the people concerned, ask questions, get answers and come back to this Parliament and then we conclude with our discussions on the motion and possible adoption of the motion. I see the Minister of Security nodding seriously. I suspect he is in support. 

3.42
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the idea that we give time to this motion. Referring it to the committee would be the right decision so that the relevant Government ministries could put in their ideas and we move together. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is that the position? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: If that is the position, I do not need to have a motion adopted to that effect. It is within my powers to do that and I will just do that. 
Honourable members, we will refer this particular motion to the Committee on Foreign Affairs and they will handle it in detail and get back to the House, and we will have a final and complete debate on this matter. Furthermore, we will take a decision on the text of the motion they would have proposed. Thank you. Next item. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy this matter has come up. There are very many international meetings that Uganda attends - on our behalf of course. Also, in parliamentary fora, where we are members, such agreements, treaties and resolutions are made. Mr Speaker, I think it is also important for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs - and the relevant ministries - to let us know of the international treaties that Uganda has entered into, which require ratification and domestication. 

Now that this has come up, can we also be informed so that we understand where we stand in some of those international commitments? I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I wish it could come as part of the recommendations from the committee so that we can adopt it, rather than a ruling from the Speaker. Thank you. Next item.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONS

    A) ON THE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF THE PROLONGED ELECTRIC POWER OUTAGE IN MAWOGOLA COUNTY SOUTH, CRIPPLING SEVERAL BUSINESSES, AMIDST THE EXISTENTIAL THREAT OF INSECURITY IN THE AREA 

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Mr Speaker, a question was asked on adverse effects of prolonged electric power outages in Mawogola County South. It has been on the Order Paper for a very long time. The question was asked by hon. Gorreth Namugga, Member of Parliament, Mawogola County South.

The question raised was about the adverse effects of prolonged electric power outage in Mawogola County South, crippling several businesses amidst threats of security in the area. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, has the power situation in Mawogola County South been rectified?

MR OKAASAI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: That is the only answer we need. 

MR OKAASAI: The answer is that the power outages in that area were actually sorted out way back on 29th of September, and there is no more power outage in that area. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MS NAMUGGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to inform you that much as you have informed the House that we have power in Mawogola - actually that is not the case. By that time, we had spent two weeks without power. 

THE SPEAKER: Was it rectified? 

MS NAMUGGA: It was not rectified because now it is one hour on and eight hours off.

THE SPEAKER: That is another matter. 

MS NAMUGGA: We cannot say that it is on because the effect is that business is being interrupted. Mr Speaker, we are talking about consistent provision of power. Umeme needs to explain to the people of Mawogola why power is on and off; we have power for one hour and then it is off for eight hours. 

Mr Speaker, through you, is Umeme really powering Uganda or not?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question was: This place has suffered without power and as a result, there was insecurity. We then asked the minister to deal with it. Was the matter dealt with? The answer seems to be “yes” except now that there is a new problem - it is on and off and that is a new matter.

Honourable minister, is it by your operations that you give power for one hour and then you turn it off?

MR OKAASAI: Mr Speaker, that is a new question, which we can go back and see how to rectify. Otherwise, the problem she raised was rectified. Therefore, I will investigate and give her an answer. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

    B)  ON THE DIRECTIVE BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY [UNRA] ON PRE-FINANCING OF ROADS; NAMELY NABUMALI-BUTALEJA-NAMUTUMBA, FORT PORTAL-KIJURA-KITOKE, ATIAK-KITGUM, LUKU-KALANGALA-MULABANA, NTUSI-LYANTONDE-RAKAI AND KATUNGURU-ISHASHA ROADS, AND THE DISPUTABLE RECORD OF POWER CHINA INTERNATIONAL GROUP LIMITED

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the 35th Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the 11th Parliament, held on Wednesday, 30 of September 2021, hon. Solomon Silwany, Member of Parliament, Bukooli County Central, requested for clarification on the questionable credentials of Power China International Group Limited; the road construction company for whom His Excellency the President directed the Executive Director, Uganda National Roads Authority regarding a proposal for pre-financing of the Nabumali-Butaleja-Namutumba, Fort Portal-Kijura-Kitoke, Atiak-Kitgum, Luku-Kalangala-Mulabana, Ntusi-Lyantonde-Rakai and Katunguru-Ishasha roads and need for adequate due diligence on the company by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to clarify as follows: We wrote to the Chief Representative of Power China International Group Limited on 15 July 2021. We informed them that we were still studying their proposal, in view of the country’s debt-to-GDP ratio status. My ministry and Uganda National Roads Authority have since finalised the analysis of all the proposals for contractor-facilitated financing or pre-financing of national roads, including the one from Power China International Group Limited to ensure that they fit within the medium-term expenditure framework ceiling.

Currently, we are in the process of inviting all the contractors who expressed interest to discuss their financing terms and understand their companies better, beyond the information which they already submitted. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport together with the Uganda National Roads Authority will undertake due diligence and signing of the project agreement if we agree with the pre-financing terms. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Silwany, any supplementary question?

3.52
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I raised a question here on 31st of September I had four questions about this company.

One, I told the House that this company had never done any business of construction of roads anywhere in the world. This is the clarification I was expecting from the minister.

Two, does this company have the capacity to do business of constructing over 400 kilometres, when it has never done such business anywhere or has not shown us any experience?

Three, the company we are talking about was the same one we gave a loan to. Those who were in the Tenth Parliament, I hope you remember the promissory notes we gave to that company to construct Lubowa Specialised Hospital, yet they did not do anything. 

The clarification I am seeking is: if the same company did not perform then, are they really going to perform now here? These are the questions I wanted the minister to respond to and give us the factual answers and then, we can go ahead. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: The question then becomes whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the proper housing for the answer. Is the minister the proper source of the answers to those questions? 

MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker, most of my questions went to the Minister of Works and Transport. When they were giving the directive, the President wrote to the Minister of Works and Transport. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supporting but the question went to the Minister of Works and Transport.

THE SPEAKER: As far as financial issues are concerned, the minister has done his best but the substance of the question remains undealt with and it should be dealt with by the sector responsible. That would be my guidance on this matter.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should not have been mean with the information. The roads that were listed, that require pre-financing, which appeared in the New Vision of last week – I know the minister had a meeting with all those companies on the 14th and they gave them a deadline of reporting back by 21st, on whether they were agreeable to the terms that the Government of Uganda, through Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had given. 

Mr Speaker, I expected the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to have given us feedback such that hon. Silwany would be able to take it up from there. Otherwise, I know all those companies that met the Under Secretary of that ministry. They met on the 14th and all of them submitted their responses by the 21st. So, what has come out of that company? Does it qualify?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, nobody answers questions that were not asked. That was not part of the question that was asked. I think we should focus on how we should deal with questions asked and those we think ought to have been asked. We deal with the ones that were asked. 

Honourable members, this is the way to deal with this. The substance of this matter is actually with the Ministry of Works and Transport and something remained outstanding from this ministry. 

The guidance here is that – I see UNRA. Therefore, it is the Ministry of Works and Transport. I think they should come back with guidance on those four aspects. Clerk, please, extract those four questions again and forward them to the Ministry of Works and Transport so that they can come and deal with it. Next item.

C) ON THE POOR MANAGEMENT OF THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY OPERATIONS TO CONFISCATE BODA BODA MOTORCYCLES WITH FOREIGN NUMBER PLATES OPERATING IN WEST NILE THAT LED TO THE SHOOTING OF SOME CIVILIANS

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I see the Minister of Internal Affairs running out. I thought that the issues that happened – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what have you just done? 

MR OKUPA: I stood on a procedural matter.

THE SPEAKER: You accessed the microphone and started speaking without the Speaker’s –

MR OKUPA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. I saw the minister run away at a high speed. Given the matters concerned – (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Wouldn’t it be better to say the honourable minister was walking out? I saw him. I did not see him running and I do not think the minister is going anywhere. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, this is a response to a matter raised by hon. Paparu, District Woman Representative of Arua, on the poor management of the Uganda Revenue Authority operations involving the confiscation of Boda Boda motorcycles with foreign number plates operating in West Nile that led to the shooting of some civilians.

On 5 September 2021, URA team from Pader, while in Arua on routine surveillance encountered people with numberless motorcycles. While trying to impound them, a scuffle ensued which led to a shooting incident, where one, Anguni Philliam, a 29-year-old, from Yivu village, Ayavu Parish, Vurra Subcounty, Arua District was injured. This incident was reported to police vide SD REF 36/05/09 2021 and the matter is now under police investigation. 

Also, on 20 September 2021, the Arua URA enforcement team, while on routine surveillance prompted by the rampant smuggling of fuel, cooking oil, rice and numberless motorcycles in West Nile intercepted four numberless motorcycles in Arivu – about 20 kilometres from Arua City. 

At some point, there was a big crowd protesting the operation, which culminated into some form of commotion. This prompted the enforcement team to evacuate the area. In the process, one Jurua Bosco, a 20-year-old was killed and a one Gertrude Afunia was injured on the arm. The injured were rushed to Arua Regional Referral Hospital for treatment. 

The above two incidents are very regrettable. We offer our condolences to the family of the deceased. What happened is not reflective of URA’s Standard Operating Procedures. URA is cooperating with the police as they investigate these incidents. We trust that any person found culpable will be handled in accordance with the law. 

Going forward, the following efforts are being pursued:

    1. That the URA is reviewing the circumstances that led to the above regrettable incidents so as to avoid a repeat of the same and ensure continued support and cooperation from all stakeholders including the community and leadership of West Nile. 

    2. URA is reaching out to the families of the victims to extend possible support and seek reconciliation. To that end, URA has also taken the responsibility of ensuring that the injured lady and gentleman receive medical treatment.


    3. URA is in discussions with the business community and boda boda association in the West Nile region to come up with better and agreeable methods that can support the smooth payment of taxes due on the numberless motorcycles. 

    4. URA will intensify its tax education and sensitisation sessions via sub-county barazas and local councils to enhance the citizens’ appreciation of URA’s mandate and foster citizens’ contribution to the national development through tax compliance. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Paparu, do you have any supplementary matter? 

4.02
MS LILLIAN PAPARU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the response. I pray that the action points will be implemented. My regret is only that some of the feedback got in the investigations is not true. They are saying the shooting happened because there was a rowdy crowd. That is very unfortunate. The community would be disappointed to hear such a statement because this shooting took place early in the morning when there were only a few people in the trading centre. Firing a machine gun at ordinary civilians in a local trading centre was really regrettable.

We pray that these action points will be put to practice because the situation is still not good. I think URA is not operating the way it planned in West Nile because there are certain areas they cannot reach at this moment. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item – 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point concerning foreign number plates in this country. My district borders South Sudan and we have so many motorcycles that come from there. When they reach Uganda, changing the number plates of those motorcycles to Ugandan number plates is extremely expensive. The way URA is treating the boda boda people who are crossing from South Sudan into Uganda is not good. 

Mr Speaker, if it is procedurally okay, I request that you direct the minister to instruct URA to make sure that the amount charged on change of number plates in this country is the same as someone changing the number plates in foreign countries. Our people are getting a lot of problems in changing number plates of motorcycles especially when they come from other countries. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to add that to your action points? It is not technically a procedural matter but it is a matter that requires action from your side. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I think it is understandable. It is important that we look at the tax currently imposed on these – 

THE SPEAKER: It should be a general review. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: We shall look at this matter and examine whether we should reduce on the amount of money that is involved to alleviate the problem. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item –

D) ON THE STALLED CONSTRUCTION OF THE RWENKUNYE-APAC-IBUJE-LIRA ROAD BY MATRIX COMPANY LIMITED DUE TO THEIR INABILITY TO ACCESS THE IBUJE ROCK FOR THE REQUISITE ROAD CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, this is a matter that was raised by hon. David Kabanda, Member of Parliament for Kasambya County, on the stalled construction of the Rwenkunye-Apac-Ibuje-Lira Road by Matrix Company Limited due to their inability to access the Ibuje Rock for the requisite road construction materials. It is a matter that they put under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but I thought it should be responded to by the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

4.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, on this matter, the Minister of Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba Wamala, is holding a meeting with local leaders in Lira on 30 October 2021 to come up with a solution. He requests that he reports after that meeting.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The way we understood this issue was that the rock from which the contractor should have extracted the materials for working on the road had been blocked by a one individual or a group of individuals. Therefore, there was no access to it by the contractor. That was the only issue. It had nothing to do with the performance of the contractor or anything else.

That means the community and the leaders needed to come together and solve this matter so that access is granted to the contractor to access the rock and get materials, which they will not get for free. I am sure they will pay for it. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you for the opportunity, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. Following the events that caused the loss of lives on Saturday and yesterday, I wonder whether it was not procedurally right, before we adjourn the House today, for the Government, especially the Ministry, Office of the President (Security) and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to give a statement to the country regarding those events. This is because we do not know whether they are going to recur. We are seeing bloggers saying so many things.

I think information is very important; it is key for the safety of Ugandans. I thought Government would give information and guidance. We have read from the newspapers that the President will give a statement on Thursday but we have the clock and the terrorists have the time. Anything can happen between today and Thursday. Ugandans need to be given information and guidance such that we secure this country like we have always done.

That is the procedural matter I am raising here. That is why earlier on, I got up and said that the Minister of Internal Affairs is running. The right words I should have used are, “sneaking out”. However, if he is seeing this on the screen, he should give the country – Mr Speaker, I will give you some information later in your Chambers. 

It is very important that the country is briefed on what has happened and what needs to be done. Was it a security gap? Like the issue of Digida Restaurant; they were operating during curfew hours. People have told us that the restaurant belongs to security officers and a police officer. There is a place in Ntinda near my home; it is guarded by military pickups in the evening. 

The police at the checkpoints cannot stop people from partying. These are some of the things we would have asked the minister about. There is a similar situation in Rubaga; a place which is always – You find a police pick-up truck and the army packed outside while people are busy partying inside. Therefore, we need a statement from the Ministry, Office of the President (Security) and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Ordinarily, this would require no prompting. When there is a situation that requires the Government to give confidence to the people, it should be automatic without prompting. I am sure the responsible people are getting ready to do this or rather I hope they are ready to do this. 

I see the Minister of Internal Affairs is here. I see Her Excellency the Vice President is also here. So, you might want to – Honourable minister, if you are not ready, you do not have to speak. Do you want to say something about this? 

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, I had actually come prepared only that I had not circulated the paper. I do not know if it is in order for me to proceed with the presentation or I wait to present it tomorrow?

The Speaker: We will proceed with it tomorrow.

Gen. muhoozi: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

The Speaker: Honourable members, there being no further matters, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.12 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 October 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

