


Tuesday, 6 October 2020

Parliament met at 3.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I hope it will also be our concluding sitting for the First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the 10th Parliament. 

Secondly, I apologise for the late start. We have been consulting on issues related to elections. I hope we made some headway to enable smooth elections to take place in the country.

Thirdly, I commend Government and congratulate the people of Pallisa. Yesterday, I was in Pallisa and I used the Pallisa-Kumi Road. I also checked on the Pallisa-Kamonkoli Road. I am told it had been a long standing pledge. I thank Government for fulfilling that pledge. The people are very happy about that road. They only said we should increase the interconnectivity. I was with the Minister of State for Works and Transport and we touched on areas that need to be supported. I hope the Government will continue doing that.

We have a few matters of national importance. 

3.36
MR PATRICK KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue pertaining to the plight of tobacco farmers across the country. I have several farmers in Bujenje Constituency who supplied tobacco to several companies that were licensed by this Government. The same issue has been coming on the Floor time and again. Last year, the Government undertook to pay off the farmers. 

In May, the Minister of State for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives told us here that plans were underway to pay the farmers by the end of July. We are now in October and I am wondering what could be the position of Government. 

It is my prayer that Government comes forward and assures the farmers when they will be paid. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I am glad the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. This tobacco issue is a very big thorn in our flesh. It is always on this Floor in every Session. 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague from Bujenje County, who has raised this issue. It gives me an opportunity to update both Parliament and the country on how far we have progressed on this issue. 

First of all, let me make it clear that when the President was trekking through the Luweero Triangle, he got this message from the farmers. It was agreed that – I will use the word he used - kusumbusa, which means “to give a helping hand”. This is because Government has no contractual obligation to pay. 

Bearing in mind that these are Ugandans and they need to be assisted, Government agreed. I will tell you how far we have gone.  Companies came - as they normally do - and dealt with our farmers. They contracted the farmers and they grew tobacco. 

There are two cases: in one case, the farmers sold tobacco on credit, as the practice was and those companies have now failed. We have harassed them; I have written to them and called them on telephone, but they have failed to come and pay our farmers. That is the first category.

There is another category of those who did not lift at all. The farmers are suffering with rotting tobacco in the barns. 

I took instruction from the President to see how we can kusumbusa these farmers. What has mainly delayed was the verification. Through the Minister of State, Office of the Prime Minister (Bunyoro Affairs), I am now happy to report that the verification exercise has been completed. 

We need Shs 10 billion to pay mainly –(Interjections)– I do not know whether there is something outside the Bunyoro sub region. I have not heard of something like that from West Nile. (Interjections) West Nile as well? Then I have done half the job because I was instructed to work on – We shall add even other areas where people supplied tobacco but were not paid. 

Therefore, my task, for the time being until I add on West Nile, is to look for the Shs 10 billion that is required. I am doing my level best and I will come back to this House to tell you how far we will have gone. 

When I get the money, I will send it to the various associations of the tobacco growers to pay the farmers. It is, however, kasumbuso. It may not mean we will pay all the amount of money. I thought I should make that clarification. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we appreciate that information. The issue of tobacco is a perennial complaint on the Floor of this House. In every Session, there is a complaint about tobacco payment. The Government should rethink our relationship with those companies because there is no Session where Members have not complained about unpaid tobacco farmers. 

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, that question would be better answered by my colleague, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives because she is the one who licenses them. I beg that you allow me take this message to her so that she comes here and explains how – For us in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we are not responsible for licensing those tobacco companies. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should take it as a serious issue to Cabinet and not just the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Please, look at the policy interventions because this matter keeps coming up. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Okay. I will take your message. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.42
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I address myself to the issue of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) that have been put in regard to the reopening of schools. According to the Ministry of Education and Sports’ guidelines, schools will be reopening next Thursday. Yesterday was the International Teachers’ Day. We heard there are schools, which were denied certificates for re-opening simply because they had failed to meet the SOPs issued by the Ministry of Health.

Secondly, at their celebrations yesterday, the headteachers said that the fees parents paid before COVID-19 were for that time and that since this will be a new term, parents would be compelled to pay school fees.

In the same line, when we met parents, they were wondering how the Government would expect them to pay the Shs 240,000 for the COVID-19 test when they have failed to pay the Shs 76,000 examination fees for the primary seven candidates.

If a parent is failing to pay school fees of Shs 100,000 for the student to be in a boarding school, how does Government expect them to pay for the COVID-19 test? Headteachers and teachers in private schools are suffering during this time, yet, Government has ordered them to reopen schools without any support. Government has also told them to ensure children and teachers keep distance, yet, in some of those schools, three learners sit on a bench. 

About the structures, some of us, while in primary schools, sat examinations in churches. Some of these schools do not have those big halls where children can be distanced. They are wondering how learners in other classrooms will be taught by a teacher in another classroom; will they use zoom?

Can the Government come out with a clear formula on how schools are going to operate if they want students to sit examinations? Unless, Government wants only children in well-off schools to sit examinations and the poor ones not resume school. 

In those circumstances, I ask Government to come up with a clear way on how they are going to help these schools, students and even children from poor families to sit examinations the way others from well-to-do families are going to. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not see Ministry of Education and Sports people here. I do not know whether the Minister of Health can say something about this, since the instructions come from there.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising this very important matter.

It is true the country is set to receive the candidate classes at the different levels as directed by the Head of State.

The Ministry of Health, together with the Ministry of Education and Sports came up with SOPs to keep our children safe while at school.

I would like to make it clear that in the SOPs, there is no provision for testing all the candidates and the teachers for COVID-19. This, as said by my colleague, is not going to be the case. 
The SOPs basically include the following preparations to ensure children are safe. The school should have:

    1. Temperature guns for screening the temperature;
    2. Hand washing facilities or sanitisers so that the children can keep their hands clean all the time;
    3. Spacing in the classrooms and dormitories;
    4. The SOPs put into consideration the fact that day schools will operate as day schools and boarding schools to operate as boarding schools. This is intended to ensure there is no much interaction between the day scholars and those who are in the boarding section. 

Madam Speaker, I would like –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to first answer.

DR MORIKU: I want to make it clear - and this is in line with the spacing my colleague talked about - that in every school, there is a minimum of seven classrooms. These are meant to accommodate pupils from primary one up to primary seven in the case of primary schools.

Right now, the classes that are reporting are basically for the candidates. Taking into consideration these classrooms, when well-spaced with the distance of two metres apart, schools should be in position to accommodate the candidate classes for the time being. That is what is involved in the SOPs but emphasis is that there is going to be screening and no testing the school children. Thank you.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for her submission. I am happy that last week, she submitted on the Floor of Parliament that Uganda is in Phase 4 of the COVID-19 infection.

We have many cases and Namboole Stadium is almost full. I was listening – Kenya Government has decided that all students will be tested for 14 days because they are not sure. They do not want to guess and put lives of students in danger. After testing students, they are going to test all teachers before schools re-open. 

For clarification, how do we prove or trust that the SOPs can work without testing our children in a country where COVID-19 is already in Phase 4? How do you trust that when all the people who tested positive for COVID-19 had no symptoms?

Namboole Stadium is full with COVID-19 patients, some of whom are children in candidate classes. Majorly, for the people at the border like Busia-Kenya, there is almost an outburst of COVID-19. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us first hear from these people who come from near the border before the minister comes in.

3.48
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern relates to the statutory instruments that were put in place by the ministry. I am glad that both the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General are here.

When the President announced a lockdown, the Ministry of Health issued statutory instruments. The closure of education institutions, airports and other sectors was effected through statutory instruments.

Now, there is re-opening of education institutions but there are no statutory instruments to authenticate that reopening. I have not seen any in the gazette.

Last week, while I was representing one of our colleagues, hon. Luttamaguzi in court in Nakaseke - he had been arrested and imprisoned for violating SOPs - I asked the State Attorney where it is provided for under the statutory instrument but it is nowhere to be cited. 

There are no corresponding statutory instruments to authenticate that opening. Madam Speaker, you guided, much earlier, that whenever there are instances of this nature, Government should take the initiative to table before this august House statutory instruments related to this COVID-19 era. The tabling was only done once and it has never happened again. 

We are here being told that airports, borders and education institutions are opening but there is no corresponding law to authenticate that opening. The minister should clarify on that. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the last issue is crucial because without a proper instrument, people will interpret the different conditions in their own way. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin with the first issue that my colleague raised. What is happening in Kenya? Indeed, the situation in Kenya is not the same like in Uganda. However, I would like to speak on what is happening in our country and the interventions we have made.

I stated very clearly on this Floor that currently, the country is undergoing stage four of COVID-19 transmissions where we have got extensive community transmissions. 

In line with international standards and what is happening elsewhere, the approach has to change accordingly. That is why there is more of a community-led strategy and community involvement. Above all, tests have to change appropriately; more of symptomatic and screening before subjecting people to the test. 

Coming to the issue of the candidate classes, as we all know, it is not the entire school but only the candidate classes that are reporting. Of course, that means that priority is going to be focused on the candidate classes in line with international standards. That is why the first stage is going to focus on screening these students. If they have symptoms, they will be subjected to the COVID-19 test. This has been proven and it is working. That is why we put it in place. 

Secondly, you will recall that we have evoked the statutory instrument, the Public Health Act. After the closure and restriction of many activities, we have been opening up in a coordinated and systemic manner, including the border districts activities, transport, churches and now, we are coming to the schools in a step by step manner.

I would rather request that since we have the Attorney-General in the House and he has the instrument with him, he could come and give us clarification on this very important matter. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: You have the instrument for closing. I think what we are asking for is the instrument for opening the schools. Have they been made, Attorney-General?

3.57
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two issues here that hon. Basalirwa raised. By way of information, there is no legal requirement to lay the statutory instruments on the Table.

I may agree with you that it is a good idea to bring the statutory instruments here or at the very least, inform Parliament as soon as they are done. As far as the law is concerned, there is no legal requirement. 

Madam Speaker, on your second question about the statutory instruments that were reversing the closing, I wish to inform this honourable House that those statutory instruments have been passed and gazetted. I have just spoken to my office and they are just sending me the copy of the statutory instrument, which I will subsequently lay on the Table. It has been gazetted and passed; the one reopening the schools. 

Madam Speaker, under the law, the gazette publication is deemed to be notice to the public. I thank you. 

3.58
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 4 October 2020 at around 9.00 p.m., a traffic officer called Fahad Kyaliyawula, who hails from Kamuli District and is based in Nakapiripirit District was shot in a road ambush. He was on his way to Moroto Regional Referral Hospital using his official motorbicycle. He was taking his wife who had got a miscarriage. Unfortunately, they met with assailants who ambushed him. They shot him on the abdomen and thigh while his wife was shot on the thigh. 

He rode a few kilometres away from the scene and was able to communicate to the RPC of Moroto, Karamoja Region. They took him to Moroto Hospital. Unfortunately, the scanner was not working so they referred him to Matany Hospital in the night. Unfortunately, he could not make it to Matany Hospital because he over bled. 

His wife is still in hospital because she had had a miscarriage and they shot her on the thigh. The insecurity situation is getting out of hand in Karamoja. My colleagues have brought motions here on issues of insecurity in that area. 

Rearming has taken place in the region. If we have gone back to the state of ambushing vehicles, that means we have gone back to square one. I do not know what this nation is thinking about Karamoja. 

My prayers are: 

    1. That we should have UPDF deployment again, especially at the border points. These guns are coming from South Sudan and the eastern part of Kenya to Karamoja and they are causing a lot of havoc in the region. 

    2. If possible, they should do disarmament of the region. If Fahad had been rescued or given some treatment in Nakapiripirit, he would not have died. Let the Minister of Health take note that we need a functional hospital in the southern part of Karamoja to be able to save some of these lives. He was rescuing his wife and had taken her to Moroto Regional Referral Hospital because Nakapiripirit could not handle the condition. Now, he has also passed on and the wife sustained more injuries. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a matter of regret because I know this young man. I supported one of his children to go to school and also to join the Uganda Police Force. He comes from a family that supports me in Nawanyago Sub County. It is very painful for us. 

I do not know what the minister has to say about the medical services. It is also true that lately, Members have been complaining of increased insecurity in Karamoja. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising this very important matter concerning the lives of our people. I sympathise with what happened. Indeed, it was a very sad incident.

Concerning health service delivery in Karamoja region, it is true that we have got Moroto Regional Referral Hospital situated in Moroto. Of course, other health care services are delivered at different levels up to health centres III and IV.

We are aware of the challenges of service delivery in Moroto. In addition, recall that this very Parliament some months back passed a loan and a grant from the Italian Government to support infrastructural development in Karamoja sub region. The first phase of upgrading most of the facilities has been completed. The second phase is about to start.

I would like to say that we are committed to ensure that infrastructure in Karamoja sub region is uplifted to a standard that can give appropriate and effective service delivery for the people. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister for Defence will address us on the issue of security, taking into account the people who escaped from Moroto Prison with guns.

MR JULIUS OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I rise to seek clarification from the Minister of Health. She is talking about Government acquiring a loan to upgrade health infrastructure in Karamoja.

The last time the Leader of the Opposition led a team to check the health facilities in Karamoja, we found the situation wanting. It is not about the buildings but the actual service delivery in terms of health education and drugs. Even if people gather under the trees, they can still be treated. Health workers can go to the communities and undertake proper treatment but not only waiting for loans to put up the infrastructure.

Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the Minister of Health to respond to the concerns that were raised by the hon. Anyakun that the services should go to the grassroots so that while we wait for the loan, people should be enjoying services required as per the laws of the country. Is there medicine? Are workers facilitated to follow the community at the grass root?

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I stated this clearly that previously, after doing a needs assessment and analysing the situation in Karamoja sub region, an affirmative action was put in place. That is why the first phase was a grant and a loan that came to support infrastructure development in Karamoja and that ended. We are now entering the second phase.

It is not only infrastructure development. It is a comprehensive package in a sense that we build the capacity of the health care providers, supply equipment and supplies for health facilities. Most importantly, upgrading Health Centre II to Health Centre III because it is in health centres III that we have comprehensive maternal child health and service delivery for the people at the grassroots.

Therefore, I would like to inform my colleague that if you are not aware, the grassroots service delivery that is very effective is at Health Centre III level where mothers are able to get services, the children and the entire population.  That is what we are doing.

I would like to also inform my colleague that the regular supply of medicine and other supplies for the region have also been captured in the Budget. The grant and the loan we are talking about is to put in place the infrastructure, equipment and supplies that are needed to improve service delivery, most importantly, for the entire population. Thank you.

4.07
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a matter of national importance. With me, is a notice of industrial action by the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Union from their president.

During the celebrations to mark the International Nurses Day on 12 May 2018, in Kitgum, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda pledged to contribute Shs 1 billion into the Nurses and Midwives Sacco but since then, they have not seen this money despite following up.

A year later, in October 2019, the Principal Private Secretary to the President communicated a Presidential Directive towards the fulfilment of this pledge to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but to date, they have not seen anything.

Last year, during another celebration of the International Nurses’ Day, the President pledged that Government would pay nurses and midwives a lunch allowance of Shs 15,000 per day, totalling to Shs 330,000 per month. However, despite all engagements that have been documented in the collective bargaining agreements signed between the Public Service Unions and Government, there is no response.

We are all aware that the nurses and midwives are facing more great challenge during the COVID-19 period ranging from the poor occupational safety and health standards to being unable to meet their very basic economic needs.

In the circumstances, we even lose 19 women every day. We are worried that if they are going to lay down their tools, then we are going to have a disaster.

Therefore, the point of national importance is to the effect that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pays this money so that the nurses and midwives continue working because it would be a disaster if they laid down their tools. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, the Shs 1 billion for the nurses’ SACCO and the lunch allowances pledged in 2018 -

4.10
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, can I beg for an opportunity to get facts. I cannot immediately reply because there is some bit of information I am not privy to at this moment. I can come back tomorrow to this House.

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, this notice is written to the Ministry of Public Service and it is copied to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They have a copy but I can offer mine.

THE SPEAKER: No. The notice has been laid on the Floor to be passed on to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us a response.

4.11
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have seven cities, which were made operational by 1st July. Three months down the road, things are not easy for these cities.

Cities have a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund and have their specific votes through which funds for social services and infrastructure are directly channelled.

I know that three more cities were added to the seven making ten but they will become operational in July 2021. However, for the seven, even to-date, we have not received the names of the accounting officers. When will Government present to the House the names of the accounting officers of these cities? When will Government present the Appropriations (Amendment) Bill to facilitate funding of these newly created cities? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that before we went on recess, we had demanded from the Government to tell us who the accounting officers were for these cities, before we could even consider the funding but they have not been brought.  

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, there are two issues we have to sort. The first one, for which I am very sorry, is that we have to appoint accounting officers.

Secondly, these cities were created after you had appropriated the Budget and I think it must be on today’s Order Paper. We are bringing a Supplementary Budget, in which we have provided money for that. Once these issues have been sorted, then money will certainly be allocated to the cities.

4.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank hon. Joyce Moriku, the Minister of State for Health (Primary Health Care). Last week, when I raised the issue of lack of masks in Kasilo County, Serere District, she took it upon herself that they would be delivered. On Sunday, while in Kasilo County, we received a consignment of masks for Serere District. I hope the same will be done to the remaining districts as candidates resume school.

Madam Speaker, due to the income inequalities in this country, the Government put affirmative action in order to uplift the following regions; Karamoja, Bunyoro, Teso and the greater north. They did this by establishing ministries responsible for those areas because the inequalities were worrying.

It is so disheartening that as people try to pick up because the poverty levels still remain high in those regions, Government is in the process of scraping off the Ministry for Bunyoro Affairs, the Ministry for Teso Affairs, the Ministry for Northern Uganda, the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs and the Ministry for Busoga region. This is worrying and they have only proposed to leave the Ministry for Luweero Triangle. 

To date, poverty levels are still high in these regions; in Busoga, it is at 42 per cent, Karamoja is at 60 per cent, in Teso is at 40.5 per cent and in Bunyoro, it is at 27 per cent. We are yet to arrive at the average of the country poverty levels. Why is Government coming out at this time to scrap these ministries? Possibly, if Government had been providing resources to these regions, we would have been able to move faster. It is only Luweero Triangle that receives Shs 42.2 billion; Shs 16 billion per year; then there is what they call akasiimo, which is Shs 26 billion per year for Luweero Triangle and that is the one they are keeping. 

However, for Bunyoro Affairs, which had been getting Shs 800 million per year and this financial year it was increased to Shs 4.9 billion, Teso Affairs, which was receiving Shs 1.8 billion - this financial year, they had proposed a budget of Shs 6.8 billion. For Northern Uganda, it only receives Shs 5.8 billion annually. There was supposed to be Shs 20 million for restocking but this has been removed from the previous financial year.

For Karamoja region, they proposed a budget of Shs 11.7 billion and Busoga region Shs 7.4 billion. All these are being scrapped and they are proposing to move these as departments to the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. If Government is serious, they should stick to the issue of affirmative action and increase budgeting to these areas such that the poverty levels can be lowered in these regions.

I would like to ask the Prime Minister to come out clearly and explain to Ugandans why they are moving to scrap these ministries when the poverty levels are still high. (Interruption)    

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving me way. I would like to give some additional information to the matter you are raising to the attention of the House and country at large. We have also learnt that the affirmative action programme called NUSAF, which has always been some additional affirmative programme in Greater Northern Uganda, to address the poverty issues that hon. Okupa is trying to raise - 

We have learnt that this project, whose second phase is ending, if it has not ended already is not about to be renewed and Government does not have any plan to put its successor programme in place, yet the poverty levels are still very high. Therefore, we would like to get an explanation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development why NUSAF is not going to have a successor plan of NUSAF III and IV? Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: The Minister of Northern Affairs or NUSAF is meant to cover 60 districts in the Greater Northern region. Hon. Komakech who is the Chairperson of the Greater North can attest to this. It is the Greater North, which stretches the entire Busoga up to Bunyoro region in order to lift them from the poverty levels. It is disheartening for us to see this happening. It is not only those ministries, which have been proposed to be scrapped but they are also proposing to scrap the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and move it to the Minister of Water and Environment; the one for refugees is to be moved to the Ministry of Local Government. 

Madam Speaker, these issues are worrying and the Prime Minister should come and explain why these proposals are coming at this time. They have even set up a secretariat to handle the implementation of these proposals.   

4.21
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, on affirmative action, when the Prime Minister comes, he should also explain to us why the old persons pension programme, the Shs 25 million should not be given uniformly; why the age should not be pushed in areas, where the Government has this affirmative action; why the age limit should not be reduced to 65 years instead of 80 years because starting from Busoga, the situation is very bad and to expect an old man or woman to make 80 years before they can benefit from the Shs 25 million is really cruel. Many of them will not be alive by then. 

Madam Speaker, we should ensure from this financial year that in the areas, which have been identified as areas for affirmative action, the age is put down to 65 years as it is being done in Karamoja. It should now be uniform in all those affirmative action areas. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I really hope the Government has an explanation about this because it is unacceptable. Busoga has just secured money and now, you are thinking of taking it away. 

4.22
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin with the issue raised by hon. Ogwal – the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) issue. You know I have already approached the senior citizen category and therefore, if we are talking from a selfish point of view, I would be an applicant. 

The problem is the question of funds. (Interjections) If you can give me a minute, I will explain the background of this SAGE issue. This issue is meant to help our people who have not worked anywhere and have no retirement benefit, yet, they have contributed immensely to this country. I can use the example of my father if he was still alive. I am sure it is the case with many of you whose fathers are beyond 78 years.

That idea was floated by the British Government. They gave us the starting amount of money and we were supposed to have started from the age of 65 years as retirement age for any civil servant. 

As you remember, we started experimenting with a pilot of 25 districts. It worked wonders. I went to Teso and I could see somebody who, with his Shs 30,000 was able to buy a goat and transform his life. The project has been a sounding success. The problem is funds. 

There are more than one million people who are above 75 years. We have been pushing the age in order to fit in with the money that we have. 

As soon as money is available, I assure this House that we shall lower the age limit for people to access this money. For now, the issue is on funds. 

MS OGWAL: From what I see, the minister is about 70 years but he is lucky that he has been a member of Parliament, he has been a public servant and he has done well. What about others? These are your aunts, your uncles and others? 

Is the minister in order to say that these people cannot be assisted because of funds? Would you rather surrender our people to die of poverty instead of you looking for money? We have enough money to go and even construct roads in the DRC but we do not have money to save our grandmothers and our grandfathers from death. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, explain whether we are constructing roads in Congo and other places and not using money in Uganda; then you will come to the scrapping of the ministries.

MR KASAIJA: I will not comment on the roads in Congo. I will come back with a full explanation on these issues.

There is a valid point, that looking after our old people should be one of our top priorities. I would like this House to allow me to go back and consult. I will come back and give a comprehensive answer on this matter. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.28
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the alleged consideration by the Electoral Commission. In light of what the Clerk has stated – (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, allow the minister to speak. He is also the mover of the Bill.

MR KAFUUZI: I am here with the Cabinet extract that has rejected the amendment to section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, which requires every adult who wishes to change his or her name to use a deed poll in accordance with the procedure laid down. In light of that, I wish to present a statement.

On 15 September 2020, hon. Angeline Osegge raised a question on a matter of national importance to this august House on the alleged consideration by the Electoral Commission not to nominate persons whose names on the national identity cards differ from the names on their academic transcripts. 

On 23 September 2020, I made a statement in this House on the matter to the effect that the law under the Registration of Persons Act requires an adult who wishes to change his or her names to do so by deed poll and the gazette.

A deed poll is a legal document for changing names or adopting a name by publishing the intention to change or adopt a name. A deed poll is required to be published in a gazette. 

Subsequently, the change of the name is registered with the National Identification and Registration Authority register, which is the national database. This applies to all adults in Uganda.

The Speaker then referred my statement to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. On 24 September 2020, together with the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, we appeared before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to further discuss the matter. The committee acknowledged that the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 requires a deed poll for one to change the name.

They were, however, of the view that consideration should be given in the case of married women only for the use of a statutory declaration to add their spouses’ names to their maiden names.

On the same day, the Speaker directed that the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 be amended to exempt married women from following the deed poll as required under section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act.

On 30 September 2020, Cabinet considered the proposal to amend the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 and determined that there is no need to amend the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 for the following reasons:

    1. The names of a person in the National Identification Register can only be changed through the legal process laid down in the Registration of Persons Act, 2015; 

    2. To effect changes in the register for an adult’s name, after the applicant has complied with the legal procedure for a deed poll and subsequent gazetting of the deed poll in the Gazette, the changes are entered in the register by NIRA immediately at the NIRA offices in Kololo. The services are also decentralised to every district headquarters; 

    3. For avoidance of doubt, a change of name under section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act entails the following:
    a) A complete change of name;
    b) Dropping or adopting a new name by marriage or divorce or 
    c) A change of religion.

    4. In such a case, the applicant is required to present the following documents to NIRA in support of  their application: 
    a) A copy of the Gazette in which the notice of change of particulars was published;
    b) A deed poll, duly registered with the Registrar of Documents;

    5. However, certain modifications of names do not fall under section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act. These are: 
    a) To change the order of one’s names; 
    b) To correct spelling errors in names;
    c) To omit pet names or nicknames; 
    d) To add names appearing on birth certificates issued before 1 January 2016 or on passports or academic documents issued before 2014; 
    e) To clarify on initials appearing on the register or to omit initials or add any name represented by an initial on the register or 
    f) To clarify on vernacular versions of names or short forms of names.

    6. In all these above cases, the applicant is only required to swear a Statutory Declaration to rectify the anomaly.

    7. Further, the register is the central authentic place established by the Government to identify persons. The name of a person is the foundation of identification globally. The framers of the law intended that section 36 would maintain the sanctity of the National Identification Register in ensuring that whoever intends to change their names would comply with the procedure, which would, in effect, minimise fraud, frivolous attempts and misrepresentations. The legal process involved in section 36 acts as a deterrent mechanism for the above-mentioned acts; that is fraud and frivolous attempts and misrepresentations.

    8. The procedure laid out in section 36 is not unique to Uganda but practised internationally. It is, therefore, important that Government embraces internationally accepted standards on change of names.

	More so, a deed poll and Gazette are legally recognised documents, which give international confidence to citizens of Uganda when they present their documentations with varying names to relevant authorities such as embassies world over.

    9. The process of changing the name of an adult person, as required by section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015, affects not only married women, but all adult persons.

    10. Every person acquires names at birth and in regard to women, a maiden name; which names usually appear on their official academic documents, birth certificates and other documents like passports. The subsequent desire to add a marital name is, in essence, a change of name, which falls under section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015.

	It is, therefore, justifiable that a married person, who wishes to add her marital name, must comply with the requirements of section 36.

    11. In order to clarify the circumstances when a deed poll or statutory declaration is required, as well as to prescribe the procedure and supporting documents required to be presented in each case, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs has amended the Registration of Persons Regulations, 2015. 

The amending regulations will be laid before Parliament, as required by section 85 (3) of the Registration of Persons Act 2015.

Having stated the above, I wish to inform the honourable members, in some detail, of the applicable procedure for effecting a change of name using a deed poll. After publication of the deed poll, the person applies to NIRA to effect the change of name, on payment of the prescribed fee of Shs 50,000. 

This change of name in the register takes effect immediately at Kololo and within three days in other registration centres across the country.

Issuance of a new identity card with a changed name is done by NIRA in less than a month. Before the change of name is effected, NIRA issues the applicant with a letter to enable him or her receive the necessary services.

NIRA will accord political aspirants priority in this process by issuing them with a letter to any entity, including the Electoral Commission to receive any services required.

Honourable members may recall that following the General Elections in 2016, several cases were filed in courts, challenging the use of statutory declarations for change of name or names. 

All the cases, including the Court of Appeal in the case of hon. Otada Sam Amooti Owor vs. Taban Idi Amin and Electoral Commission of 2016, have decided that a married woman who adopts the name of her husband must change her name, in accordance with section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015 and not simply swear a statutory declaration and present a marriage certificate in order to be validly nominated. 

The Electoral Commission is, therefore, only strictly enforcing the law as is in Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015.

Finally, there have been some concerns about the time taken by the Government Printer to publish a Deed Poll in the Gazette. While the Gazette is routinely issued every Friday, the Government printer may issue a Gazette Extraordinary on any other day of the week, where the circumstances require it, such as where it is necessary to issue in matters to issue a public notification. The cost of publishing a deed poll in a gazette is Shs 300,000. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I think what this is telling us is that in future, when people are getting married, they should actually be told, “In case you are going your name, you will be required to take a deed poll at some stage in your lives”. It is because very often people will just marry, get their marriage certificates and move on with their new names without a deed poll. Then they will get this problem.

Secondly, honourable minister, you have talked about the gazette extraordinary. I do not know what happened to the seven days required for publication. Does the gazette extraordinary still take the seven days? We would like to know that. Any comments, honourable members? 

4.43
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the learned Deputy Attorney General and senior counsel for the submission on the Floor. 

When this matter was raised on the Floor, your guidance was very clear; would it be possible to exclude the application of Section 36 on spouses? The amendment has to come and cure Section 36. 

Section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act was, in effect, not recognising the known conventional practice in the Commonwealth, in our cultures and other jurisdictions to the effect that when women get married, they adopt the names of their husbands. That in itself should not compel these married women to swear deed polls as it is the practice now. That was the issue. 

For the other cases, it is okay. If you decide to become Basalirwa Asuman Kafuuzi and you are adding on the name Kafuuzi, then comply with section 36. If you are married, however, and there is evidence to that effect, the issue of statutory declaration would suffice. 

I have heard the learned Deputy Attorney-General say that regulations are being amended and that they will be tabled before this august House. With due respect, a regulation cannot amend a provision of a statute. You are not going to bring a regulation to amend Section 36 because that section is very clear. A person who has adopted a name of a husband, in law, that is change of name. Therefore, you must comply with Section 36.

We thought the Attorney-General and Government would bring an amendment to exclude women from this requirement. Unfortunately, it does not seem to be the case. I think that is where the problem is. The regulations will not cure the concerns of this august House and neither will the explanation given in this House. 

The only solution would have been for the Attorney-General to bring an amendment specifically to exclude women. The other aspects can remain. If that is not done then we have not solved the problem.

Secondly, even the reference –I listened attentively to the statements of the learned Deputy Attorney-General. He makes statements to the effect that if you are clarifying names or you are explaining them, you need a statutory declaration. With due respect, the courts have ruled otherwise. In the most recent case of Osupulem, the court said if you are adding a name, even if it is an initial, that, in itself, is interpreted as change of name. That is what the courts have said.

Therefore, you cannot even use a statutory declaration to explain an initial or the vernacular meaning of a name. Still, you have to go through section 36. I think the solution to this issue would have been an amendment to this provision. I thought that was what we were coming to do today because the issue was as simple as that. 

If that is not done, the concern you raised of excluding women in nomination is going to continue and this process will be challenged. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.47
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to submit on the position of the Attorney-General. I will first associate myself with the submission of my colleague, hon. Basalirwa. 

The spirit of section 36 was not intended, in any way, to bar political contestants from participating in the electoral process. The mischief we intend to cure is that the Electoral Commission has adopted a strict interpretation of section 36 to the effect that even when NIRA and Electoral Commission are registering voters, they capture the biometrics of a person. When someone is at school, these days there is a requirement of identity of a person. 

In my view, I would assume that there is evidence to conclude that Paul Mwiru is one and the same person who is registered as Paul Mwiru Waiswa on the register. I will give you an example in the case of Catherine Achola Osupelem that hon. Basalirwa has referred to. She was Catherine Achola. She had even participated in the election organised by the Electoral Commission as Catherine Achola with the same academic documents. When her father passed on and the Electoral Commission retired the old register, she applied to register as Catherine Achola Osupelem, adopting the father’s name. She even had the statutory declaration as the Deputy Attorney-General is saying but the Electoral Commission argued that she must go through the process of change of name to change what is in the register. 

Therefore, what you are proposing as a solution, as the Speaker raised, is not a solution. I would like to propose that the intent of the law was not to act as a bar to people who have discrepancies in their names. If it is in the interest of us addressing the mischief now, I would still implore Cabinet that we dis-apply section 36 for purposes of participating in the presidential, parliamentary and local government elections. 

The other issue arising that there will be fraud will remain a question of evidence. If someone says, “This is not Kafuuzi Jackson”, that means you must adduce evidence to show that the owner of the documents submitted is a different person. 

Otherwise, in what you are proposing now, many candidates will not be nominated in line with the Taban Amin case and Osupulem case, which again, will go to defeat the purpose for which Parliament was trying to intervene in this matter. Leaving the law as it is – I appreciate the politics being played by the Deputy Attorney-General. 

The instruction of the Speaker is to tell us what the position is. You have gone through a lot of good English to give solace to the Members that actually, even if the law is going to be applied in the strict sense the way it is, they should take solace in the fact that they will have to adopt a declaration. There are many instances where people adopted those declarations and the Electoral Commission has taken restrictive interpretation that a change, even adoption of a name, as you are saying here, does not amount to a change of name.

Finally, when you read the regulation as you are proposing, if I am Paul Mwiru; I studied as such, I can only change my name to suit or match with my academic qualification. It is because the description is saying that Paul Mwiru who has the certificate or Paul Mwiru Waiswa in the register has no academic documents. The one who has is Paul Mwiru. This is what we had intended to cure.

Therefore, I will conclude by inviting Government again to reconsider the aspect of dis-applying Section 36 in the circumstances to address the question the Speaker raised and directed Cabinet to look into. I beg to submit.

4.52
Ms jesca ababiku (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I am very much disappointed with the response we have received. Based on the guidance you gave last week and the resumption of the House today, this was to provide an immediate solution to the problem at hand.

The problem, which we discussed last week was majorly about the added names for women who were interested in contesting. We also expected that the minister would come with a Bill to cure that issue.

As we are aware that nomination for members of Parliament commences next week and we have never extended the duration, I strongly believe that the Attorney-General did not respond specifically to the plea we made last week and also the reason you made us to come here today. We are not meeting that expectation.

What I have listened carefully to and understood in this presentation is that he is trying to explain to us the process through which, in normal circumstances, one would go through to change his or her name. Specifically, what we want is how to help these women because nomination commences next week. We have been given only two days.

Madam Speaker, you also emphasised about the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). I also remember vividly the processes we go through when we lose our identity cards. NIRA has not been well decentralised to our districts. Getting a new identity card takes a process. You have to come up to Kololo.

As the minister emphasised the process where NIRA is involved, is there a strategy that they have put in place that will ensure that if a woman in Adjumani starts to follow up these processes, she will not be able to miss the nomination, which is going to commence on Monday?

Additionally, the Attorney-General should help us today clarify on two issues, which are connected to the election dates. The election date for Members of Parliament and that of women who are supposed to contest for representation at sub-county level is not clear. The president assented to that and we also talked about it last week. I feel the Attorney-General is not clear about this matter yet you gave us only today to help our people so that the women would be able to participate. 

I need clarity on how he has provided in his submission an immediate remedy so that our people will participate next week. Thank you.

4.56
Mr henry kibalya (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to add my voice to that of my colleagues. With due respect, I am equally disappointed with my Attorney-General. For the whole of last week, we were here in ping pong; “What do we do…Cabinet has approved…Cabinet is saying I need to get this document… I am going to a Cabinet meeting tomorrow…it will be handled explicitly…”

Madam Speaker, you postponed it so that we could come today to save the Ugandans. Here we are. The Attorney-General is bringing the legal terms. 

We did not all go to the School of Law. The people we are going to explain to, did not attend the Law Development Centre or Makerere. They are waiting for us to give them what we discuss. Here we are with the Attorney-General bringing the best English to explain the law.

We are here to tell Ugandans that if you are being nominated on Monday and have issues with your name, tomorrow is Wednesday. Go and take an oath. On Thursday, you will be done and good to go. Then you will get nominated.

It is not criminal for somebody to change a name. It is my name. In my area they talk of “Kate Kasoga.” I may wish to add “Kate Kasoga” so that I win more votes. I will remain the same unless somebody comes to challenge me and say, “This is not the Kibalya who was at University.”

Unless some of us are serving – (Interruption) – but it is going far. It is taking long as if you have people you do not want to get nominated or there are hidden interests that are not being revealed here and wasting  people’s time. 

You are saying this is this and tomorrow it is the other. We need to be told the truth. If the Attorney-General has a given motive with Government that they do not want some people nominated, let us know today. 

If we are to have politicians nominated, let us make it simple. We are the same people that make this law. Let us make it easy for people to get nominated. If there are other things that we shall iron out later, we shall.

We were here amending the law for parties because we wanted them to adopt a different formula of either lining up or secret ballot. It took us a day or two to change. Now, we are protecting people’s interests and wishing to see Ugandans that will be the Attorney-Generals of tomorrow, the Leaders of the Opposition, the chief whip or the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are blocking them because we cannot help them yet we are in office today. It is very disappointing.  

We need to know from Government whether there is a hidden interest that they need to reveal here. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable Attorney-General, I do not know whether you realise that this matter has very serious ramifications beyond the political world. It will go into academia, employment and banking industry. It is a serious issue by the way.

5.00
Ms Catherine ndamira (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the Attorney-General. Allow me to give him information. They might not be aware of what is happening outside there. Today, when women marry, they adopt their husbands’ name and tomorrow, divorce comes in. on this note, some women get courage to remarry and they need to change their names again. 

If you bring a nail and pinch now, what will happen when I get another husband? Will I continue applying and feeling those deed polls? I think –(Interjections)

The Speaker: Order, honourable members. These are very important issues.

Ms ndamira: Let these Government officials go and make thorough research and get us all the statistics on marriage and divorce before it is made. Thank you. 

5.02
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable Attorney-General for the submission.

We had wanted this information last week or the other week but now it is coming today, when there is only Friday. The next Friday will be too late because nominations are on Monday and Tuesday. 

Secondly, not all of us are in Kampala. There are people who are going to stand as members of Parliament in Kotido, Kisoro and so on but you want them to now come today to do the deed poll. What is wrong with submitting or swearing a simple affidavit and then they get nominated? We request that you look into this. Yes, it is important that there is some legal document but must it be the deed poll? 

There is also the issue of the women councillors whose nominations ended yesterday. The law was passed by this Parliament, as we have been debating on this issue and His Excellency, the President, assented to the law. We came here to Parliament and agreed that this law should be operational. 

Now the nominations have closed and we want to maintain the burden on the women; that they will continue to traverse two sub counties. Then after that, they have to go to the kitchen and cook for their husbands, who are enjoying themselves, probably having a drink. These are mothers. 

In the interest of equity, we had hoped that in this day and age, this law would be operational to ease the burden on these women councillors. Otherwise, we will not reap the benefits for which we employed them in this field; that they should be effective councillors in their areas. 

We are still hoping that the Attorney-General will send instructions to the local governments to extend the nominations of the women councillors so that every sub county can be represented by a woman councillor. I thank you. 

5.05
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to pick from where hon. Jovah Kamateeka stopped. We are here in the House to represent the population down there. We do not want to be seen as women trying to do a disservice to fellow women in this country. 

We have realised that, yes, some women are on the affirmative ticket and very few get the chance to go directly to be elected; the reason we amended the law so that women should also be favoured.

In this era, you find that a male member of the district council represents a parish and then the lady represents more than three parishes in some instances, yet they are paid the same. This is not acceptable. We are calling upon you, the Attorney-General. Yes, the Electoral Commission has already concluded on the issue of the local councils but can you call upon them to open up for the women so that their electoral areas are also consistent with what we passed in this House? As for the age of 18 and above, it should also be the same for the women. 

I do not know what we are doing, as Parliament, and I do not know what the Attorney-General is thinking about the women. We first consider taking up the names of our husbands. In real sense, we are all human beings. The men should have also taken up our names but we offered to take their names and we are being punished for that. What is it? 

In your first statement to this House, you said those names that were changed way back before the amendment of 2015 should remain as that and they should be accepted with the statutory instrument, not a deed poll. What about these other women? I do not want a situation where we are going to close so many women out. 

At the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, if the couple has wedded, then, they should be registered with them. Why again are they supposed to have a deed poll? Time is not of essence. 
Attorney-General, we pray that you talk to the Electoral Commission to extend the date of nomination for members of Parliament so that the women are considered and are taken care of in this country. Otherwise, you are bound to be taken to court anytime for excluding the women. Thank you. 

5.08
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to thank my colleagues for defending the rights of the women. 

It is a very big problem to identify women and for them to accept to come into leadership because of some of the stereotypes that have been associated with them. We are now adding on the burden by making it so difficult for a woman to join and enjoy politics.

As the Attorney-General was making the presentation, I was actually counting the women in this House, who could have come back and maybe seriously affected by this law; as well as women out there. I heard the Attorney-General say that you are able to get your identity card in less than a month. I do not know where. I personally lost my Id and the replacement has been a hustle. I am a Member of Parliament. What about an ordinary woman out there? We have to be sincere with ourselves and take away this burden from the women. 

My colleagues have talked very strongly about the issue of women councillors representing more than two parishes. When I heard the news that the President had assented to the law, I was very excited and I started mobilising the women to go to the Electoral Commission for nominations but they were turned away. I am hoping and praying that this will be revised and that women will have a chance to also represent one parish and not more than one. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.10 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wanted to hear something different. We appreciate the fact that we are still in a patriarchal society. That is why a woman has to take on her husband’s name. Some of us have been nominated three times and that was no big deal. Why should it be a big deal now? The academic credential is the maiden name. Your Id is your marital name after marriage. Why do you make it very difficult for women to do things? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that the Attorney-General should work very hard together with the Electoral Commission and push the nomination date until this issue is resolved - we have only four days left. You cannot mistreat women –(Interjection) it is mainly women because it is women who take on the husbands’ names. We feel proud taking on our husbands’ names.

Right now, if I am to drop my late husband’s name (Ocan), some people would think that I want to take on another man yet that is not in my thoughts at all. Therefore, give us some freedom and make things easy for us. Do not make people suspect that something is happening because the man has died. I have old children that I should respect and continue to honour the memories of the dead because their memories are always fresh in our minds; so why should we do this? Leave alone those whose husbands are still alive.

Madam Speaker, these people should do us some good and let them work. I am proposing that you postpone the nomination date and make things a bit easy for women. Thank you.

5.12
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the House for expressing concern over this matter. I have just come to express my worries; if we are going to debate as we normally do and go away without action points - and yet as many colleagues have expressed fear, the days have run out. I would like to leave this place today or by the time we adjourn Parliament, we should be having a position that we are going away with. How are we going to proceed?

Madam Speaker, I am aware that the Electoral Commission issued a statement because when I raised this here, I also raised it with lawyer and it prompted the Electoral Commission to issue a press statement. In the press release, it was said that marriages that occurred after 2015, would be the ones affected.

However, another lawyer from the Electoral Commission is saying that they had not agreed on that position. I do not know whether in this country individual lawyers are free to pursue a point of view that is not necessarily based on the law. I do not know where we are going to end up with this. It looks like it is such a laissez-faire situation that a lawyer can just decide to say “We have not agreed on that,” and that is the position we are going take.

I would like to implore you, Madam Speaker, that we leave this place with a position on the Women Members of Parliament and the women councillors at the district level. Thank you.

5.16
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to this debate. Last week as we adjourned the House, I thought the decision to sit today was mainly meant for the Attorney-General to come with this law, which should simply be a one-page thing. By now, we would be done.

Therefore, I think the Attorney-General is trying to downplay this matter thinking that probably, it is a few women affected.

However, I would like to say that a law is a law. The Constitution of this country must benefit every Ugandan and so no Ugandan must be left out. We do not want a scenario where some people are stopped from participating in the next election simply because of something which should be handled like the way we did last week in the case of LC IIIs.

I urge this Parliament, especially the Attorney-General, that we decide today and now and here without any further delay, that you go back, come up with a proposal - of course, the Speaker will decide on the next course of action - but we cannot go for nominations next week leaving out some women.

Secondly, yesterday I got concerns from some women councillors who wanted to get nominated yesterday in my district thinking that the law we passed last week and was assented to by the President, would apply to them as well.

However, they were stranded. They called me and I also called the Electoral Commission to clarify. However, the answer I received was so disappointing; they said that the directive they got was only to swear in LC IIIs. Therefore, I wonder whether the President only assented to a part of what we passed on Tuesday. We need clear clarification on that matter by the Attorney-General. Unless that is done, there are very many women who are left out of this electoral process and I feel it will not be free and fair, especially it will not be fair to the women. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I want to clarify is that when the President sent back the Local Government Amendment Bill with the issue of qualifications, he had already assented to that part relating to the women and the councils. He did not bring it back for review; it was already assented to. So no one has any right to pretend otherwise. It was assented to long ago, so no excuse.

5.19
MS JANE AVUR PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Attorney-General for taking us through the legal processes of how to add or subtract a name. However, I have two things; the processes are long and not easily achieved within the number of days left towards nomination, which is starting on Monday for parliamentary positions.

The other thing is that during nominations, we are asked by the Electoral Commission to go with a copy of our campaign programme yet on the road map, there is no clarity as to when the general elections for parliamentary and presidential are going to take place. 

I tried to contact some Electoral Commission officials as to how I can draw my programme and they said, “Just draw it up to January.” Which specific date in January? 

Therefore, I have two prayers; one, this House should urge the Electoral Commission for an extension of the nomination dates for parliamentary and presidential aspirants.

Secondly, the Electoral Commission must come out clearly so that we know the dates of the general elections for parliamentary, presidential and local governments - when exactly. We cannot just start campaigning indefinitely without knowing when the campaigns are going to end and when we are going to be voted. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I find it incredible that anyone should ask for a campaign programme when you are being nominated. First, people do not know how many candidates there are and how many people you have to interact with. So how can you plan before you know?

5.21
MR JONSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Deputy Attorney-General, for presenting the statement. I want to support what my colleagues have said. Why should members of Parliament be nominated as early as October when they are going to canvas votes in two or three sub-counties while the President who is going to canvass votes in the entire country is nominated in November? The moment you are nominated, is a sign that you have started direct campaigns. What is the intention?

Secondly, I do not think the Deputy Attorney-General and Parliament together with Government do not have power to consult and agree with the Electoral Commission to extend the nomination days as we resolve this. We were supposed to be on recess this week but the sittings were extended to today purposely to solve this problem. 

Madam Speaker, even what was assented to concerning women is not being applied; women are not sure whether they are going to be nominated. Clear information should be given out today because even if you said that one has to follow the proper procedure - swearing and filing an affidavit and sending it to the Gazette for publication alone takes more than seven days. How will people get nominated on Monday and Tuesday?

Madam Speaker, my request is that we extend the nomination days by 14 days because it has no cost. Let the Electoral Commission consider those who were left out because of age and women whose approval for the demand to change their names is concerned. I beg to submit.

MS OSEGGE: As far as district women councillors are concerned, the Electoral Commission’s argument is that Parliament only amended the Local Government Act. According to them, we should have also amended the Constitution. So, they are saying that we cannot affect what is in the Constitution. Can the Deputy Attorney-General help us on that?

5.24
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Jackson Kafuuzi, for his submission. My colleagues, I would like to submit from the political angle.

The women who are the majority supporters of the regime and the NRM party I belong to, must be crying why they fed the freedom fighters in the bush. Hon. Kafuuzi, in his advice is denying them to eat the fruits of their sweat and the fruits of the support – they have supported the NRM. 

Hon. Kafuuzi, I do not know what answer you will give to the women voters in your constituency. You would have been the first person to support this because you know how the women in this country support the NRM. Your submission to Parliament is making the NRM to be hated by the women in this country –(Interruption) 

MR KAFUUZI: Honourable colleagues, let us not personalise this to the extent of attacking people in their constituencies. I presented to you the position of Cabinet; it is not the position of hon. Kafuuzi. Therefore, is it in order for my colleague to attack me?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes, you have to carry the burden for other people. It is not hon. Kafuuzi who brought the proposal; he was delegated by the Cabinet to say their decision.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, that is why many times, I call you the great Speaker. Your guidance to this House gives confidence to the country and the women that you are there for them. 

My colleague, the Deputy Attorney-General, is trying to tie a rope around the Cabinet’s neck. However, I believe this should be a personal responsibility because we are in the ruling Government and we should promote women empowerment. 

Also giving the President 60 days to campaign in the entire country, I believe, is another way of making sure my party President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, loses popularity. How do you give a presidential candidate 60 days?

Madam Speaker, through you, I kindly request that the nomination days be extended to allow the women of this country participate in that exercise because they are stakeholders in the governance of our country.

Secondly, I request that the nomination days for members of Parliament be extended by 14 days and add the presidential candidates more days for campaigns to help them unveil their party manifestos to Ugandans well. 

Since some parts of this country are still in lockdown and with scientific campaigns, I believe we need enough time to organise this. I, therefore, submit that Cabinet should help the women of this country and make it clear that this is not their intention and plan.

I am not the NRM spokesperson but I do not think this was brought in the spirit of the ruling Government and the NRM party, I belong to. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.29
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to associate myself with the many voices that have come on the Floor, to say how disappointed we are with the opinion and direction from the Deputy Attorney-General. The problem that we have to solve is in the law and the two parties that must solve this problem are Cabinet and this Parliament. The NIRA does not have a problem; theirs is to implement. The Electoral Commission does not have a problem; theirs is also to implement because we have a duty to give them the good laws and guidance to do their work.

Now, we find ourselves, as some Members have suggested, with no time to do what section 36 of the Registration of the Persons Act commands us to do. There have been suggestions that we extend the nomination days. I support that. However, I propose that we suspend section 36, allow people to be nominated and come to give the proper laws to ourselves rather than having these half-baked “things” that are not helping us to get anywhere. I, so, propose.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I invite the Deputy Attorney-General? As you come, one of the things we need to be cleared today is the election date. Why are we being nominated? Why are we being asked for a programme of one week, three weeks or one month? We need to know the election dates right now. Attorney-General, come. 

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleagues for your concerns. All your concerns are zeroing in on the fact that there is discomfort in fulfilling the requirements of section 36 of the Registration of Persons Act. 

Your discomfort stems from the fact that there may be no time because section 36 itself talks of seven days of the Gazette and we are left with less than seven days to go for nomination, one of which is a public holiday and two are weekends.

I remember I requested earlier that you allow me to answer fewer questions so that I am able to monitor because they were too many. What I was trying to explain was that the amendment we presented to the regulations is only in respect of those who intend to correct errors or realign the order of their names. However, section 36 remains intact; it talks of change of name. Change of name is different from correcting a name that has been misspelt or wrongly written. 

There have been concerns raised about the Local Government (Amendment) Act vis-a-vis the women councillors. I understand that we passed that but as it turned out – and I say this at the risk of condemnation but I am just presenting the law as it is – Article 180 of the Constitution talks of one third. If we had considered this earlier on, we would have probably amended Article 180. The problem was that after we amended the Local Government Act, the Electoral Commission refused to enforce it because they were being guided by Article 180 of the Constitution. 

In so doing, the parties held party primaries for sub-counties, the Electoral Commission demarcated electoral areas for women councillors and in some cases, they have combined two or more sub-counties – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I would like to get a clarification from the Attorney-General over this matter. Indeed we passed this law and it was assented to by His Excellency the President and all of us knew it was already a done deal. 

I would like to know whether the Deputy Attorney-General did not know that this was affected by Article 180, the way he is stating now. Didn’t you know that this would necessitate you introducing or coming up with a proposal to change that provision? Does it mean that you sat on this matter such that it is overtaken by events so that women are left out on this issue?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you are aware that it is this House that elects Members to the East African Legislative Assembly and we adopted 50-50 representation; we elect four women and four men per region. That is the method we have adopted right from the start. I am surprised that nobody ever challenged this House for giving 50-50 representation of women and men to the legislative assembly. It is becoming an issue now that we are talking about local government representation. May we be clarified on this issue? 

You are also aware that Uganda has actually signed the AU Charter on Gender Parity, which requires each member state to adopt 50-50 per cent representation but this has never been domesticated. I thought that it is by practice that Uganda has actually agreed that 50-50 or more is acceptable.

Madam Speaker, within Parliament, leadership of the committees in Parliament is normally represented by over 40 per cent. Are we now being reminded by the Attorney-General that we have been breaking the law? Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General started very well. He raised the concern saying that he knows the Members of Parliament’s worry is the limited time; that we cannot have the seven days. He started by discounting the two days; Saturday and Sunday, and then the public holiday, thereby leaving us with two days.

He stopped there and then went to local government. I would have expected the Attorney-General to conclude by saying that given that, we are going to postpone the nominations by a week or two. Instead, he has proceeded to the local government. Madam Speaker, is the Attorney-General’s decision to proceed without concluding this matter in order?

THE SPEAKER: That is why I asked the Attorney-General to tell us when the election date is so that we plan accordingly? Are we planning for a month or for two weeks? When are the elections? We need to know.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, your concern is equally my concern because I am a candidate. However, the Electoral Commission is going to issue those dates in due course.

Madam Speaker, I was talking about the issue of women councils. I have talked extensively with the leadership of the Electoral Commission and I am reliably informed that they did demarcations where several sub-counties were combined to allow them elect one woman councillor.

The contracts for printing the ballots have already been issued. If we open it up now for further nomination at every sub-county, the Electoral Commission will be forced to rescind some of those contracts and re-do the exercise at some point. It might also require some logistical input in the form of a supplementary budget because this is a matter the Electoral Commission leadership – 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the honourable Attorney-General is talking of the agreements contracts, which have been signed. We know that these are not cast in stone. Contracts will always be amended and addendums made.

Therefore, is the honourable Attorney-General in order to continue confusing or fearing to tell us the truth whether there is anything of concern in these issues, which are legal in nature? It is not about anything in a contract. We passed a law here, Madam Speaker, regarding the issue of the women especially.

From practice, Madam Speaker, for those who have participated in politics, the Electoral Commission has always informed us. For example, in 2015, we were nominated on 20th November but this time, it is in October. So, if they can push it to November, then all these changes can be done. What magic has happened? What problem has arisen now? It is because we are learning from experience. 

In 2015, I remember very well that it was 20th November but here, we have been told 12th and 13th. It is more than a month. I think if there is something that the Attorney-General or the Electoral Commission is hiding, they should tell us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not buy this idea that the subcounties are not known; I do not buy the idea. First, the Attorney-General told us that they have joined this subcounty and the other subcounty and told the women to stand there. 

The sub-counties are known; there are no new creations, that is why you joined two and three to make a constituency. They are well known so that ground is something that cannot stand.

Secondly, I do not know why when it is issues that touch the women, then the issue of costs comes. (Applause) Many things have been done here hurriedly. Supplementary budgets which are most unimpressive have been brought here and passed. However, for women, it is “although…ela…the expense…ate simanyi what”. No, no, no! This is unacceptable.

Attorney-General, you have an obligation to facilitate the participation of all the genders in the elections. It is an obligation; you cannot run away from it. The days we have are very limited. Even if Members were to go for deed polls, they cannot conclude the process before Thursday. They have only tomorrow, Wednesday and Thursday. Friday is a holiday and Saturday is a weekend.

Therefore, honourable minister, we demand that the Electoral Commission extends the dates for nomination – (Applause) – for a fortnight to enable the aspirants for Member of Parliament to organise themselves. The Electoral Commission should enable the aspirants who are staggering at the local Government level to also organise themselves.

Do not stampede us to be nominated on the 12th; we shall not. (Applause)

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We shall take it up with the Electoral Commission and see how best to address it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; then we need a report tomorrow on this issue. 

5.44
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, we thank you for the guidance as you said; the 14 days until the MPs and these other people sort themselves out.

As we move, given that you also pointed it out that the date for voting is not clear; we request that as the Electoral Commission organises itself within the period that you or the House is giving them, we also request that we must have most of these things sorted out so that they come back with a clear roadmap before they begin the nominations.

The roadmap must be clear and we request that all these other nitty-gritties in the entire process are put right so that we begin a clear journey, Madam Speaker.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, your ruling is that we need an extension for the women to go and sort themselves out. Madam Speaker, you listened to the Attorney-General; the Attorney-General is talking of changes or amendment of names or addition or deduction of names, which will go at a cost. 

We are talking about affirmative action for women but we are now saying that before you go for elections, women must go through some extraordinary cost in order for their names to be added or deducted. Madam Speaker, since we are going to face an election which requires money, we are now being asked that we must go and advertise. We must go for a deed poll, which I think NIRA will charge Shs 50,000. Another one will cost Shs 300,000, then the nomination fee. 

On a woman, by virtue of being a woman and an African who honours African culture by having the name –(Interjection)– Yes; you should have given me the –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The Attorney-General?

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is just a point of information to hon. Cecilia Ogwal, with whom we have been having a very cordial chat about what to do. It is, of course, not true, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that there is an agenda against a woman or African woman. That is not true, hon. Ogwal.

Hon. Okupa – I do not know whether he is still here – was talking about the stampede. The problem was that during the election cycle of 2015/2016, this same matter - the question of changing the name and the cost of going to do a Deed Poll – We have not manufactured it and it is in the law; section 36.

Hon. Ogwal, you will know that this matter was challenged up to the Supreme Court; I am sure you are aware about that. The Supreme Court actually held that the only recognised method for changing of name is by deed poll; that is what they held.

We are not doing anything deliberate. What I, of course, agree with – and we were trying to engage in a discussion with the Rt Hon. Speaker this morning about the extension of time – is because clearly, in light of these two days, it seems they are insufficient.

Therefore, that is a matter we have just agreed with hon. Kafuuzi to call the Electoral Commission tomorrow and have a meeting with them and come back. However, there is no agenda against the women. Section 36 is there for a Deed Poll.

The points that you are not bringing up, hon. Ogwal – with due respect and you know I respect you very much – is that there is a lot of emphasis on the inconvenience on women in terms of changing of name. This leaves a lot of room for the unscrupulous people; the forgers and manipulators. 

Once you leave the changing of name to be so fluid; I agree there is a side of the inconvenience but you must also take cognisance of the fact that there are many people who will also take unscrupulous advantage of this change of name.

I thought I should inform you.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I think that one of the areas the EC missed out was they should have addressed the issue of change of name, the same way they address the issue of academic documents.

They had set a deadline in July for Members to clear their academic documents. They should have also told the public that there is also this issue so that people address it but now, there is a stampede.

Attorney-General, we want a confirmation tomorrow of our demands and a way forward for the country, especially on the date when the election will be.

Let us go the next item.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON COMPENSATION OF KANUNGU ORPHANS WHOSE PARENTS PERISHED IN THE INFAMOUS KIBWETERE INFERNO IN MARCH 2000

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs, as usual. Let us go to item 4(2).

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF 3 MAY 2018 ON THE PAYMENT OF MONIES OWED TO UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

5.51
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, about a couple of hours ago, hon. Basalirwa had spoken about the statutory instrument, and I promised I would bring it; the one allowing the candidate classes to open. So, I have brought it, and I would like to lay it on Table. He had said it was not there, and I said that it was there. I beg to lay the statutory instrument that permits the reopening of the schools. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, you said earlier that there is no legal requirement, but I think it is just good collaboration to say this is what we are doing and this is the law. You are not working with documents. You are working with people. 

5.52
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the statement to Parliament on the status of implementation of the resolution of Parliament on payment of monies owed to Uganda-South Sudan traders.

In 2008, the Uganda Grain Traders, through their association, UGTA, commenced supply of maize grains to the Government of South Sudan (GOSS) in partnership with South Sudan companies. This was in addition to other suppliers from the East African region. 

These suppliers had largely not been paid by July 2010 when things went sour in South Sudan, which led to the Uganda Grain Traders seeking the intervention of the Government of Uganda.

Subsequently, negotiations were held between the Government of Uganda and that of the Republic of South Sudan that led to a Memorandum of Understanding(MoU)in which the latter acknowledged that $56,431,987 was owed to UGTA, and an initial instalment of $15 million was paid by the Government of South Sudan to the traders in 2011. This left a balance of $41 million unpaid. 

Thereafter, Cabinet authorised the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to effect payment upon agreement with the Government of South Sudan and on terms and conditions of reimbursement of the $41 million. In other words, what I am saying is that we are doing this as a loan to South Sudan. The MoU says South Sudan, when it stabilises, will be able to reimburse Uganda.

A bilateral agreement was therefore signed in 2016, and additional payment equivalent to $10.809 million was made thereafter by the Government of Uganda. This brought the total payment to the first ten traders from UGTA to a total of $25.809 million out of the $56,431,987. 

An addition of $4.9 million, which is equivalent to 15 per cent of the outstanding balance was paid in quarter one of this financial year. This payment was based on the consent order between Government of Uganda and the Uganda Grain Traders Association. The matter had been taken to court. This brings the total payment, to date, to $30 million of the $56,431,987. The balance is to be paid within a period of five years in line with the Government cash flow. The consent order so says.

Please note that the above payment relates to traders covered by the bilateral agreement reached between the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan. It does not cover those people who came later on. 

We have met a second category of traders that are a subject of Article 10 of the bilateral agreement who were recently verified. Under this category, we have a total of 160,000 claimants with a total claim of about Shs 1.531 trillion. This includes the 23 companies indicated in the resolution of Parliament of 03 May 2018.

As I indicated in the statement I made to this House in March 2020, only three claims amounting to $6,947,183 million or an equivalent of Shs 25,738,478,427 met all the criteria and were, therefore, categorised as valid. The other claims were categorised as questionable. 

The questionable claims were mainly as a result of the following: 

    1. Claimants whose export declaration forms as proof that their commodities exited Uganda were not consistent with Automated System for Customs Data (ASYCUDA) listing provided by the Uganda Revenue Authority.
    2. A total of 14 out of the 56 claimants that submitted sub-contracts did not attach the primary contracts from which these sub-contract agreements arose.
    3. In other instances, some sub-contracts were signed before the primary contracts with the Government of South Sudan were signed.
    4. For other claimants, it was noted that the quantities in the goods delivered notes were much less than the contracted quantities, and yet the traders were claiming the entire contract values.
    5. Some of the contracts between the Government of South Sudan and the claimants were incomplete, and did not indicate the agreed quantities.
    6. Some claimants who were contracted directly by the Government of South Sudan did not attach copies of their contracts.
    7. Five individuals are claiming for compensation for supplies made to individual officials of the Government of South Sudan.
    8. 42 claimants were seeking compensation for lost property and goods rather than supplied to the Government of South Sudan.
    9. Goods declaration were in some cases made on customs documents not corresponding with the goods that were to be supplied as per the contract shared.

The outcome of the verification was presented to the claimants and discussed in a meeting held on 13 December 2019. Thereafter, I prepared and submitted a Cabinet memorandum on the verification report on 19 February 2020. As earlier noted, this matter is still awaiting a decision of Cabinet. 

For this latter group, there is still another procedure that we are yet to fulfil. As I have said earlier, we are lending money to the Government of South Sudan. It will need to go back to South Sudan and include them as an addendum to the main memorandum of understanding. Short of that, we shall receive many queries from the auditors because we will have no basis why we should start to pay when we have not agreed with Southern Sudan.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, there is no “Southern Sudan” near us; we have South Sudan. We have been dealing with South Sudan not “Southern Sudan”.

Mr kasaija: I am very sorry; I beg your pardon if I said “Southern Sudan”. It is South Sudan.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is committed to paying the Ugandan traders and supports all prudent efforts towards settlement of their claims with the Government of South Sudan. However, procedures must be adhered to and so, I would like to rest my case. Thank you.

6.02
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the submission he has made. However, I think our patience is running out because the response from the ministry has continued to be negative.

His submission today is still in support of the first category of 10 companies, which are being suspected as belonging to the “untouchables” in this country. We have talked about it but we do not want to discuss it on the Floor of Parliament.

That particular group was given $15 million in cash in 2016. When the matter eventually came to us, I remember strongly supporting the motion and we acknowledged the fact that trade did take place between South Sudan and Uganda. We appreciated that there was some kind of negotiation and arrangement for the payment of those who provided the services, particularly in the form of supplying maize to South Sudan.

However, during that debate - and that is what the ministry has deliberately evaded - we acknowledged that in addition to the 10 companies of the distinguished Ugandans, there were 23 other companies that had been verified by the Government of South Sudan and there were documents. 

They had also been verified by the revenue authority of Government of Uganda. They had all the documents verified by both sides of the Government.

This House went a step further by saying, “Fine, since the Government is claiming there is no money, we are also willing to support these other 23 traders” because these are the ordinary traders who are claiming $50,000 or $10,000 as opposed to the first category of 10 who are claiming $10 million or nine million dollars. These are people who are claiming very moderate amounts.

Therefore, we decided that since these are our people and mainly affecting the people of West Nile, Acholi and Lango because of the proximity of the borders, many of them are affected; we decided that let this Parliament allow additional funds in order to accommodate the 23 companies.

This House approved an additional fund of Shs 76 billion. Right now, this money was used for additional payment to the first category of the distinguished Ugandans. None of the 23, whom you and I were concerned about, has been paid. 

From the human perspective, there is one particular man from Kitgum who now sleeps in the bus park here in Kampala. The banks have sold all his property. He has scattered his family to his relatives and he has lost his normal senses. Another man was recently also affected because the banks sold all his property. This is happening as we are watching yet Parliament took action to assist this Government to sort out the problem. The Government continues to come to us to say that there is no money. When you give it to them, it goes to the first category of 10 companies. 

Therefore, can the minister tell us –(Interjections) There are three categories and I can tell you in case you were not properly briefed. One is the distinguished Ugandans who own the 10 companies. You can go and verify from the Registrar of Companies.

The second category is the one whose documents we inspected and this Parliament agreed in that motion saying, “In addition to the 10, let the 23 companies be paid.” That was the order on 03 May 2018 - to pay, not only the 10 but also the additional 23.

On that day, it was agreed that there are other Ugandans whose companies had not been verified or they were in the process. It was agreed that we should also allow them to be verified. 

Madam Speaker, if you recall, we set in place an ad hoc committee to do verification for us. They even went to South Sudan but that did not affect the 10 distinguished companies and the additional 23. These were for the new companies, which were still in the process of being verified.

I think that the minister is trying to tell us that those who have the information have not briefed him correctly. I have all the information but I feel it is not my duty to inform a Government minister about what is going on in his backyard.

I am telling you that you have overpaid the 10 companies yet the 23 companies have continued to wallow in poverty and are suffering because of lack of payment.

Therefore, honourable minister, can you confirm to us today that as you leave this House, you are going to call the 23 and pay them? Even if you paid them halfway and made a commitment for additional payment, we would understand. 

These are our ordinary people; very poor traders who are just suffering. Northern Uganda is just coming out of disaster. Please, have mercy on them. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, we debated this matter very many times. We just want answers.

Mr jonathan odur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has made very serious statements here that there are companies that they have verified and found that they had falsified their export information. Uganda Revenue Authority has the mandate to sanction those companies. I would like to find out whether those companies have been sanctioned.

Secondly, where is the report of the verification of those companies? Bring it here because what we know and we have been told by some of the owners of those companies is that you are favouring businessmen from one region against those from the rest. We would like to see a report of how you verified them laid here so that we can assess the situation. Thank you.

6.10
Mr Elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, listening to the minister responding, I do not know whether that is the response it would have taken you the stand that you took that unless the Minister Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes here to answer, we shall not handle any of their business.

It is painful to those people who did business. The minister came here and said that for those people that are coming now, it now needs the Government to go back to verify with Sudan. What does it take? From 3rd May 2018, if you love these Ugandans and needed to help them, why haven’t you done that? There are so many people who keep coming here with documents. I wish I knew this matter was coming up today, I would have also brought more additional documents.

Honourable minister, what is so difficult with you bringing to this House and laying documents stating the amount of money you have paid? In those documents, you state the unverified that you will verify in a certain period of time so that people get to know. If you think people have falsified, name them so that people get to know them. The laws are there regarding that. 

Why do you fear? Why aren’t you telling us that? We would be happy if tomorrow you called a meeting for those with claims and they come with documentation so that you do the verification; bring it to this Parliament stating the details. That would solve the matter. What is difficult with that? I think if you did that, this matter would be put to rest. Paying them in instalments is not because you do not have the money. Why can’t we do that? Why do you make the people who have more – unless you want to follow what the Bible says, that, those who have more will be added unto them. 

However, for those people that have little, why can’t you pay everybody in instalments and they understand? That is where we would be able to appreciate and everybody will know our Government is in for us. 

We know the challenges people face when they are doing that business. People’s vehicles were burnt and some ran without documents. Some may not even have the documents given the security situation in that place at that time. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you coming back to respond, minister? Let us close the matter.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you again, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I think we should cut this short. We have no quarrel with the 10 or 11 companies. The ones that we are not certain about are the 23 and others –(Interjection)– hold on, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Just allow me to finish – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, we have asked him questions. Please let him answer. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, one of the 10 companies was actually blacklisted by Uganda Revenue Authority. 

THE SPEAKER: Which one was that? 

MS OGWAL: I think it is called Aponye. It was mentioned in that report so you cannot say that you have no problem. You have a problem. In the verification by URA, they found that the registration numbers of some of the vehicles that were listed, especially the trailer, turned out to be the registration number of a motorcycle. 

MR KASAIJA: I cannot answer tribal or no tribal – Madam Speaker, I do not have specs to see which tribe is which. I am talking about pure commerce. She knows that because we did it together in the 60s.

I suggest that we do two things. I would like this House to allow me to go and first look at these 23 companies, get all the evidence I can get and then come back to this House. 

In addition, somebody would have to go to South Sudan and have them included in our MoU. This is because if we do not – let me repeat what I said; the premise is that we are lending money to South Sudan. If that is the case, you cannot begin to pay unless you have agreed with South Sudan that they will adhere to the obligation. It will mean differently. The question may be, why haven’t you done it yet? I would like to assure this House someone will have to go – even if it means me myself; I will go to South Sudan – and make the Government of South Sudan agree to pay to Uganda when we pay this. We form this as part and parcel or an amendment to the MoU that we did. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what is clear is that, from the time we made that resolution, the whole of the balance of 2018/2019 and a bit of 2020, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was not able to complete this verification. It is just incredible! 

Anyway, minister, give us a list of those you say you have cleared. Give us a list of the second category and tell us when you will do the last category. Give us that update tomorrow. 

Minister, do you want to speak on item 4 on the life jackets? A proposal was given here but I do not know whether you are still with it. Hon. Bahati had made a proposal but I do not know whether you are still -  

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, can I handle that tomorrow? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, can you confirm that item 4 (iv) has been overtaken by events so that we get it off the Order Paper?  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PLANS BY GOVERNMENT TO RE-OPEN BORDER DISTRICTS THAT ARE STILL UNDER THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I stand to inform the House on the statement which reads, “Plan by Government to re-open border districts that are still under the COVID-19 lockdown.”

On 20 September 2020, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, directed that all border points be opened and the statutory instrument that was used to reopen was the provision of Statutory Instrument 84 of 2020; the Public Health Act, which was laid on the Floor of Parliament by the Attorney-General. 
I, therefore, would like to state that this has been done. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we note that the border districts have now been opened so that item should be removed from the Order Paper. 

Are you ready for the masks or you will speak on them tomorrow?  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO FULFIL ITS UNDERTAKING TO DISTRIBUTE FACE MASKS TO THE PEOPLE OF PAKWACH DISTRICT

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I stand to inform this House on the issue of face masks. On 18 May 2020, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda directed that all Ugandans aged six and above should be given a free face mask to prevent the spread of coronavirus. 

In line with that, the Government of Uganda committed funds for the implementation of this exercise within the framework of “Buy Uganda Build Uganda.” This is to ensure that we use Uganda manufacturers and employ Ugandans. 

A Cabinet sub-committee chaired by the First Deputy Prime Minister was mandated to provide stewardship and stakeholders’ coordination. Thirty three billion shillings was made available through a supplementary budget and it was passed on this Floor of Parliament. It was released to the Ministry of Health in quarter one of this financial year accounting for 12.7 million masks and each was at Shs 2,400. Madam Speaker, following a balance of Shs 46.2 billion, which finance has committed to release so that a total of Shs 79.2 billion that was budgeted for, for a total of 33 million masks for the entire country is met.

Madam Speaker, the 33 million masks that were estimated were based on Uganda’s population excluding children under six years of age who were estimated to be 23 per cent of the population.

No funds were provided for in-country transportation and community distribution of the masks. We appreciate the unwavering support from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs who supported transport, Uganda Wildlife Authority, World Food Programme and the local governments at all levels who supported the transportation and distribution exercise.

Madam Speaker, as of last week, 68 districts across the country had received facemasks totalling to 20,952,447 masks out of the planned 33 million masks. This accounts for 63.5 per cent of the total country’s target plan.

We have also supplied about half a million masks through a mosquito net distribution campaign and another one million masks through United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

We have also served Village Health Teams (VHTs) and other high-risk - especially the frontline persons - through other agencies and health projects. 

Government, through the Ministry of Health, commits to have completed the distribution of masks.

The distribution of face masks has met some challenges, which has delayed completion within the stipulated timeframe. The challenges included:

Sourcing for the material, production capacity of manufacturers and the total in-country mask production was initially estimated to be 800,000 masks per day. That was pledged by the Uganda Manufacturers’ Association and their members.

However, in practice, the production per day has been significantly lower than this. They were not in position to make all those per day and this affected the distribution.

Lack of full commitment and needed funds has also led to reluctance to supply knowing that settlement of their invoices will reduce.

We also face procurement delays arising from the need to consult various stakeholders, quality assurance that has been processed by Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS).

In line with that, the ministry has decided to phase the distribution. We started with the high risk border districts followed by other borders, cities, municipalities, districts along cargo road tracks, treatment centres and other areas.

The Government further decided that small tailoring groups in the cities and other up-country municipalities be mobilised, through reservation schemes, to add on the mask production to add on the capacity and spread economic benefits to the countryside.

In line with that, other entrepreneurship and business persons, especially women, have been engaged to produce more masks.

Madam Speaker, I would like to reassure all the people of Uganda that the Government is committed to distributing facemasks as promised to all the people aged six years and above.

We are also committed to distribute at least two pieces of facemasks to each candidate as they resume their studies.

The ministry appreciates all Ugandans for their patience, diligence, vigilance and embracing the proper use of face masks, hand hygiene and social distancing.

As I conclude, coronavirus is real; community transmission is all over the country. We call on Parliament to continue mobilising the community to embrace the Presidential COVID-19 Preventive Guidelines and the Ministry of Health SOPs. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know the question was about Pakwach but you did not say anything about Pakwach. Why haven’t you distributed in Pakwach? 

Secondly, you have talked about the local groups being given contracts but I do not know - Did you advertise? I did not get requests to organise groups in my area. Just answer about Pakwach and tell us how our groups can get in.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question about Pakwach was raised two weeks back and indeed, it is true that face masks were sent there a couple of weeks ago. Even last week, a number of districts that have met challenges including Manafwa, Serere and other parts of the country have had face masks sent. Currently, we are concentrating to give face masks to candidate classes as they get to school.

Finally, it is true that the women groups and other people who are able to produce these face masks have been mobilised so that they are in position to add to the existing capacity of the manufacturers.

However, I am not certain if other regions are not involved. As far as our technical team is concerned, this exercise is supposed to take place in the entire country, not only in the centre. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can you then give us the information? What do I tell the people of Kamuli? That you might be able to make masks - I will go to Kidera and they will ask me the same thing. Give us the information so that we can tell our people.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, tomorrow I could come with that detailed information as to the criteria that we use to involve the other women entrepreneurship groups to make masks for the country, as the capacity of the manufacturers is not adequate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, bring it tomorrow. Now item 6 (xi) - I understand the committee has not yet met with the minister. Can we ask our Committee on Education to interact with the minister on that issue so that we get it out of the way? I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs; shall we go to item 22?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $ 30.0 MILLION FROM EXIM BANK OF INDIA TO FINANCE THE SUPPLY AND INSTALLATION OF SOLAR POWERED WATER PUMPING SYSTEMS FOR PROVIDING WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS IN RURAL SUB-COUNTIES OF UGANDA WITH LOWEST SAFE WATER

THE SPEAKER: As the Chairperson, organises himself, honourable members, there is some information that was sent to me from Ugandans in Famms Market in Juba. They say, “We hope this note finds you in good health. On 27 September 2020, three Ugandan traders were kidnapped along the Nimule-Juba Highway at around 7.00 p.m. in the evening near Nisitu. The kidnappers requested a ransom of 9 million South Sudan Pounds.

On 29th September, at 9.30 p.m. one of the victims Asiimwe Andrew escaped, managed to reach the Uganda market in Juba where he sadly informed us of the brutal death of other two traders by the names of Sebaggala Ahmed who hails from Luweero and Mayende Kamaadi of Mbale.

With this Honourable Speaker, the traders on 4 October agreed to stop bringing goods to South Sudan from Thursday this week until when the two Governments intervene and rectify the situation. 

We thank you for your usual cooperation and support, which you render to us as the Diaspora community.” It was written by Twaha Osman Musa, the leader of Famms Commercial Market; the biggest Ugandan Market in Juba. Therefore, our Government should take an interest on how our people are fairing in this area. Thank you.

6.30
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on Government request to Parliament to allow borrowing of USD 30 million from the Exim Bank of India to finance the supply and installation of solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural areas and sub-counties of Uganda with lowest safe water coverage.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I request that you permit me to be brief and summarise the findings of the committee. Before I present the report, allow me to lay the following documents on Table that the committee considered while analysing this request:

    1. The report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to USD 30 million from the Exim Bank of India to finance the supply and installation of the solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural sub-counties of Uganda with lowest safe water coverage. The report is signed by over 20 members of the committee.

    2. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s brief to Parliament on the loan request.

    3. The letter from His Excellency the President, to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the approval of the project dated 3 April 2020.

    4. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development clearance of the financial implications for the supply and installation of solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural areas sub-counties of Uganda with lowest safe water coverage project, confirming that the Government of Uganda counterpart funding for the project amounting to USD 5.3 million will be availed within the Ministry of Water and Environment.

    5. The letter from the Prime Minister to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Cabinet subcommittee on loan approval of USD 30 million from the Exim Bank of India to finance the supply and installation of the solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural sub-counties of Uganda with lowest safe water coverage.

    6. The National Planning Authority letter on the recommendation for approval of borrowing up to USD 30 million from the Exim Bank of India to finance the supply and installation of the solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural sub-counties of Uganda with lowest safe water coverage.

    7. The project approval document from Exim Bank of India dated January 2019.

    8. The draft Buyer Credit Agreement between the Republic of Uganda and Exim Bank of India for the supply and installation of the solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural sub-counties of Uganda with lowest safe water coverage.


    9. The letter from the Deputy General Manager, Export-Import Bank of India to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in regard to the issuance of indicative term sheet for buyer credit under National Export Insurance Account facility to the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the supply and installation of the solar powered water pumping systems for providing clean and safe water to the rural areas in the Republic of Uganda valued at USD 35.3 million.

    10. The letter from the General Manager Export-Import Bank of India to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Water and Environment in regard to the proposal for the supply and installation of the solar powered water pumping systems for providing clean and safe water to the rural areas in the Republic of Uganda valued at USD 30 million.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, this report is uploaded on our iPads. I hope colleagues have read through the report. I request to focus only on major issues, and I will begin by the project objectives:

    a) To improve access to safe water supply.
    b) To improve access to sanitation services.

Project outcomes 

    1. To ensure piped household water connections resulting from the project interventions.
    2. Female headed households with water connections to be increased.
    3. Improved community water collecting points under the project. 
    4. Percentage increase in safe water coverage in the 20 sub counties, which I will read shortly.
    5. Percentage of the projects with baseline study reports.
    6. The number of institutional latrines constructed. 
    7. Number of demonstration latrines constructed. 
    8. Number of households with hand washing facilities.
    9. Number of trainings/capacity building for the various stakeholder categories.
    10. Percentage of water sources with functional management committees. 
    11. Percentage of water and sanitations committees with women in key positions in project areas. 
    12. Number of water source protection plans developed. 
    13. Percentage of water source plans implemented.

Project beneficiaries

This project is distributed across many parts of the country. The sub counties to benefit from the solar powered water supply systems including the following: 

    1. Agago, where safe water coverage is only 32 per cent;
    2. Amudat, where safe water coverage is 45 per cent;
    3. Bulambuli, where safe water coverage is 40 per cent;
    4. Buliisa, where safe water coverage is 24 per cent;
    5. Buvuma, in the sub counties of Lubya  and Buyaga, where safe water coverage is zero per cent;
    6. Buyende in Kidera Sub county, where safe water coverage is only 30 per cent;
    7. In Kaabong, in Lotim Subcounty, safe water coverage is 47 per cent. 
    8. In Kasese, in Mukunyu and Maliba subcounties, safe water coverage is 21 and 46 per cent respectively. 
    9. In Kibale, Ndaiga/Kakindo, safe water coverage is only 11 per cent. 
    10. In Kisoro, in Bukimbiri and Muramba, safe water coverage is 15 and 7 per cent respectively. 
    11. Kyankwanzi, specifically in Nsambya and Ntwetwe subcounties, safe water coverage is 11 and 13 per cent respectively. 
    12. Kyegegwa, in Rwahunga Subcounty, safe water coverage is 22 per cent. 
    13. In Lyantonde, Mpumudde Subcounty, safe water coverage is only 32 per cent.
    14. Mityana, in Bulera Subcounty, safe water coverage is 44 per cent. 
    15. In Mubennde, Kigando and Nabingoola subcounties, safe water coverage is 28 and 18 per cent respectively. 
    16. In Nakaseke, Kinoni Subcounty, safe water coverage is 23 per cent. 
    17. In Namayingo District, specifically in Sigulu Islands, safe water coverage is 13 per cent. 
    18. In Rakai District, Kyalulangira Subcounty, safe water coverage is 15 per cent. 
    19. Sembabule, in Lugusulu and Mijiwala subcounties, safe water coverage is 21 and 23 per cent respectively. 
    20. Finally, in Yumbe, in Midigo Subcounty, safe water coverage is only 31 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, allow me to conclude so that I may have time to present another report. In conclusion, the Committee on National Economy carefully considered Government’s request to borrow US$ 30 million from the Exim Bank of India to finance the supply and installation of solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural subcounties of Uganda with lowest safe water coverage, and recommends approval of this request. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and members of the Committee on National Economy, for that report. 

I would like some clarification on the performance of loans in the water and environment sector. I am concerned that the loan for strategic towns water supply and sanitation, approved here in December 2018, has performed at less than one per cent. I think we would be interested in finding out why that has happened. I hope the minister can explain why it has performed in that manner. 

6.44
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman for the submission and the report. However, I have a few concerns to raise. 

One, in my constituency, I have a cell that is in a rural part of the municipality, where we clearly need to have this facility, yet I have not heard Kumi being mentioned. We are talking about safe water coverage but we are aware of places within the country where the water stress levels are so high, yet the percentage of water coverage seems to be looking good. I come from one of such places. I do not know what the committee will do to help me because in Kumi, I seriously need at least one of these facilities. In Akarukei, that is in Amejei Ward, I badly need that support. 

Madam Speaker, your people in Kumi are listening; we badly need an intervention. Akarukei has very bad water stress levels. I have failed to help them with any other intervention. If they put this solar system at the water point, we can be able to pull these people out of that situation. 

Otherwise, I am here to support the loan request because it is for a good cause. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Maybe on that note, I can also remind the minister about Bukomansimbi. It has very low coverage and I was hoping to see the district mentioned here. 

6.46
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also add my voice to thank the chair for the report. Much as this US$ 30 million loan is for solar powered water pumps, which would be a social gain rather than an economic gain in terms of the returns on investment for some of these infrastructural projects, the challenge that Uganda faces is the ever increasing debt portfolio. 

I have just scanned through the list of the beneficiary subcounties and it is not exhaustive. I see most of the districts that have been mentioned are part of the cattle corridor, which is already a beneficiary of the other fund for water for production. Most of the water stressed subcounties have not been mentioned, for instance in the Elgon region and areas of Busoga. They have been left out. Therefore, I am wondering whether there has been equity in the distribution of these solar powered water pumps. 

I have seen that in the past, we have borrowed to get water through gravity flow schemes, but the performance is very low, actually below average. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker; much as you have just reminded the chair about the poor performance of the other water projects, we need them to come up and give us the plan –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I suggest that we do what we did with the roads, where the Ministry of Works and Transport gave us the map of tarmacked roads in the country and he came here and explained. We shall ask you to give us the water map of this country.

6.48
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Every Member of Parliament would love to support such a loan proposal and I am one of them, not because my district is a beneficiary but because it is a noble cause. However, when we look at the amount of money that has been proposed for borrowing and compare it to the number of subcounties and districts to benefit, it leaves a lot to be desired. 

I believe that there is a problem somewhere because the subcounties are few, yet the amount of money involved is huge. The US$ 30 million is not small money. I would imagine that this money would cater for many more subcounties than what is presented here in the House.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, Agago District, as one of the beneficiaries, had requested for a gravity-flow scheme for that belt which has Omiya Pacwa as one of the beneficiary sub-counties. The Ministry of Water and Environment had promised, and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was supposed to finance this gravity-flow scheme for the areas covering Omiya Pacwa, Paimol, Lapono, Lira-Palwo; and also, parts of Adilang and Lokole would be covered under that scheme. 

Later on, however, we were informed here that all these things would not work, that the water in the hills was not enough and so on, and eventually we were told that this option was there. However, even with this option, from what I see, I would like to find out from the minister and also the chairperson whether Omiya Pacwa will cover the subcounties of Paimol, which neighbour Omiya Pacwa and are also water stressed. Paimol is where the shrines of the two martyrs, Jildo Irwa and Daudi Okelo, are. We normally go there for celebrations but we have water problems in that area, and it borders Omiya Pacwa. I wonder whether this solar project will cover that area and stretch also to Lapono, which is equally water stressed. 

Otherwise, this is a good loan request and I support it. I, however, urge you to come with better proposals to cover more areas in Uganda. Thank you very much.

6.51
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand in support of this motion. 

I would like to commend the Uganda Government for the efforts they have put in to make sure that safe water is available to many parts of Uganda. However, I was disappointed when I did not hear the chairperson mention Maddu Subcounty in Kabulasoke, Gomba District, which does not have water at all. This is actually part of the cattle corridor but I do not know why it is not being mentioned.

I would also like to inform this House that Gomba is one of those districts that do not have a single piped water system. Therefore, I do not know why they are missing on this list. When I talked to the minister, he promised me another water scheme. However, we are approaching the election season and if you are postponing Gomba all the time, where will you get the votes from, honourable Minister of Water and Environment? I would like the minister to come here and assure the people of Gomba that something is going to be done, at least during this time, so that we can be able to easily look for votes.

Madam Speaker, I am also of the opinion that the time has come for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us a whole list of the loans we have approved. It seems we have passed some loan requests here but those loans are not even performing. I had an opportunity to be part of the Committee on National Economy –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR KALULE SSENGO: I had an opportunity to be part of the Committee on National Economy and I know that many of the loans are not performing. Therefore, I would request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us a breakdown of all the loans that we have passed. We are passing loan requests and accumulating loans, yet some of them are not performing. If they performed, I think they would be able to make the economy move forward. Nevertheless, I support the motion. Thank you very much.

6.54
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee chairman and the ministry for bringing a project where I am also a beneficiary. However, I am more interested in the bigger picture.

At the beginning of the National Development Plan I (NDP I), there was a policy shift on the Government side, and Parliament agreed; it was to the effect that to reduce on the boreholes, which were not very functional, we shift to providing piped water. My first prayer is that since you are now moving to NDP III, can we talk of some big sized money? 

I would like to anchor the point that the Speaker has made. When I was chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, we did the map for both electricity and roads nationally. So, when there is such an intervention in NDP III, whereas I am very happy as a beneficiary in Buliisa, I would have been happier to hear that the other parts of the country, where they still have stress and challenges in water coverage, are equally covered. 

We were saying that we should move away from the boreholes. We talked of gravity water schemes, which had challenges. Now that we are talking about more piped water, can we really do it? We are still losing a lot of money in districts from maintenance of these boreholes; MPs are now in charge of maintaining them. To really run away from that backward approach, can we find more money?

I understand the EXIM Bank approach in giving us that money. How I wish it was at least $100 million, we would see more places covered. For Buliisa, in particular, as I reported the other day, we have a problem where in some places in Wanseko and Butiaba, one kilometre inland is flooded and in other areas, 500 metres beyond the NEMA buffer. When the project is being implemented, we are going to look at specific areas because the 11 landing sites are now under water. We can see what to do.

We, however, commend the efforts towards providing more sustainable water through the piped water system, as we run away from the “borehole syndrome”. I thank you.

6.56 
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and members of the committee for processing this loan request and coming up with this report.

I would like to express my support for this loan request. I only wish to request that it would be prudent if the Ministry of Water and Environment came up with a master plan on how they are going to extend this kind of safe water coverage to the entire country. 

I have got two subcounties in my constituency, namely Peta and Katajula, whose safe water coverage is well below 20 per cent but they are not part of the beneficiaries in this project. I would wish that the minister or the sector takes interest in those two subcounties - Peta and Katajula – so that they can also benefit, plus other areas that may not be captured. Otherwise, I have no reservations; I support the motion. Thank you.

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Mr Ronald Kibuule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be brief in my answers. I take note of the honourable members’ concerns, particularly those who are arguing that we should have more loans, like my brother, hon. Mukitale. 

The selection was made, and we tried very much to look at the issue of regional equity. You can have a constituency where you have four subcounties, but the determinant of this type of facility is underground based. If the area has potential for boreholes, they could get priority. If you look at Kisoro, for instance, it has the lowest potential in western Uganda; you cannot drill a borehole in that area because the potential for boreholes is not there.

This funding will address the lowest points but in consideration of the ability for the area to have water. We cannot drill boreholes where there is no water underground.

The map is available, Madam Speaker. It is attached to this document and Members can look at it. However, I will still make it easier to interpret. There are other projects that will cover some areas like Maddu. The same goes for Kacungu in Agago. There is a bulk water transfer supply, which is under design and it will also cover Otuke. So, this is not the last opportunity. 

We considered some areas where there is no intervention, and the same will happen Maddu; you will get from the intake of Katonga very soon. The project is under World Bank and it will cover the whole of Maddu, like we covered Kabulasoke and the neighbours on that road. The water scheme will cover both lower and upper Maddu. 

My brother, hon. Othieno, talked about Peta and Katajula subcounties. We are supposed to do this; according to our findings, we had designed a bulk water transfer system to cover that area. I will share with you the details. It will serve more villages than this one. So, take note. I will share with you the details on how that design, which has already been developed, will cover your area.

In Bukomansimbi, it is very true that the district has issues concerning water. The other problem is that underground water is not available. We shall have to do bulk water transfers. We have carried out studies and the best thing to do is to have a bulk water transfer system for them; they will have piped water very soon. 
	
In some areas, we have intervened by giving them tanks to harvest water. We have done this for schools. We visited the place with the Prime Minister, following instructions from the President to buy tanks as a temporary measure for them to harvest water. 

When it comes to the other big question on the performance of our loans, we have issues ranging from land acquisition - Whenever we develop these water sources, we start by preparing the place where we are going to put the tank. However, people change; for example, some inflate prices and others have family problems. 

I will give an example of Kagadi where our own brother, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, owned land where we were supposed to put the tank. We had a lot of challenges in persuading him to accept our price. The price at which he was selling his land was really unfair, but we managed to persuade him to accept to serve his own people. If a minister can come to your constituency to negotiate for land, you can imagine the challenges we go through. There is an example in Dr Elioda Tumwesigye’s constituency, where people vandalised the intake during the by-election in order to fail one of the candidates who was saying he was responsible for bringing water to the area. 

Therefore, there are challenges of vandalization, land acquisition and weather at times. When it is raining, the roads are impassable in some of these areas. As a result, no work goes on. 

Of course, the lockdown also affected our performance because the contractors were not moving since they were not allowed to move, even though it was an essential service. Many of our contractors could not access sites during the COVID-19 lockdown.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there are also the delayed processes in the banks. My brother from Kumi Municipality talked about the water stress there. We have intervened and of course, he knows, that his underground water level is not so good – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: In the specific place that I am talking about, there is already some sort of water source, which was not developed, but it has proved its reliability. The community is now relying on it. They go in the morning to get water but when the animals come, the whole place gets mixed up. 

I would like to take this opportunity to humbly request Parliament to give me an opportunity of having this facility. At least the people of Kumi will smile. The minister then – (Interruption)

MR KIBUULE: I take note. I will get back to you with a solution for those people. If it is about developing an existing water source, it becomes easy; I believe I can deliver on that. 

Madam Speaker, allow me respond to hon. Nambeshe who talked about equity. Mbale cannot benefit from this. The underground water is not available because the area is mountainous in nature. We can only develop gravity flow schemes in that area as opposed to underground water. Therefore, hon. Nambeshe, take note of that. We have never excluded Mbale District; it is just because of the geographical nature of the area that we cannot deliver. 

Of course, there are other areas and we have loans and existing water supply systems that will cover these areas. Allow me to stop here, Madam Speaker. I think I have answered the questions. I thank those who have supported the loan request. We are committed to deliver on time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, I put the question that the question now be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do approve the proposal by Government to borrow US$ 30 million from the EXIM Bank of India to finance supply and installation of solar powered water pumping systems for providing water supply systems in rural subcounties of Uganda with the lowest safe water coverage. 

(Question put and agreed.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to appeal to you to give us just ten minutes to do one short report. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO €7.5 MILLION FROM THE UNICREDIT BANK AUSTRIA AG FOR THE CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPPING OF AN ONCOLOGY AND DIAGNOSTIC CENTRE IN GULU (NORTHERN UGANDA)

7.08
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to, within this limited time, present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow €7.5 million from the UniCredit Bank Austria AG, for the construction and equipping of an oncology and diagnostic centre in Gulu.

In the interest of time, as I was given ten minutes, allow me to lay on the Table – 

    1. The report of the committee signed by over 20 members of the committee; 

    2. A brief to Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow €7.5 million from the UniCredit Bank Austria AG for the construction and equipping of the Northern Uganda Regional Oncology and Diagnostic Centre; 

    3. A letter from His Excellency the President to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    4. A letter from the Prime Minister to the Head of Public Service and Secretary to Cabinet on the loans clearance committee; 

    5. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s letter to the Head of Public Service and Secretary to Cabinet on financial clearance of the financial implication for the construction and equipping of the Northern Uganda Regional Oncology and Diagnostic Centre;

    6. A letter from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to the Executive Director, Uganda Cancer Institute, on the clearance of the feasibility study for the establishment of the regional oncology centre in northern Uganda;

    7. Minutes of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) meeting held on 10 January 2020 in regard to the approval of the draft commercial contract –

The Speaker: Has the Minister of Water and Environment left? – Okay, I thought he had abandoned us after doing his work.

Mr bategeka: Letter from the Solicitor General to the Executive Director, Uganda Cancer Institute, on the clearance of the commercial contract for the construction and equipping of the Northern Uganda Oncology Centre;

    1. Letter from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to the Executive Director, Uganda Cancer Institute, authorising him to commence with the procurement process leading to the signing of a commercial contract and supply contract for the establishment of a regional oncology centre in northern Uganda;

    2. Certificate of approval of the environmental impact assessment for the establishment of the Uganda Cancer Institute, Gulu Regional Oncology and Diagnostic Centre;

    3. Environmental and social impact statement report;

    4. Loan clearance letter from the National Planning Authority;

    5. The financial and economic feasibility study for establishing the regional oncology centre in Gulu;

    6. The draft loan financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and UniCredit Bank Austria AG for the construction and equipping of the Northern Uganda Regional Oncology and Diagnostic Centre in Gulu;

    7. The purchase contract entered into between the Government of Uganda and the lender for the construction, delivery of related hospital equipment, services and training;

    8. Letter from Managing Director, AME International (contractor) to the Executive Director, Uganda Cancer Institute, in regard to the revised project contract sum;

    9. Letter from the managing director of the contractors to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury introducing the contractor for the construction of the oncology centre;

    10. Letter from the Omoro District Chief Administrative Officer and the Subcounty Chief of Koro Subcounty in regard to the Omoro District Council approval;

    11. The Memorandum of Understanding between Omoro District Local Government and Uganda Cancer Institute;

    12. Uganda Cancer Institute’s progress report on the implementation of East Africa’s centres of excellence for skills and tertiary education in biometric sciences phase I;

    13. Breakdown of construction of costs and construction works for the establishment of a regional oncology centre;

    14. The list of equipment for the proposed regional oncology centre in northern Uganda at Gulu;

    15. Scoping report and terms of reference for the establishment of the regional oncology centre in Gulu;

    16. Master plan, site layout and aerial views of the proposed regional oncology centre in northern Uganda; 

    17. Uganda Cancer Institute’s five-year strategic plan for the period 2015/2016 to 2019/2020;

    18. Minutes of the committee meetings held to consider the proposal by Government to borrow up to 7.5 million Euros from UniCredit Bank Austria AG for the construction and equipping of Northern Uganda Regional Oncology and Diagnostic Centre in Gulu, northern Uganda. 

I beg to lay.

In the interest of time, I will be brief. Basically, this is part of the implementation of a national plan in the Ministry of Health with regard to treatment of cancer.

Despite the growing cancer burden, cancer continues to receive relatively low public health priority in Africa largely because of limited resources and other pressing public health problems including communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis.

Another factor may be a general lack of awareness among the policymakers, the general public and international private or public health agencies concerning the magnitude of the current and future cancer burden on the continent and its economic impact.

Sub-Saharan Africa is one of the regions hit by the cancer burden yet only 30 per cent population-based cancer registries, representing about 19 per cent coverage, are currently provided with quality cancer data for the entire continent.

Madam Speaker, permit me, very briefly, to say that this cancer institute in Gulu is part of the decentralisation programme by the Ministry of Health on diagnostics and treatment of cancer. After serious scrutiny of the loan request by the Government, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow $7.5 million from UniCredit Bank Austria AG for the construction and equipping of the Northern Uganda Regional Oncology and Diagnostic Centre in Gulu be approved. I beg to report.

7.18
Mr lyandro komakech (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise to thank Parliament and Government of Uganda for locating the centre in Gulu, based on decentralisation that has just been mentioned.

Cancer in Uganda is becoming a big problem. In 2018, from statistics, you are aware that there were 32,000 new cancer cases and 28,000 were reported. In northern Uganda, we welcome this with all our hearts. When we discussed COVID-19, we talked about building the capacity of bio-sciences laboratories. I think this goes in line with that.

Given the human resource constraints we have in the health sector, we believe that the cancer institute in Gulu is timely for the region and will even cover beyond the region. We may even go beyond that and reach South Sudan because we are neighbours, and given that they are also part of the East African Community. 

I have nothing else to add; I only feel happy on behalf of the people of Gulu City and the people of the greater north of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.20 
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I am just short of words. I am sure this proposal has excited the whole of northern Uganda because this is remarkable. It is going to be a historic moment for us to have such a facility. 

As hon. Komakech illustrated in his comments, cancer has become a very big problem not only in Uganda but, of course, in Africa. The experience we have in northern Uganda is that all the time our people have had challenges with cancer, they have got to travel all the way from whichever part of northern Uganda they are to Mulago, which is, of course, overwhelmed. Having a centre now in Gulu for northern Uganda or for the rest of the country will lessen the burden of our people having to travel that distance.

Madam Speaker, I also think women will be the greatest beneficiaries of this great hospital. This is because in recent times, you will agree with me, cancer of the cervix has been a big challenge. Northern Uganda has had a challenge of accessing screening facilities. Women have not been able to get screened early in order for them to access treatment. 

Such facilities were not there and most of our women, who get cancer of the cervix, realise very late, yet this would have been prevented and corrected if detected early. I think putting this centre in Gulu is going to lessen the burden on women and improve on our health. 

Therefore, on behalf of the people of northern Uganda, Agago District and Acholi subregion in particular, I would like to stand here - tall as I am - to thank Government. You know I am tall, so I needed to emphasise it. At least, this is one of the things we are going to go back with, as a gift from Government for the five years of this term. At least, I can count on this one and I am so proud of it. Thank you very much. May God bless you. 

7.23
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a loan request that is worth supporting because I am going through a very painful experience attending to my father who is battling prostate cancer. 

I am, therefore, a regular visitor in Mulago and I have realised, during my usual visits, that we receive very many patients from our neighbouring countries. I interacted with one patient from Kenya. He told me that it is because we have a very good machine - the cobalt-60 radiotherapy machine - which is far better than that of our neighbours. 

This is, therefore, a loan request that I must support. My prayer would be that the project should not suffer the same misfortune that befell the Lubowa specialised hospital, with a whooping amount of funds, which of course have faced –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude your submission. 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you. It would be my prayer that if the plan of Government, courtesy of the National Planning Authority, is to decentralise these oncology centres, it should be expedited. Now that the north has received this, attention should also be shifted to the remaining regions, particularly the east. This is because travelling all the way and delayed referrals from some of those hospitals have cost so many lives in Uganda. I support the motion.

7.25
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I need to thank the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as well as our Committee on National Economy. If there is a loan request that has satisfied me and made me happy, it is this one. I have always felt bad about the rest of the loan requests but I am particularly happy about this one. 

Madam Speaker, I am the publicity secretary of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum, of which the chairperson is hon. Komakech. One time, we were driving from Gulu and I had a discussion with him, particularly on issues affecting the Greater North in the health sector. One of the issues we talked about was cancer and how we were going to handle it in the Greater North. 

I am too delighted today to have a loan request before this House that is going to address this specific challenge. I do not want to waste a minute in throwing my support to the approval of this loan; it should be approved as quickly as possible. 

Nonetheless, I also request this House to now see how we can provide this facility for the east, so that we cover the entire country. I believe in central here, we have a facility. I think we also have one in Mbarara. Now, if we are going to have one in Gulu, let us do something so that we have another one in Soroti, Mbale or Jinja. We would like to –(Member timed out.) 

7.27 
MR CHARLES ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to thank and appreciate the committee and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which has done a great job for northern Uganda. 

Indeed, this is what we have been advocating for. When I was a member of the Committee on Science and Technology in the Eighth Parliament, we visited Mulago Hospital. During our visit, we realised that a number of cancer patients come from northern Uganda, more than those from the central. When we thought of that, we talked about it and today this has been realised; I would like to appreciate the effort. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the quality of this institute will be comparable to the one we have in Mulago. Secondly, I do not know the timeframe that the ministry will take to construct this centre. Today, we have discussed it and then we may wait for longer than the expected time. 

Can we, therefore, be assured of the timeframe and timeline of constructing this? When will it be available for the work to kick-start? Talking about it here is very simple but we do not know the processes involved. Can we be assured about when it will start? Otherwise, thank you very much. I appreciate it. 

7.29 
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for processing this loan request and for the report. Any investment in health is highly commendable. 

I would like to thank Government for the decision to decentralise cancer treatment. I congratulate the people of Gulu and more so the greater north. I hope that this process will not end with the north but will be extended to other regions. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues and say that preferably, if we are to think of any other region, the eastern region should be put into consideration.

Madam Speaker, I have looked at the components of this project - I am not a specialist but I hope that the machines that are in Mulago are the same type that are going to be installed in Gulu, so that the people of northern Uganda get the same level of treatment as those in Mulago.

I also pray that this loan does not suffer the same fate as the specialised hospital. It would be a very big heartbreak for our people if they get excited and from nowhere, the loan suffers a stillbirth or it fails to materialise. 

Otherwise, I support the loan request. The terms of the loan are very good - it is highly concessional. I urge the House to support and pass this motion. Thank you.

7.31
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in supporting the committee on this loan request. 

Last week, I visited Mulago Cancer Institute and I could see that there is a big problem. People are sleeping outside, with no food. They also incur a lot of costs in transportation from wherever they come from.

I have about 12 patients in Mulago from Katakwi. I think this regional based approach of constructing centres is the best. If there was a way, the Government should construct a centre in either Soroti or Mbale to cater for the eastern region as well. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEATH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee for recommending that Parliament approves this loan. This is in line with the National Development Plan III, which puts a lot of focus on human capital development that is aimed at increasing productivity.

Madam Speaker, in line with the spirit of decentralisation, our focus is to decentralise specialised care across the regions. This is the first wave, where we started with Mbarara, Arua, Gulu and Mbale. In Mbale, the land has already been got. We believe by decentralising these services in this first wave, it will help Ugandans to receive these specialised services and to be productive. After this, we want to move to the next wave, and I believe the other regions will come in accordingly. 

As we all know, 30 per cent of cancers can be completely cured when diagnosed, detected and treated early. We also know that 30 per cent of cancers can be prevented if we put in a lot of sensitisation and awareness programmes. In line with this, all the regional centres are emphasising a comprehensive package in terms of prevention, treatment, and other treatment for improving survival rates.

Madam Speaker, there were one or two issues that were raised by colleagues in terms of timeframes - when this centre can be constructed fully and made ready for use. From the schedule, we believe that the timeframe will be within two years. So, within two years, we expect this facility to be complete and ready for people to utilise.  

In addition, the quality will not be different from what we have at the Uganda Cancer Institute. The services in Mulago will be the same that will be taken down to the regional centres. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this spirited fight to ensure that cancer issues are addressed within the regions of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank the minister and the Members. This is a happy day. I have been a long-time advocate for decentralisation of these specialised services. Let us move closer to the population. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House approve the request by Government to borrow €7.5 million from UniCredit Bank Austria AG for the construction and equipping of an oncology and diagnostic centre in Gulu, Northern Uganda.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had debated item No.20 and declined to take the question, pending an answer on the issue of South Sudan. Now that we have received the answer, we can give our consent, because that was our condition. 

I now put the question on item 20, on the resolution of Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 72.7 million, equivalent to US$ 99.8 million, additional funding from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP-AF). I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do approve the request by Government to borrow as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had asked you to give up only today so that we could finish the work on the issues of democracy but we have not completed the work. We require a firm confirmation from the Minister of Justice tomorrow. I pray for your indulgence to interfere with one more day of your time, so tomorrow we come and receive the final commitment on the issue of the names, the issue of representation of the women and their participation in the electoral process, and also the lower local governments and the issue of the actual dates of nomination and elections. We cannot just operate in a vacuum. Thank you very much. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.37 p.m. and adjourned until 7 October 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
