PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA10723Tuesday, 24 October 2023As a House, we thank His Excellency, the President, for finding it befitting that though retired, this gentleman is given an official burial.Our condolences, as a Parliament, go to the family, the Kyabazinga of Busoga, the people of Busoga, the Rotarians and His Excellency, the President, on losing such a distinguished friend whose contribution will always be considered as having played a great role in ensuring that we have a stable and prosperous country. I thank you, honourable colleagues.(Entrance of the late Hon. Henry K. M. Kyemba)The National AnthemThe East African Community AnthemLaying of WreathsTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have family members, friends and well-wishers of the late Hon. Henry Kyemba. They have come to join Parliament in paying tribute to the late honourable member. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)On the technical bench, we have the immediate family members:1. Mrs Janet Kyemba – the widow;2. Mrs Tezira Wacha – family member;3. Mr Henry Nabeta Kyemba – son;IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - SPECIAL SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.02 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I want to welcome you to today’s special sitting in which we are going to pay tribute to the late Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba, a former minister and distinguished civil servant, a man who has served his country with high-level diligence, a man who took off his time to put down the history of Uganda, what was going on in our country for the future generation to know where our country has come from.Honourable colleagues, this is a man who has served humanity in many aspects. As a Rotarian, he rose to the rank of governor; and at the time of his death, he was still volunteering in many Rotary projects where he was touching lives all over. Of course, students of history who have read about the black history of Uganda, know the critical role he played in exposing the evil in Idi Amin’s regime and where he mobilised many people to end the brutality that was being meted out on Ugandans. We do appreciate him for that.10724TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBA [The Deputy Speaker]4. Ms Susan Muwanse Kasede – daughter;5. Ms Linda Nabirye Kyemba – daughter;6. Mr Louis Stephen Kisadha – son; and7. Ms Delphine Serumaga – family memberIn the VIP gallery, we have a delegation of rotary leaders from districts 9213 and 9214. They include:1. Mr Edward Kakembo - district governor; 2. Mr Francis Ssemwanga - district governor;3. Ms Christine Kawooya - district governor;4. Mr Emmanuel Katongole – past district governor;5. Ms Rosetti Nabbumba - Past district governor; and6. Hon. Mike Kennedy Sebalu - past district governor. They have come to join us in paying tribute. Please, once again, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  I will be recognising more VIPs as they come. Furthermore, honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Bright Star Junior School from Wakiso District. They are represented by Hon. David Sserukenya and Hon. Betty Naluyima. They have come to join Parliament in paying tribute to the late Hon. Henry Kyemba. Please, join me in welcoming them once again. (Applause)MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY KISADHA MAGUMBA KYEMBA, FORMER MINISTER AND DISTINGUISHED CIVIL SERV ANT2.26THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga):  Mr Speaker, the motion reads:“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow, the sad news of the demise of Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba, which occurred on Thursday, 19 October 2023; AWARE THAT Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba had an illustrious and distinguished career, serving in various key positions in the political and public service of Uganda, where he played a crucial and immense role in the pre and post-colonial administration of Uganda; NOTING THAT Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba held several key positions of responsibility, which include the following – (a)  Principal Private Secretary to the then Prime Minister of Uganda, H.E. the late Dr Milton Obote;(b)  Principal Private Secretary to the then President of the Republic of Uganda, H.E. the late Gen. Idi Amin Dada; (c)  Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Community Development from 1974 – 1975; (d)  Minister of Health from 1974 – 1977; (e)  Minister of Justice/Attorney-General in 1976; (f)  Minister of State for Animal Industry and Fisheries, 1990 – 1993; (g)  Member of the Constituent Assembly; (h)  Minister of State Office of the President 1994-1996; (i)  Member of Parliament representing the people of Jinja Municipality West, Jinja District then, from 1996-2001; and (j)  Secretary and Commissioner, Judicial Service Commission;RECOGNISING THAT Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba was a firm advocate and promoter of democracy, good governance, peace, rule of law, respect for human rights, access to justice for all and strengthening public administration, ideas he illustrated in his book “A STATE OF BLOOD: The Inside Story of Idi Amin”; and 10725THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023APPRECIATING THAT Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba was a diligent leader, who immeasurably participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda and served Uganda with dedication and patriotism. NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that: (1)  Parliament collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished citizen of this country; and (2)  Parliament takes cognisance of the pa -triotic service and dedicated contribu -tion that Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba rendered to the people of Ugan -da.” I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Rt Hon. Kadaga. Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Mpuuga, Hon. Zijjan, Hon. Nambeshe, the Vice President, Rt Hon. Nakadama, the Government Chief Whip, Hon. Bahati, Hon. Nabeta-Igeme and the whole House. Rt Hon. Kadaga, kindly speak to the motion. RT HON. KADAGA:  Mr Speaker, I thank the House for that clear endorsement. On Thursday, 19 October 2023, the country received unfortunate news of the passing of Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba, former Minister in the Governments of Obote 1, Idi Amin and the National Resistance Movement. Hon. Kyemba succumbed to diabetes-related complications at URO CARE Hospital, Kampala. Hon. Kyemba was born on 8 December 1939 to Suzana Mutekanga and Suleiman Kisajja, who served as a colonial administrator in Bunya County, present-day Mayuge District in the Busoga Region. Kyemba was the last born of the seven boys.He attended local primary schools and later joined Busoga College Mwiri for his Cambridge School Certificate, from 1951 to 1956. Subsequently, he pursued further education at Makerere University, where he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in History in 1962. He pursued a Masters’ Degree in History and a Certificate in African Studies from North Western University, Evanston in the United States of America. Hon. Kyemba’s journey in Public Service and politics began shortly after graduating from the university, marking the start of an eventful and influential life, growing through the ranks from Principal Private Secretary, to a Member of Parliament and then minister.Hon. Kyemba was a distinguished statesman and one of the great senior leaders in this country whom we should emulate for his patriotism. Hon. Kyemba is famously known for the book he authored titled: “ A STATE OF BLOOD: The Inside Story of Idi Amin”,  which provides a first-hand account of his experience as a Minister of Health in Uganda. He was a dedicated member of the Rotary International movement; that is why you have seen many Rotarians in the gallery. He became a Rotarian in l987 as a charter member of the Source of the Nile Rotary Club, now in Jinja City. Under Hon. Kyemba’s influence and contribution, the Rotary movement grew exponentially bigger in Uganda, to now include some 400 clubs, as of 2023. That is no mean achievement. At the time of his demise, Hon. Henry Kyemba was a Past District Governor of Rotary International District 9200, made up of Uganda, Kenya, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Tanzania. His contributions and service above self have truly impacted the masses in their millions.Mr Speaker, as a country, we shall remember Hon. Kyemba for being a fixture in Uganda’s public life. Prof. Derek Peterson, an American Cultural Historian from the University of Michigan, described Hon. Henry Kyemba as “a dedicated civil servant, a courageous critic of Amin’s brutality and a custodian of memory.” 10726TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAI would like to thank His Excellency, the President, for according this great statesman a state funeral, in recognition of Hon. Henry Kyemba’s dedicated service to his country. The Government wishes to extend its profound sympathies to the family, Mukyaala Kyemba and the children, the Kyabazinga of Busoga and the people of Uganda. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace. I beg to move. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Kadaga. Yes, Leader of the Opposition.2.34THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga):  Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Following the events of the past week, I discern that our presence in the House today is peculiar to some, and we clearly understand where we are coming from. Today, common sense brings us into this chamber to do a befitting task; to pay tribute to a colossus figure in the modern political history of our nation, the now-fallen Hon. Henry  Kisadha Magumba Kyemba. We sincerely condole with the family, the nation and most personally the Kyabazinga and people of Busoga for the loss of a loyal servant. I would like to assure the House that we came for this sitting and we will retreat back in our bunker until normalcy returns home. (Laughter)I must observe, as I stand to second the motion raised by Rt. Hon. Rebecca Kadaga to pay tribute to the Late Henry Kyemba, that we have before us an enormous task of portraying the essence of Hon. Henry Kyemba, a statesman on one part, and a politician on the other. Sometimes, that delicate mix does not arise. Some people simply fall as politicians and the other part of them is a wild chase.The late Hon. Kyemba always carried an aura of confidence in speech and presentation, owing to his vast experience and exposure. He spoke ably on quite a number of subjects that one found hard to sustain debate on if they were not well grounded. He generously offered time and space to whoever came to him with the thirst to sit down at the feet of a guru to learn; yet in all this, he commanded a high and disarming sense of simplicity, which endeared him to many. In all he has had such a giving heart; little wonder that he ended up in the Rotary family, where his impact was very much felt. He was, in all these positions and without a question, a gentleman.His, by all definition, has been an illustrious career spanning over 50 years in public service. He had the privilege shared by a few remarkable Ugandans such as the late Hon. Abu Mayanja and the late Hon. Mayanja Nkangi serving in different regimes, starting with Uganda’s newly independent administration in 1962. Between 1972 and 2000, he held multiple Cabinet roles, as mentioned - the Constituent Assembly and represented his constituency for four terms in the Parliament of Uganda. He also served on the Judicial Service Commission as a Secretary. In other words, he had the privilege of serving all three arms of Government, which is a rare feat.Once in 1977 – I was barely two years old – while in exile as the only option available to save his dear life, he defected to London. He would return to Uganda in 1986, convinced, as many notable Ugandans were, that the country would return to normalcy. He might have rightly yearned to put his vast experience to use when he was included in the Cabinet. I would like to think that his heart began to break the moment it sank in that the liberation he had been part of would become a byword for dictatorship; a gross violation of human rights; deep corruption; and inefficiency, which would result in poverty, disease, brutality and the collapse of the country’s economy. I believe he goes to his eternal sleep saddened that the dream of many was not to be. [Rt Hon. Kadaga]10727THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker, with a career under one’s arm dating as far back as Independence in 1962, when he first joined public service, Hon. Kyemba’s life is a testament to the notion that public service is noble and he did tremendously well along the journey. He brought to life the words of Mark Twain; “Patriotism is supporting your country all the time and your government when it deserves it.”Mr Speaker, Hon. Kyemba would demonstrate, early in life, that there was a need to cede political space and pass on the mantle in good time, when he chose to retire honourably. He availed himself for selfless service as a member of the Rotary International movement in 1987, rising to Charter member of the Source of the Nile Rotary Club in Jinja. Indeed, at the time of his passing, Hon. Kyemba was a Past District Governor (PDG) of Rotary International District 9200; that is Uganda, Kenya, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Tanzania. He has also served, from 2003, as Director of University and Technical Education for the Muljibhai Madhvani Foundation, which has impacted the lives of numerous people. (Applause) Mr Speaker, despite having held positions of advantage, Hon. Kyemba, too, knew adversity as many Ugandans across the times have. In 1977, he lost his brother at the hands of the regime he had served under, faced personal insecurity and once took a bullet that was meant to assassinate the President. For many, who may not have interfaced with him at a personal level, he is seen through the lenses of his book, “A STATE OF BLOOD: The Inside Story of Idi Amin ”, which he authored. His timeless revealing work of literature, a bold account of the failings of a government, has gone down in history as a relevant discourse depicting our own times, with accuracy. Having served as the government protagonist in the book, the late minister is a testimony that we shall have many “Kyembas” waiting to happen soon, which is more reason why we should tread carefully as we exercise nonchalance in this House. He would later, in his own words, abridge his action as below and I quote: “I can only give myself as an example. I was in sensitive positions… you know that your president is telling a lie. What do you do? You immediately say, ‘I run away and you would...’ What I grew up knowing and what I got from the British training was that as a civil servant, you had all the right to advise what was proper… but you must also be aware that the head of government… because of the enormous power they wield, can do what he wants and, if necessary, go to Parliament and amend the law.” Mr Speaker, Parliament as we know it in our times has not been spared by this assertion and I am afraid we shall one time be called to account for both our omissions and commissions. In finality, Mr Speaker, the late Hon. Henry Kyemba and his generation have done their part in building the nation. It is profoundly because of their sacrifice that we exist as an independent nation and in miniature as a Parliament. They would have died in vain if we did not stand tall on our mandate to call our nation to order. It is, therefore, time we took the mantle and amplified their call for a Uganda they have aspired for through the generations or we legislate in vain. May the soul of this great son of Uganda rest in eternity. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. (Applause) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Mpuuga.  2.45THE DEAN OF INDEPENDENTS (Mr David Zijjan): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the Independents docket, I also rise to second the Motion for the Resolution of Parliament 10728TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAto pay tribute to the late Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba, for his patriotic and dedicated service to the Republic of Uganda. Mr Speaker, today we pay tribute to a Ugandan with the legacy of an impeccable record of civil and political service without a scandal:(a) Assistant Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister - no scandal;(b) Private Secretary to the Prime Minister - no scandal;(c) Principal Private Secretary to the Prime Minister - no scandal;(d) Principal Private Secretary to the President - no scandal;(e) Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Community Development - no scandal;(f) Minister of Health - no scandal;(g) Life in exile - no scandal;(h) Minister of Justice/Attorney-General - no scandal;(i) Minister of State for Animal Industry and Fisheries – no scandal;(j) Constituent Assembly Delegate - no scandal;(k) Minister of State, Office of the President - no scandal;(l) Member of Parliament - no scandal;(m) Secretary and Commissioner, Judicial Service Commission - no scandal;(n) Governor Rotary District - no scandal;(o) Madhvani Foundation - no scandal. Mr Speaker, Uganda, through our institutions such as family, church, schools, et cetera, needs to revive the ‘factories’ which manufactured civil servants, public servants and politicians such as Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba, “Mr No Scandal”. May his memory live forever. (Applause) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Zijjan. Honourable colleagues, in the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have:1. Hon. Anthony Butele, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)2. Hon. Lydia Balemezi, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)3. Hon. Capt. John Otekat, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)4. Hon. Florence Mutyabule, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)5. Hon. David Abala, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)6. Hon. Ben Wacha, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)7. Hon. Eng. Nelson Wambuzi Gagawala, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)8. Hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)9. Hon. Fred Mbagadhi Nkayi, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)10. Hon. Asuman Kiyingi, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)11. Eng. Badru Kiggundu, the former Chairperson of the Electoral Commission. (Applause)12. Hon. Stephen Tashobya, a former Member of Parliament. (Applause)13. Hon. Bernard Mulengani, a former Member of Parliament. (Applause)  14. Hon. Salaamu Musumba, a former Member of Parliament. (Applause) They have joined us to pay tribute. Please, join me once again in welcoming them. (Applause)  Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, I am going to open up the debate, but I will start with these three people: Her Excellency, the Vice-President, a family member, Hon. Nathan Nabeta Igeme, and Hon. David Isabirye, the area Member of Parliament. Then – but Hon. Dr Batuwa is the one who brought Hon. Isabirye to my office and said: “This is the area Member of Parliament.” (Laughter) So, please – I will also allow you to speak. (Laughter)  This was this afternoon, so, I do not know whether that is a scandal or not. (Laughter)  thereafter, I will open up for the rest of the honourable colleagues. However, as the Vice-President comes in, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Hope Senior Secondary School from Mawokota North County in Mpigi. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Hillary Kiyaga and Hon. Teddy Nambooze. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. [Mr Zijjan]10729THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. Yes, Your Excellency, the Vice President. 2.51THE VICE PRESIDENT (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Government, on my own behalf, my family, and on behalf of the people of Katakwi District, I would like to extend sincere condolences to the bereaved family of the late Hon. Henry Kyemba. I would like to thank His Excellency, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for giving Hon. Kyemba an official burial. Hon. Kyemba was a distinguished statesman as already described by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in the motion. Therefore, I stand here to support the motion. May the soul of the Hon. Henry Kyemba rest in eternal peace and may the Lord sustain the bereaved. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Your Excellency. Now I have received a point of clarification from the Hon. Dr Batuwa. He said he is the area Member of Parliament, but that the Hon. Isabirye Aga is the area Member of Parliament for the burial grounds. (Laughter) 2.53MR NATHAN NABETA (NRM, Jinja South Division East, Jinja City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. It is actually true Hon. Kyemba used to represent Jinja West where we shall have the vigil on Wednesday.  When we go for burial on Thursday, we shall be in Hon. Aga’s constituency. So, they are both right.Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank you very much for giving us this opportunity to come here to pay tribute to our late uncle, father, and grandfather to some of the people here.Here lies the last born of seven brothers, born to Suleiman Kisajja and Suzana Babirinzangawo . Hon. Kyemba held the flag for us. He was the last man standing and now he has fallen. However, with your permission, Mr Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the seven brothers and their descendants up there. Just briefly, they are: David James Nabeta (DJK). You can stand up, DJK Nabeta. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  They can stand up for recognition.MR NABETA:  All the seven brothers can stand up for recognition. There is David James Nabeta, Adonia Katagwa, Lume Kisadha, Elijah Mutyabule, Nelson James Nabeta, Basil Katagwa, and of course, the last born, Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba. Thank you very much.Mr Speaker, every time one spent time talking to Hon. Kyemba, and mentioned any of the global powers of his time, they would notice that he had a personal relationship with all those people. If you talked about, for example, Mr Zhou Enlai, the former Prime Minister of China, he would tell you stories about him. If you talked to him about Bill Clinton, he would tell you personal stories about him. If you talked about Bill Graham, the evangelist, he would tell you personal stories about him. That goes for Nelson Mandela, Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana; he would tell you stories about them all.One time, I talked to him about Lee Kuan Yew, and he told me that the news about the coup in Uganda of 25 January 1971 came to them while they were meeting the Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew. He was a historian and was able to tell a story about anything one wanted. If you look at his career, for the 61 years of Uganda’s Independence – you will notice he served this country for 51 years. Of course, as you have heard, for those 51 years, he was able to serve three Presidents. One may wonder, step back and ask: “How was Hon. Kyemba able to ascend to such great heights?” 10730TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBASuffice it to say, Mr Speaker, everyone needs a mentor. Hon. Kyemba was mentored by his elder brother, David James Nabeta. David James Nabeta was an educationist. He taught at King’s College Buddo and later transferred to teach at Busoga College Mwiri.Hon. Kyemba was able to interact with the powers that be even before he attended Busoga College Mwiri because David James Nabeta was teaching at Busoga College Mwiri, and needless to say, at that time he started going to Busoga College Mwiri, as a little brother to David James Nabeta, David James Nabeta was, at that time, teaching someone who would later become the Prime Ministers of Uganda. That interaction helped Hon. Kyemba to elevate his understanding of the geopolitics. In 1954, when Sir Andrew Cohen, the then Governor of Uganda appointed David James Nabeta to represent Busoga in the first Legislative Assembly, Hon. Kyemba was able to get more experience.By the time Hon. Kyemba finished university in 1962, he was a complete package. He was a statesman. And for some of you, who dealt with Hon. Kyemba, you must have observed that he was a statesman. Even when he danced, he danced as a statesman. (Laughter)  He took everything as a statesman. Mr Speaker, it is from that that we were able to learn. There was a unique and peculiar thing that used to happen. My father, Nathan James Nabeta used to host his younger brother, but whenever he came, my father would vacate his special seat - there was always a small seat next to it. So, he would vacate the big seat, and sit on the smaller seat and have very serious discussions.What I learnt from that was that if you came to talk to them, they would look at you with such fiery eyes that you would have to run away, and you would scamper for life because they would be in serious discussions. On 4 January 2001, when I had gone to say goodbye to my father, I found them in discussions. As I was leaving, Hon. Kyemba looked at his elder brother, pointed at me and told my father, “NJ, this young man needs to stand”. That was in 2001, Mr Speaker. In conclusion, on behalf of the Nabeta family, I would like to take this opportunity, through the Vice President, to appreciate His Excellency, the President for allowing us to have a befitting send-off for Hon. Henry Kyemba. (Applause)Likewise, I would like to thank the Office of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Presidency for the team they availed to the family members to coordinate to ensure we have a befitting send-off for our father, Uncle Kyemba. Mr Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the people who have supported and worked hard. I thank Alfred and Celia Nabeta who flew in from New York yesterday - Dr  Mutyabule and Rose Mutyabule, thanks. I also thank Dr Lume from London. Mr Ray Nabete, thanks for being a good chairperson of the organising committee. Irene Kabindi from Boston, I thank you, for coming. I also thank the young generation. Mr Speaker, you could have seen Hon. Ben Wacha up here but his wife is seated here. One may wonder why, but Madam is representing a very good friend. This is why she is seated here. (Applause)  Of course, Delphine represents Aunt Teresa. Thank you very much. To my uncle, thank you for serving this country for a long time, here and in premises around. It is time to go home; thank you for your service. Your mother, brothers, sisters and your father are waiting. Let us go across the river, Godspeed. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Nabeta. Honourable colleagues, I made a special time allocation to Hon. Nabeta as a family member because he could go into the family details. I request the rest of us to be cautious on time. Limit yourselves. If you do not respect that, I will come in and start limiting you. The practice is that we start with the constituency Members of Parliament. Let us keep time. Hon. Aga, Hon. Batuwa [Mr Nabeta]10731THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023and Hon. Manjeri, then I will allow the other Honourable colleagues.3.02MR DA VID ISABIRYE (FDC, Jinja North Division, Jinja City):  For the record, my name is Isabirye David Aga, a Member of Parliament where the late will be laid to rest; the Member of Parliament for the graveyard. (Laughter)  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me space to speak about the late. I got to know and interact at length with the late a few years ago when I was still working at a radio station in Jinja where I was a talk-show host of a radio program which focused on the history of this country.The late was one of the sources of information that I relied on as far as the history of this country is concerned. When dealing with him, I never found any challenges. He gave me information whenever I wanted it and at times, when I failed to get him on the phone, I could just call Mama  Janet Kyemba, who is equally an exceptional woman and supporter. I remember asking him, at one point, how he managed to work in all the regimes since independence. He vividly told me that he put country before self. Whenever called upon, he was willing to serve . (Applause ) Mr Speaker, this morning as I was talking to Hon. Daudi Migereko, former MP for Butembe constituency and a great friend of the late, he told me how the late was friendly to all and a team player. He recalled when they were still councillors at Jinja Municipal Council.I was told that the late was a councillor, together with Hon. Ssekitoleko. Hon. Beti Kamya, the current Inspector General of Government (IGG), was also a councillor in Jinja together with Hon. Frank Nabwiso, Justice Egonda Ntende, among others. The late was one person who could reconcile them whenever they had misunderstandings.The late was a great debater during his legislation time at Jinja Council and here at Parliament where he mentored many, as Hon. Nabeta has testified. He valued friendship so much, not like us today who are fond of backstabbing each other. Today someone is your friend and next day, he is your sworn enemy.When the Dean was speaking, he described him as “Mr No Scandal”. Indeed, that was him. How I wish we could emulate him. I salute the late for offering the younger generation direction and knowledge and we shall always acknowledge him for that. For God and my country, may your soul rest in peace. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Dr Batuwa –3.05DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent a constituency that the late represented in the 5th and 6th Parliament. I lead the Opposition on matters of health and had I been making this statement in the 1970s, I would be addressing a colleague on the other side because at the time, he was the Minister of Health and we would be talking business outside the Parliament. However, that will not be the case because he is gone. I have known him as a humble and very obedient politician. He is one of the figures that Busoga, as a sub-region, is indeed proud of. He associated with people who serve above self; the Rotarians. In 1996, he participated in the launch of kicking polio out of Africa. Indeed, by 2020, Polio was kicked out of Africa. He put up a spirited fight against cancer. Sadly, I do not think it has reached where he desired. He has died at a time when Jinja Regional Referral Hospital in his constituency has made a step in the fight against cancer. We have a cancer centre that can test but cannot treat. When it comes to testing, it is weak because we are doing very weak tests like pap smear and the rapid test. We do not have a mammography and therefore cannot do breast cancer tests and all that. 10732TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAThese are programs that the Government is putting in place. They are cascading cancer treatment from the National Cancer Institute down to the regional referral hospitals. I wish that Jinja was among those regional referral hospitals that are earmarked to start this program. It is our duty, in this sitting and during this motion.More than paying tribute, we should ensure that the late Henry Kyemba, a big name as eulogised by a family member and our very good politicians - Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga has stated that we need to name either the cancer centre or the blood bank after him so that his memory stays with us.At an appropriate time, Mr Speaker, I pray that you put a question to the House to amend the motion to include naming the cancer centre that is about to be put up in Jinja Regional Referral Hospital after him. However, the Government should have it equipped to look like him. Last but not least, in a special way, I thank the Minister for Health, Ms Jane Ruth Aceng. I remember one time I was speaking for our senior cadres as a Member of Parliament when the only cardiologist in Jinja Regional Referral Hospital was being transferred to another hospital. I put up a spirited fight and informed him that we have senior citizens who find it hard to travel to Kampala. We discussed and she gave me her position and at the end of the day, she agreed to maintain the cardiologist in Jinja. (Applause)  With limited resources, such favours do a lot towards the lives of these people. Related to the late Bishop Bamwoze, another big name in Busoga, may his soul rest in peace. Mr Speaker, I was privileged to drive him from home to hospital and as I was taking him, he insisted on going to the regional referral hospital despite having very good private hospitals in Jinja because he wanted to go where the common people receive treatment. He had a big name, family and big people to take care of him, but he insisted. It is therefore my humble request, as we are going into the Budget process, that Jinja Regional Referral Hospital - this time we have been assured that we are getting a blood bank because we have donors taking part. We showed them the land and the Kiruddu Hospital team visited and assured us that they would get us dialysis equipment.We showed them the place to house them and I pray that this does not only end on paper but is implemented and that one of those centres is named after him. This is more honourable than naming a road after him. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I pray that the soul of the deceased rests in eternal peace.3.11MS MANJERI KYEBAKUTIKA (NUP, Woman Representative, Jinja City):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have given to me to pay tribute to our own; Hon. Kyemba. Mr Speaker, I was worried when you started mentioning leaders from Jinja City and you were not mentioning me. I kept wondering how you could talk about Jinja City and not talk about me, a senior leader from the city. (Laughter)We have lost a great leader who has served this country with passion in different capacities. As Jinja City, we have lost a senior resident, a wise man and a person of value to the people of Jinja. The late Hon. Kyemba has been a man of wisdom and we have been going to his home to make consultations on many matters concerning Jinja City and the country at large. He has been ready and available to offer free information whenever approached. As Jinja City, we have lost someone very senior and we shall never remain the same.The late Hon. Kyemba has served in different governments and in different capacities. During his time as a political leader, he emphasised the value of education, especially to the young people in Busoga and Jinja in particular. He helped so many people and supported the [Dr Batuwa]10733THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023underprivileged to get scholarships within and outside the country, unlike nowadays where it is the privileged who gain from scholarships.As a politician, the late Hon. Kyemba was a big inspiration to many politicians in Jinja and Busoga and he has served his country diligently. One thing I remember about him is that even after quitting active politics, he remained a humble man and he has been living a free life.He tried so much to avoid getting involved in scandals such as fighting his opponents. I want to recognise Mama  Janet Kyemba. I contested with her in the recent elections but even though the late Hon. Kyemba had connections in Government, he never - I did not see him anywhere trying to disorganise the election process. (Applause)Even when I won, they congratulated me as a family. Therefore, he was a man without scandal. As a lesson to this Government, we should always try, as much as possible, to avoid persecuting and oppressing our political opponents. I am very sure and I do believe that the late Hon. Kyemba did not support the kidnaps and abductions that are currently happening in our country. Even though I believe in the National Unity Platform (NUP) and you believe in the National Resistance Movement (NRM), we should always disagree in principle; but it is very unfortunate that nowadays, Opposition Members of Parliament need to seek permission to hold prayers; you can imagine. As a country, we need to emulate a lot from the late Hon. Kyemba. Mr Speaker, I thank the Government for offering our own; the late Hon. Kyemba, a state funeral. However, at the same time, we should take the opportunity, as Busoga region, to ask Government to think about Busoga as a region. It is very unfortunate that recently, as the President was in Busoga -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, please conclude.MS KYEBAKUTIKA: He stood and said, “I wonder how the people of Busoga live in this kind of poverty”. This is despite the fact that we have very capable and intelligent leaders from Busoga. We need to have development in Busoga, apart from offering us official burials - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I am going to give you an opportunity. It is the only item we have today.3.18 THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Hon. Kyemba Kisadha Henry who was born in Bunya, which is the present-day Mayuge District. Hon. Kyemba has been a peace-loving person. There is a lot to say about him but I can mention one of them. In that area of Mayuge, there is a very big chunk of land belonging to them and part of that land is occupied by squatters. However, we have never had any scandal concerning that land and those who are occupying it.Hon. Kyemba practised mature politics. Around 1961 and 1962, Hon. Kyemba’s elder brother, Hon. David Nabeta, stood with Hon. Shaban Nkutu who is also my uncle during the elections of Busoga South East Parliamentary seat. After contesting for two consecutive times, Hon. Kyemba remained a close friend to the family of the late Shaban Nkutu. Even after the death of my uncle, Shaban Nkutu, the late Hon. Kyemba, whom we are mourning here today, remained with the family and continued supporting them in the situation they were in at that time.I would like to say that we should also continue to practice mature politics. As was said by one of the leaders here, we should not use common sense at certain times but at all times. I thank you and may the soul of Hon. Kyemba rest in eternal peace.10734TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the VIP gallery this afternoon we have Rt Hon. Nantongo Zziwa, the former Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly. She has come to observe the proceedings. Thank you. (Applause)In the public gallery, we have students and teachers of Proverbs Junior School, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia District. They are represented by Hon. John Mulimba and Hon. Hellen Auma Wandera. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House so please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Milly Babalanda - Honourable colleagues, I have already picked you so we should follow the order.3.22THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PRESIDENCY) (Ms Mariam Babalanda): Thank you,  Mr Speaker. I support the motion and also stand here to celebrate the life and achievements of a distinguished statesman, an opinion leader, an elder, a civil servant, a father and a friend of many, Hon. Henry Kisadha Kyemba.Hon. Kyemba will always be remembered for his contribution to the liberation of Uganda from the murderous regime of President Idi Amin Dada in which he served as the Minister of Health. Through his book, “ A State of Blood” , he painted an accurate picture of the real crisis that Uganda was in, which needed nationalists to reverse the trend of going into total anarchy.Besides being a statesman, Mzee Kyemba was a revolutionary and a liberator who contributed greatly to the struggle for a free Uganda. Unlike many elders who retire and become a source of conflict and intrigue in the society, Hon. Kyemba was a man of peace and good counsel. (Applause)I thank His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for granting him an official burial for his contribution and a rich legacy as a great son of Uganda. I would also like to thank the National Organising Committee for steering this function. I would like to extend my sincere condolences to Mama  Janet Kyemba, the widow, the bereaved family, the people of Busoga and Ugandans at large.The Bible says in Revelations 14:13, “Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord henceforth.” “Yes”, says the Spirit, “they will rest from their labour, for their works will follow them.”  May the good soul of Hon. Henry Kyemba rest in eternal peace. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Brandon Kintu and then Hon. Nsaba Buturo. 3.26MR ALEX BRANDON (NRM, Kagoma North County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 19th October, the whole country was dark. A lot has been spoken about this great man who served at a time when many of these young parliamentarians were not yet born. There are certain things that may not be very easy to say about someone. Some people die and the rest take a very long breath. In my local language, they say, “At least he is gone; that mouth is gone.” However, I believe the mouth and spirit of Hon. Kyemba will always stay and light - He was a great man and I will only speak in one aspect because the rest is political. I have nothing much that I can talk about Hon. Kyemba in the line of politics; I never served with him, but I used to look at him. These days when you are smartly dressed as a young man, they say, “Look at this dude.” He was indeed a serious dude. (Laughter) If you saw him in suits, even in his old age, he was a very handsome man and attractive to everyone. (Applause)  I think Mama Janet got a very great opportunity to have him .Hon. Kyemba loved this institution and as Members of Parliament from Busoga, we have 10735THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023also been inspired. When I failed to become a priest, I chose the line of politics and he is one of the men that I would look up to and say, “How I wish I could be like Hon. Kyemba.” There are some objects in the community like trees that are very important and well-known to people while individuals are not known. However, Hon. Kyemba is well-known. Yesterday, I got a chance to be in church and was so humbled to see a delegation of high-ranking citizens in Uganda that came to pay tribute to him. I challenge you, Members of Parliament, if we all go – I was joking with someone that, “If you died, would we bring you in such honour?” There must be honour that really depicts honour. Let us work hard and learn from such examples so that one day, we can be very strong men and women like Hon. Kyemba.Lastly, he loved his kingdom very much and fought so hard for it to be restored. It is very unfortunate that on 18th November, when we hoped that he would be with us to rejoice as we receive one of the finest women in the world; the Inhebantu of Busoga, he will not be with us. However, for those who are looking to make Hon. Kyemba happy and reflect the confidence and support of the Kingdom, please join us on Friday at the Royal Dinner at Kololo. Come and be happy with the Kyabazinga on 18th November. That would be happiness for Hon. Kyemba. Rest in peace and may God be with you till we meet again.3.29MR JAMES NSABA-BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, this moment is like no other in the history of, not only this Parliament but also our country. We are witnessing paying tribute to one of the finest men this nation has had and the finest in every sense.He belonged to that tradition of men and women who never believed in the accumulation of wealth as the primary objective. He believed in serving this nation to his best ability. (Applause)His character signature was amazing and an inspiration to all of us. He was a man of tremendous integrity, the kind of which we do not see these days. It behoves us to remember that the morality which the late did represent is one that will cause this nation to be stable, secure and prosperous. Mr Speaker, the question that comes to mind, which I believe every Member must be wrestling with, is that when it is my time to leave this earth, will people say the kinds of things they are talking about the late Henry Kyemba? We should ask ourselves that question. The honourable Member we are seeing off had a tremendous character and made contributions that clearly endeared him to the kind of accolade we have given him. I join other Members in thanking the President for acknowledging the tremendous contributions that the late made. It should be standard practice that those men and women who serve this nation selflessly are rewarded in every way to seek to encourage others to do the same. Mr Speaker, we are seeing off a man that has been acknowledged as “Mr no scandal”. What a challenge to all of us. Those who have a conscience must acknowledge that, that is the kind of tribute we should all work for. It is not something that comes just like that; you have to work for it. The challenge our country is facing now is one that is increasingly indicating a shortage of men and women of integrity. That invites this nation to a situation of instability if we are not careful, insecurity and ultimately more underdevelopment. Our brother represented the ideal that we should all aspire to. Finally, we commiserate with Mrs Kyemba and her family. It is our primary duty to serve this nation to the best of our ability. Henry Kyemba did, we too can. I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, before I invite Hon. Iddi, I will first pick a few seniors who were 10736TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAwith him in the Constituent Assembly (CA). It is very important for us to bring them on board. We shall have Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Hon. Mushemeza, Hon. Naome Kabasharira - yes, Hon. Mushemeza was in CA, Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, Hon. Ekanya, Hon. Katuntu, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Hon. Baba, Hon. Bagiire and Hon. Lumumba.3.34MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving us the opportunity to pay tribute to our dear brother and friend, Henry Kyemba. I thank the mover of the motion and the seconders. I stand here to second this motion and to let you know that I was closely associated with Henry Kyemba. He was my brother-in-law because my husband, Mr Smart, went to that school and that is why the First Deputy Prime Minister has always had an eye for me; because I am her sister-in-law. I always made sure that she did not report me wrongly to her brother. Janet, you are my sister-in-law and I stand to mourn with you. Mr Speaker, Basoga produce different kinds of children. There are those who are very diplomatic, humble and handsome, among others. (Laughter) Then there are those who are very cantankerous and proud. (Laughter).  I used to ask Kyemba why he was different from the Basoga I knew. I was closely associated with John Kirunda and Sam Tewungwa and they were very proud, arrogant and loud-speaking Basoga. Then, there were those like Kyemba who made me wonder whether they were children from Busoga. That is a mystery and I am still battling with it. I thank God that my husband went to that great school because he is diplomatic and very good-looking. That is why he is called Mr Smart. I thank that school for bringing up my husband. In the Constituent Assembly where we associated closely with Henry, we found it difficult to associate with people who were members of the NRM. The core members of the NRM tried to avoid us even if they were socially friendly to us. I made a mistake one day and took one of the ladies to the washroom to guide her on how to navigate debates concerning problems in the North. Little did I know that one of the senior members of the NRM was on the other side of the washroom listening to our conversation. That lady was battered because of that. The situation was hard, but I thank God. Whenever we met Henry Kyemba, he would talk to us like he was one of us. Every time we met Matthew Rukikaire, he would comfort and encourage us. These are the characters of Ugandans that we really need. It is not about my view but who I am. I am very grateful to Henry Kyemba for associating with us at a very difficult time when politics was hard. When I see the Leader of the Opposition speaking the way he does, I look back and say, “Oh my Lord, I wish he was with us then.” (Applause)  I thank my brother because he would look for Ben Wacha, Dr Okullo-Epak and me to joke with us. He was proud to be seen talking to us while the rest of the people avoided us for reasons I did not know. Mr Speaker, while I thank the President for giving Henry Kyemba a befitting send-off, we should not forget our history and those who are gathered here should learn something. Many of us from the North or those who were closely associated with Obote would have hated Kyemba. In fact, many people said a lot about Kyemba. Some of them thought that he knew about the coup because when it happened, he flew back and left his boss. However, by virtue of Henry Kyemba taking up the job with Idi Amin, he saved many lives. I want to give you my personal testimony. Hon. Henry Kyemba, as PPS to Idi Amin - the day that my husband was picked up because he was the head of youth in the Ministry of Culture and Community Development, he was accused of recruiting the youth to overthrow Idi Amin’s Government.In my desperate situation – during that time, when you were picked up and put in the boot, you were finished. My husband was picked [The Deputy Speaker]10737THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023from home and we thought that, that was the end of him; but God gave me courage that night. I picked up the phone and called Hon. Henry Kyemba in State House. He received my call and I told him, “Your brother, Mr Smart, has been taken and I am sure he is killed”. He asked, “By who?” I answered, “I do not know”. Hon. Henry Kyemba allowed me to talk to President Idi Amin directly and I told Idi Amin that, “You have taken my husband and you have killed him”. Idi Amin said, “How? When?” I told him that by 5.15 p.m., he had been picked up from home by car number this and that, he was taken and killed”. He said, “Have you seen the body?” I said, “No.” Then he said, “Okay, give me time and I will find out.” Mr Speaker, I was a young woman with just one child. That night, I did not know what to do and I was cursing God as to why I got married, but in the morning, my husband was brought home. (Applause)  Hon. Henry, I thank you. You left before your brother, but I thank you for keeping Lameck alive.That night, Lameck was taken to Singapore cell. Whenever you were taken to Singapore cell, that very night you were taken for slaughter and Mr Lameck had qualified for this by the time he was traced and brought home. That is why I thank you for giving me an opportunity to thank my brother, although I said it many times when he was alive. It is good that I am sharing this with you now because some of you may not know.Because of that, I was appointed an ambassador to serve in Germany and I think the Vatican and I had nowhere to go. I talked to Jack Dwonga who was the PS and he said, “Cecilia, first pray.” When I talked to Hon. Henry Kyemba, he said, “Let your conscience talk to you”. That statement was enough to caution me not to take up the job. So, I did not take up that job but instead, Bernadette Olowo was appointed because I had declined to take up the job. Therefore, let us not condemn Hon. Henry Kyemba for taking up a job with Idi Amin because by being there, he saved many lives. Let me speak for him because he cannot speak for himself now. I would like to thank President Museveni for giving us the opportunity to pay tribute to Hon. Henry Kyemba. It would have been unfair if this man went quietly. He has left us something but can he extend that to people like Hon. Aggrey Awori? Suppose tomorrow you hear that your brother and mentor who you liked so much, Hon. Ben Wacha, is gone and then we say, let us contribute something - Such people have contributed so much and we cannot let them go quietly as if they are thieves. We have been told of “Mr No Scandal.” Such characters who are “Mr No Scandal” and “Miss No Scandals” are very many with us so when they go, Mr Speaker, give us just one hour to say something so that as Parliament, we record the good things they have left with us. Finally, can the Government try to utilise the wealth of knowledge and experience such characters have? When we have political turbulence like we have now and you sit with people like Hon. Matthew Rukikaire and now the late Hon. Henry Kyemba to talk about Uganda, they would give you good, pure advice. If you seek the opinion of many people today, they are just protecting their jobs and cannot tell you the truth. We really need a genuine council of elders who can guide this Government on how to move forward. My sister, Janet, we stand with you and I will tell Mr Smart, your brother-in-law, that I have seen you personally. May God bless you all.3.47PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Inde -pendent, Sheema County South, Sheema):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I knew the late Hon. Kyemba when I was still in school but we in -teracted more during the Constituent Assembly and at that time, the activities were at the Con -ference Centre, Serena. 10738TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAI realised that Hon. Henry Kyemba had special skills; he was a man of experience, skill and competence. I should add that he was a man of determination. Honourable members, where there is determination, failure cannot dismantle the flag of success. That was Hon. Henry Kyemba. I also asked him directly how he managed to serve three Presidents with various characters, experiences and visions. He told me that he was able to do that because he was trustworthy; “You have to be trustworthy”. He also told me that you have to respect authority. (Applause) In our contemporary society and even on social media, you do not see respect for authority and elders. He added that: “You must not be corrupt.” When I was appointed the deputy chairperson of NRM Electoral Commission and for quite some time I was the de facto chairman, I interacted with him again and he told me, “This is an opportunity for you to prove that you are not corrupt.” I assured him that I would serve without taking a shilling from a contestant, aspirant or any candidate during my time. That was his advice in my office at Plot 10, Kyadondo and I stood by it. (Applause ). As he walked out, Hon. Nadduli entered and he asked me, “What have you been discussing with this experienced man?” I told him, “He has been mentoring me on how to avoid corruption in this sensitive job”. You know Hon. Nadduli - he laughed and said, “We have thrown you into a lake, we want you to swim and come out”. The lesson I picked there is that when you are given a sensitive job or responsibility, it is an opportunity for you to prove yourself. Mr Speaker, even when there is turbulence in this House, this is an opportunity for you and you have been able to lead us very well in this House. (Applause)  I am sure that if Hon. Kyemba were alive, he would say, “Thank you, Mr Speaker, for managing the House even in turbulence”. Hon. Kyemba was a scholar. In the field of academics, we say: “You either publish or perish.” Hon. Kyemba has not perished; he published. (Applause) I have heard people quoting him; he will live forever because he published. I encourage the intellectuals who are here not to concentrate on legislation only. Have time and note something down and at an appropriate time, publish. When you publish, you never perish.Finally, in the field of economics, there is a principle where you have to balance. It is called the optimisation principle; balancing the interests of the institution, leaders and the voters. Hon. Kyemba was an optimiser. Mr Speaker, I thank the Government and also agree with Hon. Cecilia Ogwal that there are many more citizens that we need to recognise. We should not wait to recognise them when they are dead and a medal alone is not enough. Actually, some of the people who have received medals ask us: “What is accompanying the medal?”We need to look beyond the medals and thank our elders. We should look beyond partisan lines and respect our elders when they are still alive. I am happy to see the representatives of our elders up there. They deserve respect when they are still alive.With those few words, Hon. Kyemba, rest in eternal peace. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Kabasharira, Hon. Magode Ikuya, Hon. Jenepher Namuyangu – Hon. Namuyangu was with Hon. Kyemba in the NRC. Honourable colleagues, do you see why it is very important to pick honourable colleagues who worked with him like Hon. Baba and team? They help to bring us on board. I will try to do a mix and pick those elders.3.53MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Independent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about this great man of Uganda, Hon Kyemba. [Prof Mushemeza]10739THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker, I got a rare chance – I call it “rare” because there are few here who got it – to work closely with Hon. Kyemba. To make the record clear, I came to this Parliament in the Fifth Parliament, that is the National Resistance Council (NRC). (Applause) It was not the CA.Hon. “Mama Busia” says, I am the youngest. When I came to this Parliament, Mr Speaker, I was young and just from school. Therefore, I bring condolences from the National Resistances Council, the Sixth Parliament and myself to the family and the country.When I came to this Parliament, Ntungamo had just been elevated to district status and I had just finished school. People called me and I did not even know how Members were elected to Parliament. Some people told me, “It is this and that” and I ended up coming unopposed. When I came, it was through a by-election and people would normally escort you in. People usually mistake me for having come to the CA because I came around the same time. I was here for one-and-a-half-years and we went back for elections for the Sixth Parliament.When I was brought in, Hon. Kyemba was a minister. However, despite him being a minister and me being young – and I had never seen him - he was among the few people who walked me in to the Speaker. That is why I said I was honoured and I feel happy that I can now testify about his goodness. Mr Speaker, that experience tells me a lot about what I see around me. I travelled with Hon. Kyemba to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conferences. He was a diplomat and a man of good etiquette. Honourable members, especially the men, you need to emulate him. As a gentleman, when you are moving with a woman in a bus or whatever, you do not sit before a woman sits. (Laughter)  You need to be gentlemen.He was a very neat and smart man. You could read it in him when you sat with him at a table. Mr Speaker, I do not want people to misunderstand me but some people do not have etiquette. When you sit at a table to eat, you need to emulate this gentleman. He was a gentleman, diplomat, neat, great and a very clever man. I knew about Rotary through Hon. Kyemba. He was a very good Rotarian. He lived and moved like a Rotarian. You would find him with neat badges every time; he was decorated. At times I would ask, “Why don’t you give me one?” He would say, “Join Rotary.” He encouraged me to join Rotary although I never joined. (Laughter)  Probably, in his memory, I should join Rotary. (Applause)Mr Speaker, I benefited from him being a Rotarian. He had got some donated items – I think they were supposed to be for a certain area in Busoga. However, because he used to take me as his child in Parliament, I convinced him and he gave me very good books, which had been donated, and I took them to Ntungamo. By then, I was representing Ntungamo District. We shall miss him but he has lived a good life. As Hon. Zijjan said, he was “Mr No Scandal”. I did not know him as a scandalous person.When we had just come, we formed the Young Parliamentary Group and the qualification would be that it was either your first time to be in Parliament or you were a young person. He did not qualify because he had been in Parliament longer. However, because he associated with the young Members of Parliament, Hon. Kyemba used to move with us and advise us. Hon. Mao is there to testify. That was in the Sixth Parliament. I therefore wish him a good rest. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. (Applause)4.00THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr James Ikuya):  Mr Speaker, I have managed to come here today in order to pay tribute to this very illustrious person whom we are now remembering. Normally, I have difficulties even walking but I had to trudge and come to say these few words. As an elder – in fact, 10740TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAthese days, I am now accorded the respect of an elder . (Applause)  Only some years back, I thought I was active and strong but recently, I realised that I was going down. In my village, we say, “You do not know when you grow old until you begin seeing your daughter smiling at some people.” (Laughter)  This is when you realise that you must change. If you have been going to nightclubs, you stop it because you know that the era has changed.  (Laughter) Otherwise, at first, I did not know that these were the norms.  When I first joined politics - I joined politics as a young person, not in the same style as the honourable Members of Parliament who are probably seated here in front of me. They joined politics and some of them became “honourable” immediately. For me, it took a long time to even peep in. By the way, even here, I have come to peep in. I do not know whether I am called “honourable”; I just peep in because I am an ex-officio Member. I have never acquired the title of “honourable”. (Laughter)Now that I have been sworn in – which you did, I want to pay personal tribute to the late Hon. Kyemba. Mr Speaker, I did not personally associate with him, so, I have no personal testimony to offer to you today. I saw him from the horizon of my time, rising until he reached the level where we could not fail to recognise him and it is that I would like to take a few minutes to offer as my testimony. I joined politics, not to look for positions or places in Government but to try to articulate some social affairs concerning our communities. In that process, we began associating. That is how we joined the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC). I was a member of the delegates’ conference in 1964 in Gulu, where we walked out after we saw some of the things which require a lot of stories to be told.  (Laughter)  I do not know whether we walked out like you also did.  (Laughter)I am told some of you also walk out. Ours was principled. (Applause)  It was very clear that we walked out because we did not support ways of doing certain things. As a young person, this took me on a new trajectory where I met other colleagues with whom we shared the same ideas.  Therefore, at that time, we did not have knowledge of people who were seen to be big, like the Prime Ministers, ministers and honourable Members of Parliament. By then, Hon. Henry Kyemba was in Government, a top-placed civil servant. We did not even know them personally. We had to keep away from them, but in the process of trying to do certain things, that was when we discovered him during Amin’s time. During Amin’s time, when a lot of atrocities happened, he did one remarkable thing which brought us into a lively debate and discussions about Idi Amin although we knew much more than that. That was his book, which you are now calling “ A State of Blood ”. His book, “ A State of Blood”  is not just telling history. He was rather telling a conscience and only a few people at that time could have the conscience to tell the truth as it should be done. I do not know about now but at that time, whoever had some conscience was either killed or had to lie low like an envelope. This is what we were doing - lie low like an envelope. Though we would travel to Dar-es-Salaam to meet other few people, but connecting certain ideas with the rest of other countries. In the process, his book – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleague, switch on the microphone and conclude.MR IKUYA:  I was taken up by telling stories. It is also my maiden speech, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)  I thought it was a parliamentary etiquette that maiden speeches are allowed - (Laughter)- anyway, since today is not for maiden speeches, I would like to say that the fallen person we have here has left a great mark in the sense that:[Mr Ikuya]10741THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023First, he left behind a book titled “ A State of Blood” , which was a very conscientious research on Idi Amin and it helped us to struggle against Idi Amin.Secondly, he made personal sacrifices to write that book. Otherwise, under Idi Amin, if you did that, you had to go away - as he did; you must make a personal sacrifice that you pay.Thirdly, as you have said, when he was a minister, he was “Mr No-scandal”. The fact that during his time there was no scandal, to me, he carries part of our tradition; the tradition we had - the struggle for a better Uganda, which he reflected in his personal attributes. Mr Speaker, if all of us emulated those same attributes, we would be able to give him a fair send-off. A send-off is not enough just in words; I think we should also do it in deeds. May his soul rest in eternal peace. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, of course, it is a very big opportunity for some of us to listen to such an elder telling the history - people who were there as witnesses and saw whatever went on in the country. I would have given him more time but unfortunately, we have more Members who would like to make a contribution. However, we really appreciate you, Hon. Ikuya.In the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Musana V ocational High School from Iganga Municipality. They are represented by Hon. Peter Mugema and Hon. Sauda Kauma. They have come to observe proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)We have also been joined by our own former colleague here, Hon. Brig. Gen. Felix Kulayigye. He has come to observe proceedings of this House. (Applause)Let us have Hon. Namuyangu, then Hon. Okot-Ogong.4.10THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to join colleagues to pay tribute to a gentleman and son of Africa who lived a very focused and purposeful life.In 1994, I got an opportunity to join Parliament as one of the first Youth MPs, representing eastern Uganda. Out of the five Youth MPs, four were female; Dr Kyambadde, Hon. Bintu, Hon. Namuyangu and Hon. Nampeera. Only one, Hon. Mark Otim, was male.We were joining people who were mature, rich, and educated and we had to look for people to look up to. We met a gentleman who was well dressed and ever smart; he spoke less but was a diplomat. He mentored, nurtured and guided us, and therefore, we had to make a contribution to the country. I would like to salute him.He was a minister for Uganda because when we came in, he was the Minister of State for the Presidency and served everybody equally. He was a peacemaker and served his country diligently with humility, and many of us learnt a lot from him. That is why up to now, we still serve this country.Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity but I would also like to salute Gen. Museveni and his comrades who ushered in peace. We hear stories of people who are still looking for the remains of their own, but here we are. Mama  Kyemba, your children and the family, you have an opportunity to bury Hon. Kyemba. We salute you, Hon. Kyemba, for the contribution you made to this country. May the Good Lord reward you and sustain your family.Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Namuyangu. I will have Hon. Okot-Ogong, Hon. Katuntu, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, Hon. Baba, Hon. Lumumba. Hon. Iddi Isabirye, Hon. Mbayo, Hon. Bagiire and Hon. Asamo.10742TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBA4.13MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo):  Mr Speaker, I stand here to pay tribute to our gallant son, a great leader, patriot and true Ugandan.I first met the late when I joined Parliament in 1996 as a young person. We had just left Makerere University with my colleague, Hon. Norbert Mao and we joined Parliament to make a contribution to this country.When I reached here, as my colleague said, most honourable members were very old and highly intelligent with impeccable records. It was very difficult to fit within that Parliament. These are people who had worked for many years; these are people who had been to exile. These are people who had money; they were everything. However, we were young men and women.When I joined, I was actually mentored by the late because of his character, demeanour and way of doing things. When you were around him, you would find peace and comfort. When you were around him, you would be sincerely guided.I remember when I joined the NRM – because I came as UPC; people who believe in multiparty politics. In 1998, I decided, through his wisdom and guidance, to join the NRM. As a strong leader then, they are the people who supported me to take the chair of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus. I was actually the Chief Whip at that time. I belonged to the political high command at that time and I got wisdom from him.There was one situation which was difficult and complicated for me, when the former presidential candidate, Rtd Col Kizza Besigye wrote a dossier when he was still a serving military person. I was the chairman then. I was directed by the High Command to write to him and the caucus to listen to him. When I wrote my letter to Rtd Col Besigye, he declined to appear. I was then guided that I should use his wife, Ms Winnie Byanyima and Gen. Salim Saleh, so that we could meet him. In my presence, I took an elder, Hon. Henry Kyemba, to join me. We met at the then Nile Hotel. That time, my good brother, Rtd Col Besigye, also declined to appear; so, we were in a very complicated moment. Before we could move, our brother declared his position as a presidential candidate. We were between a rock and a hard place. (Laughter)  However, we got good guidance from Hon. Kyemba. Because of his controlled temperament, vision and humility, he asked us to give him time and we proceeded.Honourable members, I would like to inform this country and Parliament that we can only get good leaders when we take trouble to identify them. (Applause)  Hon. Kyemba was identified by the former President, Milton Obote, when he had just completed his university studies in 1962, to serve as his Private Assistant. He was elevated to be his Principal Private Secretary until Obote was deposed. Hon. Kyemba became a Lango man and that is why he was very close to me – because he believed the people of Lango are nationalists. (Applause)  In the house of Obote, there were very few Lango – (Interjections) – not Langi; we call them “Lango”. There is no “Langi” in Lango. (Laughter)  We call them “Lango”.At that time, you would get Rugunda, Mutebile, including Museveni. He told me that Museveni did an interview in Public Service. He was identified to be a very intelligent and focused young person. He wanted to serve in the Foreign Service but was advised to go and serve in the Office of the President because President Milton Obote wanted intelligent, honest and clearheaded young people to join his office. (Applause) From that time, he advised me that if we are to be good leaders – (Interjection)-  I think you should listen to me today; if we want to be good leaders, we must learn to listen. 10743THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023He told me; the reason President Museveni has been in power for a long time is because he takes time to listen. You can tell him whatever you want but he will take his time to listen. The second point is that you must compromise. In humility, accept to lie low and allow for compromise. I would like to advise our brothers who are in the Opposition that this is the time for us to come together as Ugandans and discuss our issues here in Parliament. I would like to request my brother, who is chairing Parliament very well, the Deputy Speaker, to allow the Opposition time to speak because we want to hear what they would provide to this country. We discourage issues of mere politicking. Uganda is our country; we must serve it whether we are in the Opposition or Government. In conclusion, my elder brother, we thank you for your good service to this country. We thank you for being diligent, honest and loving the late President Milton Obote. The people of Lango will always remember you. Rest in peace. 4.22MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for having given me this opportunity to pay tribute to Mzee  Hon. Henry Kyemba. It has been a very long time since I watched a debate in this House, like today . (Applause)  I have been sitting here looking at all of you and I thought, “What bug is this that bites you and you do not speak like you are speaking today?” That anybody outside watching us, is looking at us with pride, saying that, “Those are the Members of Parliament.” Speaking about national issues; you are all speaking with one voice as leaders of this country. What goes wrong? Anyway, let me speak about Mzee  Kyemba. Mr Speaker, from my subregion, we donated one of our finest, lying there with impeccable integrity. Hon. Zijjan is baptising him “Mr No-Scandal.” Today, that is going to be a vocabulary, I am sure. Even on social media and in papers, you will hear “Mr No-Scandal.” When somebody dies, colleagues, when we are speaking, it is not about him; it is about us, whom he has left behind. What lessons do we pick out of his life? This politics of extremism – Mr Speaker, let me tell you a story: I sit in this particular seat because, in the Seventh Parliament, one person inspired me to sit here. He is the husband of that lady sitting there, Ms Tezira Wacha. This was Hon. Ben Wacha’s seat and that is why I occupy it. The shoes are too big, but I am trying. (Laughter) Just look at all of us and ask yourself, “20 years later, what will they be speaking about me in Parliament?”Let me speak about Hon. Kyemba but not others. He did serve the Obote regime. My late father was honoured to have served with him in the same office – the President’s Office. They had a difference of opinion which they never resolved because my father did not agree with him. I do not want to be cantankerous; according to Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, those who come from Busoga, and others are very cantankerous. I do not know where she characterises me; Whether I am one of the others or like Hon. Henry Kyemba, but I leave that to her judgement. The regime he served, subsequent to the Obote regime, was the Idi Amin Regime. We all know that it was the most problematic regime ever in the history of this country. How do you serve a problematic regime and live without a scandal? How? It is a lesson to us who serve regimes; do not associate yourself with the mistakes of the regime. That is why Hon. Henry Kyemba today, the testimony is; that even when he was serving Amin’s regime, he was saving lives like that of one of Mr “Smart” Ogwal. That is 10744TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAwhat is remembered. I see some of you trying to hide; it is wrong to hide a wrong. Please do not, for heaven’s sake. What they will be speaking about you is exactly that. If there is something going wrong in the country, we are all cooked as Ugandans. It takes sober voices, like the one of Hon. Kyemba to tell Amin “Please, there is this; why can’t you sort it out?” and a soul is saved. Regimes commit mistakes every other day but sober people in those regimes help. Sometimes they are overwhelmed and there is nothing you can do about it. However, if you are serving a regime and it is committing a mistake and you have a voice, please say, “This is wrong.” You may say it internally; you do not have to go in the newspapers or social media, but we expect you when you have an opportunity to point it out. How do you for heaven’s sake- Somebody saying one person has been kidnapped and you come to the House and say “No, it has not happened.” What is the difference between you and the one who served Amin and committed a crime? Honourable members, Hon. Kyemba was a great statesman. Why? Basoga can own him naturally because he came from our place. By the way, his first primary school - Rt Hon. Kadaga, was Busesa Primary School in Bugweri. The foundation of his education is Bugweri –(Laughter)-  and indeed, many of the big Basoga personalities, it is Bugweri-founded, including Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga; she is our daughter from Bugweri. We donated her to Kamuli - (Interjection) isn’t that so? Even Rt Hon. Nakadama is from Bugweri and we donated her to Mayuge - (Interjection)- Yes, ask her. She is from Buwooya and you can go on. Whether you are talking about Hon. Wanume Kibedi, Mr Luwuliza-Kirunda, Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, mention it –(Interjections)-  and yours truly, of course.  (Laughter) For us, at that time, Busesa Primary School produced some of the best and we are happy that we donated Hon. Henry Kyemba to this country. The testimony of non-Basoga because – Mr Speaker, 60 per cent of the people who have spoken today are non-Basoga; therefore, it ceases even to be a tribal issue. How many of you are beyond your small little tribes, and clans? Everybody wants to say, “I am a Musoga; I am a Munyankole ; I am Lango,” but it does not work in this Parliament. We should be saying, “We are Ugandans.” That is why that man managed to serve the Rotary movement – because it was “service beyond self.” In Rotary, they do not know their tribes and religions. That is why you see them as nationalists and statesmen. Hon. Kyemba was soft-spoken. By the way, he was not an orator but he was a communicator and very knowledgeable. That is an encyclopaedia lying in that coffin today. And my young brother, Hon. Nathan, has just talked about it; you could ask Henry Kyemba anything and he would have an answer. As a country, we have lost one of one of our finest. Hon. Kyemba, travel well and rest in peace. 4.31MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from the only school in this country called, Busoga College, Mwiri. On the 30th of September, we had a homecoming for old boys and that is a meeting where all old boys go to the school. In the announcement, they said, “Hon. Henry Kyemba is not going to be present today because he is not well.” Every time we were in Mwiri, he was present and the reason he came to Mwiri was to talk to the old boys. He said, “You need to be a Mwirian because Mwiri produces leaders.” It produces presidents, prime ministers, leaders of the Opposition, ministers and Permanent Secretaries. [Mr Katuntu]10745THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker, you missed being in Mwiri because you would have gone beyond this. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I thank you for supporting Hon. Kyemba to be here - Of course, there is someone asking, “Who are the Presidents, and ministers?” I will elaborate on them later. A leader like Hon. Kyemba is a rare species. If you read his biography, when he came back during the National Resistance Council, he became a councillor. When some Members of Parliament here walk, they even advertise on the roads that, “I am a Member of Parliament; I am honourable so-and-so.”  However, what are you doing to make you honourable?  Some of you need to copy people like Hon. Henry Kyemba. In fact, you need to come to Mwiri to study and know how leaders behave. My mother asked who the Mwiri boys are, but you just see them by face and how they talk. Mwiri boys are bright, intelligent, have integrity, are willing to help and have everything you need from any human being. Mama , when we saved your husband, it was Mwiri saving him because Mwiri’s motto says , “Kulwa Katonda N’Eggwanga Lyaffe” (“For God and our country.”) When the Prime Minister, who became the President of Uganda, Dr Milton Obote, was in Mwiri, he instead came and copied our motto and changed it from “our” to “my” country. In fact, Busoga College Mwiri should sue the Government of Uganda for having taken their motto without paying them. Why am I bringing that up? Mr Speaker, you can see such schools bring up people - where are they now? You have heard my mother, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal saying, “Mr Smart came from Lango in the village.” Nandala-Mafabi came from Busamaga in the village and they both went to Busoga College Mwiri, one of the top schools. Now, those top schools are no more. You have now created private schools that take children of those who have money and you are not educating leaders. You are now educating people to pass exams, businessmen, thieves, Enjaga  people, mention it. That is why when you go to their offices, they do not know how to write in English and cannot even pronounce their names. The death of Hon. Henry Kyemba should open the eyes of the Government of Uganda; that it is time to go back and review the education system, starting with those original schools, which would pick bright children from village schools. Even if you were in a village in Arua and you were very bright, you would pass and go to Kisubi or Teso College Aloet. However, where are they now? They are now on zero grazing. That is why you are coming up here to say that we should teach people patriotism because they do not know a Mugisu - if they are in Arua, they only know themselves because of “zero grazing”. When you go to Busoga College Mwiri, you will find a notice board showing you prominent people who have passed through the school. There are those who passed very well and became heads of schools and prefects. When you go there, of course, you will see our names there –(Interjection)-  yes, I can confirm you are one of them. (Laughter)  I can confirm that Hon. Kyemba is well-known and when he came to the school, he would talk to the boys about how to behave. Recently, in one of the meetings we held – Hon. Katuntu, you missed this one. We had the late Kirunda Kivejinja, Prof. George Kirya who was the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University and Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, who is also our product. When they came that day, unfortunately, COVID-19 hit us. We sang and they said, “I wish Uganda could bring their people to learn what the people in Mwiri learn.” I would like to ask those in Government that when you are in those offices, please remember that you will leave them one day. But when you leave, what have you left there? 10746TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAMr Speaker, I would like to conclude with this; when they had overthrown Amin, there was a man being hidden in one of my grandfather’s bedrooms. I would go there and I ask my grandfather, “Why is this man here?” He said, “Keep quiet. This man saved my sons. He is the one who made us get some sugar.” Of course, he was referring to my father and uncles, some of whom went into exile. I wish Gen. Moses Ali was present here because he would have testified to this. He further said, “Since he was in those offices and he is not one of those who participated in the killing, I have saved him. I am waiting for a way to take him out of this country.” Indeed, that gentleman was driven - My grandfather, unfortunately, never told me where he dropped him but later on, it was Gen. Moses Ali who told me that my grandfather saved one of them. Unfortunately, he is not well, but I would like to say, that those of you in those offices, use them to save others. Do not use them to prosecute and to kill others. When Hon. Henry Kyemba came back, Mama  Cecilia Ogwal saved our father, Mr Smart and we cannot say that he did wrong. It is God who told him to go back and save Mr Smart, among others. Therefore, we should pray for him that “God, if there is anything he has made which is not right, forgive him because he has been here for us.” Recently, when I met him in Dr Mutyabule’s hospital, he said, “Nandala, I need to meet you and give you more wisdom.” I said, “I thought I had wisdom.” He said, “You do not have everything.” Unfortunately, I did not get all of it.Therefore, I will look for Dr Mutyabule to tell me what knowledge he was supposed to give me. However, Hon. Kyemba has gone with knowledge. I hope the Basoga have got some of it. Some of us from Bugisu have got some of it and we will use his knowledge to develop this country. May God forgive him if he committed any sin. God, as he comes to You, welcome him because it is one-way traffic. We shall miss you, Henry. We love you but one day, we shall be together. May your soul rest in peace. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if you remember very well the issue of the traditional schools, Government brought a proposal which we supported tremendously as Parliament. We have been appropriating money for traditional schools and I hope Busoga College Mwiri   is one of them. If it has not benefitted, it should benefit because the money for revamping them is a credible amount; if it goes to a school, it makes an impact. 4.41MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to talk about the power of apology and the power of forgiveness. This was my circumstance with the late Henry Kyemba, the late Wanume Kibedi and the late Godfrey Lule. At that time Godfrey Lule was the Attorney-General in Idi Amin’s Government, Wanume Kibedi was the Minister of Foreign Affairs and I was a junior officer under him.Years later, when Wanume Kibedi was still alive and was the Chairman of the Immigration Board, he arranged for a meeting between Henry Kyemba and I so that he could apologise to me. I was astounded because when Henry Kyemba was promoting his book, “ A State of Blood”,  they messed me up. I was in Copenhagen heading the mission and they came to promote that book, “ A State of Blood”.  When one of the journalists asked him if he knew James Baba, He said, “Yes, I know him very well; he is one of the mass murderers in Uganda.”Kibedi said, “No, I was his minister.” Then Godfrey Lule said, “I am the Attorney-General, I knew all the State Research Bureau boys.”[Mr Nandala-Mafabi]10747THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023The following day, I made headlines in all newspapers; “James Baba, Ugandan envoy to Denmark, mass murderer.” The next day, the Minister of Foreign Affairs summoned me saying, “Baba, if this is true, we are going to ask you to leave.” I contacted my ministry and they linked me to the Solicitor-General, who was Mr Matovu. He told me to fly back to Uganda and we consult.Mr Matovu told me “These people are not after you, but Idi Amin,” adding that I should forget about that case. I said, “Sir, I respect your views but my name is already in the headlines, how will I move?” He said, “Okay, go and fight your case.” I went back to Denmark, sued them, won the case, got my US$ 14,000 and kept quiet after that. (Laughter)  Years later, I was appointed Minister of State for Internal Affairs and Wanume Kibedi was the Chairman of the Immigration Board. He said, “I want Kyemba, you and myself to meet and we discuss something.” I said, “I am available.” That was when he apologised to me.He said, “Baba, we did not intend to soil your name. Our job was to make sure that Amin’s Government was brought down. You were just a victim of circumstances.” I told him that I had forgotten about the issue and I forgave him unreservedly. Mr Speaker, today, I have forgiven Hon. Kyemba without reservations. (Applause)  My point is that when somebody acknowledges that he has wronged you and you know that he is telling the truth, you must forgive him. That is what I have done. Let us learn to forgive. Our history is very bad; many people died, others were kidnapped and suffered during Amin’s regime. I was a victim yet I come from Koboko - the same area as Idi Amin - and they used me to promote that book. However, that book did a great service to this country; it brought awareness to the whole world about the atrocities that was going on here. Possibly it contributed greatly to speeding up the fall of Idi Amin’s Government.Lastly, we still have a responsibility to find out the people responsible for the killings in this country. (Applause)  Profiling tribes that these are killers; Lango, Acholi and West Nilers is not enough. We must go into detail about the actual killers who killed people in this country and stop the profiling. Mr Speaker, we must learn to forgive if somebody wrongs us. Thank you very much.  (Applause)4.41THE MINISTER,  OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Lumumba) : Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for according us time to talk about our brother, parent and grandparent. Honourable members have talked about the late Henry Kyemba, but I would like to bring out something that has not been said yet.When we were growing up and after university, when I went back to work in my home area, Bugiri District, there was a very beautiful, elegant and smart lady, who used to come with NGOs in our area to show us how to work because it was a new district. She would have side sessions with us, young girls who had left the university and opted to work in the villages because, at that time, most girls wanted to work in Kampala. This lady created time and taught us how to speak, how to make your point clear and develop yourself as an individual, combine your office and work and be happy as a young mother or woman. That is Janet Kyemba.She came with very many NGOs, took up the responsibility of coordinating with them to work in Busoga and led them to where there was need. I am your product and I would like to thank you. That is also a sign that she had a husband who sacrificed in order for her to execute her office work because at that time, he had just 10748TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAleft politics. However, he would stay home, and gave her the opportunity to serve the community to which they belonged. I want to thank him, because not many men can do that.I would also like to bring out the issue Hon. Baba talked about – the issue of forgiveness. Hon. Baba, on behalf of us Basoga and Busoga, thank you for forgiving our great father, our great leader.I say this because he had equally forgiven the same subregion which you come from and our former President Idi Amin Dada, because it was during his leadership in this country that Hon. Henry Kyemba’s brother Lume Kisadha disappeared. His son is in the gallery but he cannot give accountability even to the grandchildren because he disappeared and yet he had a job in Nytil as a store manager. The story did not come out clear; what was the cause? Was it because of politics, the job he was doing? Because at that time, being a manager of a store meant that you could influence things by opening and things are carried to support a particular individual especially in politics.However, he forgave them, the President and he painfully went and worked with President Idi Amin because he had a mission to accomplish. God wanted to use him for certain things so that people would benefit. I thank Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for telling us that and we appreciate it, as Busoga. When it comes to issues to do with family, Hon. Kyemba was from a very rich family. His father Suleiman Kisadha was an administrator of the Gombolola called Mayuge. That means, right from that time the family had money. For those of you who have just seen money, we saw the family of Mwami  Kisadha with money in Busoga. When his brother Nathan James Nabeta would go to the Bank of Baroda to bank, that day they would lock the whole branch because a rich man in Jinja, a brother to Hon. Henry Kyemba called Nathan James Nabeta, the father to Hon. Nathan Igeme Nabeta had gone to bank. Despite the fact that they were educated and had money, they remained humble in the community. How many of us would carry both education and money and remain humble wherever we are? Let us pick lessons. You have the money; it is yours and not for everybody; keep it to yourself. Yes, you went to school; use your education to help the community as you help yourself.You do not have to throw around yourself because you carry money and degrees. We should learn from them; humility is very important. By the way, being humble is not simple; it means that you have to sacrifice and make sure you register within your mind to remain humble in the community because that is what it is looking for.Being arrogant and braggart is not useful to the community and that is not what you would want the children of others to learn from you. So, we take it from them as a family that their grandparents and parents taught them to be humble. It also brings in the issue of reading and being informed before you talk, and talk when you must. Mzee  Henry Kyemba talked less but because he talked less, we are here seated and all want to talk about him, not because he talked much. He only talked when he was supposed to talk and he would have sense in what he was saying. There was a message, and that is why we are here to say, “I have this to talk about him.” Are we all the same, in our era of politics of showbiz? I sometimes say politics of celebrity, talking because you have to but are you communicating? Is there a message you are carrying?I call on Members in this House to carry important messages to the people whenever we stand up to speak. And if you do not have anything to communicate, I would request that [Ms Lumumba]10749THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023we keep quiet and only communicate when we have a message to pass to people. Lastly, whenever we had issues as people in Busoga, when Hon. Henry Kyemba had retired, he would take off time to call you to his house and he offers you food, drinks and the message was, “Please you are the people who are in leadership now. You are carrying our flag out there in the country, as Basoga, make sure you do not do...” He would tell you the dos and the don’ts and very few people will do that for people who are not their biological children. He would ask you, “What is this happening? Can you please play your part well?”When I was appointed NRM Secretary-General, he called me to his house and he told me, “People are always insulting, talking this about President Idi Amin, nothing good. They always talk about the bad things.” Make sure you do not say anything bad about him because it is your responsibility to mobilise in West Nile; he was their son. If you said it in Kampala, when you go there, they will not receive you.”He told me that; “When it comes to Dr Milton Obote, they will say this and that. But please do not talk because that will not enable you to do your work of mobilisation.” I carried that and it helped me. So, for those of you who are aspiring for something beyond your constituency, when you are making submissions here, speak knowing that you might go to that place years to come to request for support but they will still remember what you said about them. Always be careful, speak today what you can defend tomorrow; I learnt this from Hon . Kyemba. He has helped his family, in the subregion of Busoga, Uganda and that is why when Hon. Nabeta was speaking here - the children are all over the world because he was destined to serve the whole world. Destine yourself to serve the whole word. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 4.57MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, thank you, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the fallen gallant son of Africa, the icon of Uganda and beyond.At first when you chose me but then took a decision later that we first hear from the people who served with Hon. Kyemba, it was a right decision and it brings me back to our Parliament which you preside. There is a lot that we miss from colleagues especially our brothers and sisters who have been in this Parliament and even the young Members of Parliament because of the two minutes that are given to Members of Parliament. How I wish that we are given enough time to talk about ourselves and our people and the constituencies that we represent here. Hon. Kyemba was a humble servant of the people. I did not serve with him but I have heard many people talk about him. The subregion where I come from is mourning, but again when we sat here to listen to what Hon. Kyemba did, it comforted us; that today we are sending off a person who served the nation without any scandal. How I wish, in my prayer, that you grant that – the knowledge we are talking about him - we declare a day for a public lecture in his memory such that these good stories and the legacy that he has left behind can always be remembered, even by our grandsons and granddaughters.Mr Speaker, one thing that has not been talked about Hon. Kyemba is that he used to love sports. He was a sportsman. You cannot be smart if you do not love sports. In Busoga, where I come from, there is Bugembe Stadium. I wish the Government could take over that stadium in his memory. I am not demanding so much for the recognition of the person lying here before us.Honourable Members, I would like to thank you because less than 10 per cent of us served 10750TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAwith Hon. Kyemba, yet you have offered your time to sit here and listen to what is being said about this gallant son of Africa.I thank you, Mr Speaker and the Government of Uganda for offering our father a befitting send-off. On behalf of the people of Bunya County South, I would like to say this: may his soul rest in eternal peace.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Esther Mbayo, Hon. Bagiire – honourable colleagues, I see most of you making signs for me to pick you. Some are sending – it seems you just want to speak and go out and leave me here. (Laughter)  Otherwise, why are you rushing? We usually have two hours to pay tribute. I intentionally moved this session from 10.00 a.m. to 2.00 p.m. to give the late a minimum of four hours in this Parliament. (Applause) Bear with me and we push on up to around 5.45 p.m. or 6.00 p.m. so that most of you can contribute. (Applause)However, let us be conscious of time. Hon. Mbayo?5.02MS ESTHER MBAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me join the rest of my colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to a gallant son of Uganda who has lived a life worth celebrating. On behalf of the people of Luuka, I send my heartfelt condolences to the family of Hon. Kyemba, the people of Busoga, the Kyabazinga of Busoga and the Government of Uganda. I would also like to thank the President of Uganda for according Hon. Kyemba an official burial. Hon. Kyemba was an icon, a true statesman, patriot and politician with a very unique and humble character that made him serve in three governments, some of which were very hostile and difficult.Hon. Kyemba’s maternal grandfather, Daudi Mutekanga, was my maternal great-grandfather. When I was appointed as a Minister in charge of the Presidency, Hon. Kyemba felt as though they had appointed his own. He called me, with love and humour, to his home to take me through what is entailed in the Presidency. He, indeed, told me the dos and don’ts of the Presidency. Among others, he told me to respect authority and never to fight useless wars, but to concentrate on doing my assignments well.Mr Speaker, the discussion I had with Hon. Kyemba included the story about when he went to Singapore with then President Dr Milton Obote in a delegation of 30 officials. At that time, he was the Principal Private Secretary (PPS) to the President. While they were in Singapore, the Government was toppled and it was he who whispered to the President: “Your Government has been toppled”. Gaining such courage to tell the Head of State: “You have been overthrown!” He told me that they did not think about what to do next until they heard a pronouncement that President Idi Amin Dada had allowed the officials who had gone with Dr Milton Obote to return, but not Dr Milton Obote.When he came back, he was taken to meet President Gen. Idi Amin Dada. They had a meeting and after the meeting, Gen. Idi Amin told him to go and occupy his office, where he would meet him. However, he said: “Your Excellency, I do not have an office because I was the PPS to the former President.” That was when Gen. Idi Amin told him: “You are now the PPS to me.” He was later appointed the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the Ministry for Culture. He had an assignment to organise a graduation ceremony at Nsamizi Institute for Social Development. The one who was supposed to officiate at that function was the then minister, the late Hon. Josephat Engu. However, a day before the function, an announcement was made that that minister, together with others, had been dropped. Hon. Kyemba gathered the courage to call the State House and talk to President Idi Amin Dada. He said: “Your Excellency, tomorrow we have a function and I do not know who is going to officiate because the [Mr Isabirye]10751THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023minister has been dropped.” He told me that Idi Amin told him: “You are now the Minister for Culture. You have to take over and officiate at the function.” (Laughter)  That is how he got his position. I think it was because of his humble way of doing things.He told me of how he became the Minister of Health, how he went into exile and how he came back to join the NRM Government. Mr Speaker, the time came when I felt that Hon. Kyemba had told me enough and I wanted to leave. He said: “Mama , don’t go. I still need you; I still want to talk to you.” In his sitting room, there were newspapers pinned all over – where he was presiding over functions and where he was attending international engagements. He told me about them, one by one. I had to stay with him for the next two hours. When I told him that I wanted to go, he held my hand and said: “I wish you the best but the office you are occupying needs somebody who is patient. You do not need to talk a lot. You need to say a few words, perform and be perfect.” I have lost a brother, mentor and everything. May the good Lord lead your way as you join Him. Rest in peace, my brother.  (Applause)5.09MR AGGREY BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion of paying tribute to our gallant elder, leader, comforter and guide, who came out with all his best to serve this country. I met Hon. Kyemba when I was a young boy in Kiira College Butiki, in 1989. He came to school on sports day, and most of the students had gone to the playground. I was the games prefect, and I was engaged with some of the members of staff before going to the playground. As I came out, I saw a sleek car parked in front of the administration block. I walked straight to the vehicle. A policeman came out of the car and opened for a decently dressed gentleman. I had not known or met Hon. Kyemba. We had been told to welcome visitors – so I had moved to welcome him but when I saw a policeman, I stood at a distance. When he came out, he called me and said, “Young man, who are you?” I introduced myself to him. He asked me: “Is the Headmaster in the office”. I said, “No, but the Deputy Headteacher is in”. Mr Speaker, Hon. Kyemba held me by the hand, walked with me up to the veranda, and we chatted for 15 minutes. At that point, he told me he was the Minister of State for Animal Industry and Fisheries. Hon. Kyemba told me to wait for him because he was not going to engage the Deputy Head Teacher for long. As I waited anxiously outside, I thought Hon. Kyemba was going to give me money. (Laughter)  This was because that was my second encounter with a minister. In 1981, I encountered Hon. Sam Tewungwa who was my father’s personal friend. I waited anxiously for Hon. Kyemba because Hon. Tewungwa used to give me a lot of money whenever he came home. When he came out, he told the Deputy Head Teacher - “I see a potential in this young man. How do you elect prefects in this school?” The Deputy Head Teacher said, “We appointed them.” Hon. Kyemba said, “I think you appointed the right person. He asked me: What sport do you play?” I told him the kinds of sports I played, and he asked if I was going to run to which I replied, “Yes”. So, he said, “I am offering to drive you in my car.” It was a black Nissan Laurel. Mr Speaker, I sat in the Nissan Laurel and was driven down to the college playground. I came out a very victorious man. (Laughter)  Hon. Kyemba, the humorous man told the police officer to open the car door for me. He got out and walked with me to the playground. He asked me, “Of the races that you are going to participate in, which one is your best?” I told him; my best was 400 metres relay. He said, “I want to see you run.” He begged humorously that the 400 metres relay, which I was involved 10752TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAin be brought forward – otherwise, we would start with long track events. By God’s grace, I was the best. (Laughter)  I remember, Hon. Kyemba pulled out Shs 1,000 and gave it to me. I had a field day that month because it was a lot of money. After about three weeks, my head teacher, Mr Isabirye Aga, came to class looking for me, with a dozen books which Hon. Kyemba had sent to me. He picked interest in me. After the holidays, I told my dad about the kind gesture he had extended to me, and my dad told me stories about Kyemba. That was when I heard about the book he had written called “A State of Blood” . I learnt a lot about what he had done to liberate this country. Mr Speaker, when I joined politics later on, I caught up with Hon. Kyemba. Hon. Daudi Migereko took me to meet him at Crested Crane Hotel. I reminded him of what he had done for me at school, and he remembered instantly. We picked it up from there, and he continued to be an advisor. He was a very humorous person. When I became a minister, he did not have my number. However, Hon. Daudi Migereko told me - “Hon. Kyemba wants to talk to you. This is his number.  Call him”. He was excited when I was appointed and he told me this - “I saw this in you, and God has made it. I continue to pray for you. I worked in the ministry where you have been appointed. You are following in my footsteps. Serve with diligence. Do not be corrupt. Do not steal. You will get money at an appropriate time. Respect the staff. Love them. Like them. Work with everybody. Your approach must be vertical and horizontal.” These were the words of the man lying here.In the interest of time, I would like to say that this country has lost somebody who virtually knew everything in its history. If you wanted to get, or understand anything about this country, one of the right people to ask was this man lying here. This country has lost one of the finest that has ever graced it - (Member timed out.)5.18THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I speak on behalf of the disability fraternity who live in Jinja, to pay tribute to Hon. Kyemba. We condole with the family, the people of Busoga, and with the whole country. Mr Speaker, under the leadership of Rt Hon. Kadaga- I was greatly involved in the Busoga issues. I had an opportunity to meet the gentleman we are talking about today but before I go there, Hon. Kyemba, was the Minister of Health and my mother was a nurse. Much as I recognise the government of UPC, which built the hospitals, it was under his leadership that these hospitals were commissioned and it was the first time I saw a minister.I was a young girl and those days when the President was coming, children were put on the road to line up to welcome him, to welcome a minister and ministers were ministers. (Laughter)  I want to tell you, we were in Bugiri, and my mother was transferred to that hospital and those hospitals are many, Itojo, and others, those were hospitals built all over Uganda, under the supervision of Hon. Kyemba, under the wrong time of Iddi Amin but I am telling you, the hospitals were sparkling, they were smart. He was not moving around as a minister but his administration was felt even when he was not there. You find the nurses saying, if Kyemba comes - nobody would steal medicine, nobody would do anything bad. The hospitals, right from the kitchen, were smart and food would be given there. That was the administrator, in the man called Henry Kyemba. How many of us emulate that? These days, as ministers, with due respect to the ministers, we want to be everywhere. How do you put in the system, which people will feel that you are there when you are not even there? I want to give him credit. It is a lesson I learned. [Mr Bagiire]10753THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023I saw a man who was very smart and those days when you saw a minister, you would admire him and when he was smart, smart in his body, smart in the brain. When he welcomed Amin - let me tell you, Amin also had a good step, much as we talk about his bad things, he was also a smart man. I am telling you, when they were walking, you would say, is this what power means? That was power at that time. I respect this gentleman lying here. When he was the president of Rotary, he met me and said, “You are a member of Parliament for People with Disabilities and you know, sometimes we give out things like wheelchairs. Would it be okay for me to invite you to one of our meetings?” I asked which type of meeting. So, when he explained, I found a man who was a nationalist, he was not thinking about Busoga only but about every person. This man is a great man, a rich man but even a person like Asamo, who is disabled? He would still walk to you and talk to you in a very polite way. He would come smiling and when you looked at him, you wondered, “Does he want to talk to me?” He would say, “Honourable, can I know who you are?” By the time you explained, he was already giving you a way of wanting to support the people you represent. That is the great man we have here. As we sit here talking, Hon. Kyemba is not hearing. Many people have talked, but as members of Parliament, we need each other. Whether you are in the Opposition, whether you are an independent, or whether you are in NRM, anything can happen. We need to work together. Sometimes, we give a bad picture out there and people look at us and say, what type of Parliament is this? Even if it is one person. In my tribe, we are told, “One frog can spoil all the water in the lake”. How I wish we emulate Henry Kyemba and get lessons that will make his memory be remembered in this country. I say all this in the memory of my own mother. He was a very good minister during that time and I want to say, rest in peace, our elder. We shall always remember you, until we meet again. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Mao,  Hon.  Ekanya, Hon. Taaka, Hon. Bwiire -  Please, honourable colleagues, I am choosing honourable members, I am not choosing strangers. So, if I pick a Member, and I hear you saying-5.24THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Norbert Mao):  Mr Speaker, this is one of those moments when I wish I were not an ex-officio Member of Parliament, so that when the question is put, I would shout the loudest. Unfortunately, I am silenced by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. We should not reduce Hon. Henry Kyemba to the size of a school, to the size of a clan, to the size of a community. We only make those references because everything has a credo. We talk about Jesus of Nazareth, but he was not about Nazareth and his mission was universal. Just like the mission of Prince Henry Kyemba was national, Pan-African and global. Many will talk about the offices of distinction that he held but running through all those offices is one thing, Mr Speaker, it comes down to character. That is what the measure of the man is.We condole with the family, we condole with the Government of Uganda and the President, we condole with Parliament, we condole with the whole of Uganda and all the friends. We celebrate his achievements and in doing that, let us talk about his roots, and how he was formed. What was he made of? How did he view himself and how did he view the world? In the city of Jinja where I grew up and spent many happy years as a child, there is a road called Lubas Road; it was a famous road, which had two cinemas. Those who know, know. 10754TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAThere was also a very well-known law firm where I did my internship, Mutyabule Kisadha and Company Advocates. That is where my story and connection with Hon. Henry Kyemba begins because Senior Counsel Elijah Mutyabule Kisadha was my professional mentor. He carried himself the very way Hon. Henry Kyemba carried himself, with dignity. You only needed to look at him and ask, who is that? There are those who you look at and you want to know who they are, somehow, whether they hold any office or not. Lubas Road is also named after Chief Luba of the Bunya Chiefdom in Busoga. As you may know, Chief Luba is the one whose name is indelibly associated with the murder of Bishop Hannington, reportedly on the orders of Kabaka Mwanga. Perhaps you need to know that Chief Luba was Hon. Henry Kyemba’s grandfather. He used to joke that because of the notoriety of the murder of Bishop Hannington, their family had to do something spectacular, so they produced a bishop as a way of making amends with the Church and perhaps God. Hon. Baba, your amends came much later perhaps; the amends were already done in the bigger platform.He exuded integrity. Of course, integrity has many definitions but mine is that “Integrity means doing what is right rather than what is convenient.” What is convenient is usually the things, which will bring applause. What is right is not really convenient because it may attract insults, sometimes. I am sure he is going to be scrutinised forever, but you cannot understand something unless you understand it in its very context. Americans celebrate George Washington, but they do not know that he owned slaves. Therefore, you must understand the man in the context of his times. What would you do?  In relation to the choices he made, we can only say “ judge not that you may not be judged”.  He had discipline, a very good time keeper and he had humility- we all know that. He was willing to talk to all of us as Hon. Okot Ogong said. He taught many of us how to be Members of Parliament. Some of us came here with flaming swords like live conductors to electrocute everything that we would come across here. Some of us came with very unpopular messages. Mr Speaker, I may be on record as probably the most bullied MP in the record of Parliament. Every time I opened my mouth, it was as if I was saying something that people did not want to hear. For example, I would propose “talk to Joseph Kony” oooh; this and that. Then when you say “Give amnesty or return multi-partism,” you would hear “no, never”, but you must listen to that voice inside you. That was what was referred to here as “conscience.” After all, some things change and some do not change. Therefore, you are better off fixing your eye on the things that you know will never change.He had courage. There are two types of courage - there is physical courage as in facing physical danger but there is even the tougher kind of courage, which is moral courage, which simply means taking a stand. That book was banned in Uganda; those who were alive know that. “A State of Blood ” was banned because it said things, which the Government did not want revealed. As I close, Mr Speaker, and in the spirit of peering beyond the horizons in our country, it is hurting, it needs reconciliation- not reconciliation between two people but reconciliation between the building blocks that make Uganda. If you are lost, you go back to a familiar place.Those of us who took long to come to Kampala, knew, for instance, the Post Office. Therefore, if you get lost, you ask “Where is the Post Office?” even if that is not where you are going, you were assure that from the Post Office, you can find your way. Therefore, let us go back to the Constitution because that should be the real point of departure because that is the consensus on which we are building ourselves. [Mr Mao]10755THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023I beg to disagree with those who are talking about “scandal or no scandal.” In this world, there is something called “Redemption.” Peter who formed the foundation of the Church was very scandalous and he committed a real scandal of denying Jesus. Paul whom we quote every day in the Bible was full of scandals. Let us realise that nations are built because of a commitment to renewal. A nation can renew itself. Every institution can renew itself and sometimes, it is those very people whom you think fall below the standards that may come and do the right things. How could De Klerk, the leader of the party of Apartheid be the one to partner with Mandela ? How did Moi become the architect of the new Constitution of Kenya? I was there when he was being bullied but he did it. Therefore, even if we criticised those who are battling on the fronts of national renewals, and they may have checkered records, and may be doing things that we disapprove of strongly, nevertheless, we must not lose sight of the fact that it is possible to have renewal. (Member timed out.)  If we do not, Mr Speaker, as a place-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Hon. Mao, you first seek permission; we do not just switch on ourselves. Just conclude, please.MR MAO : You know, we were taught that when the Speaker is speaking, you must sit down. That is why I was heading to my seat though I see that this does not happen here these days.Mr Speaker, there is a danger in this country that the past is being glorified, particularly by those who never lived in that past. We went to primary schools, which were closed so that we could go and witness firing squads. We were children and an Army jeep would come and close the school and say, “There is an important event taking place, come and witness it”. We lived washing clothes with paw-paw leaves because there was no soap. Mr Speaker and dear friends, in the words of a wise man, “Let us not open war between the past and the present” otherwise, we shall lose the future. The future is bright and Uganda can be renewed. When I see people thinking that Iddi Amin could be an alternative to the present, I shudder to think of that. However bad the President may be in your view, please, do not even think about those days. We should not stigmatise the community from where Iddi Amin came from. We must base our judgements on the philosophy of “Individual responsibility for individual crimes.” Every tribe produces good and bad people. I never get tired of saying that we may have produced the likes of Joseph Kony, but we also produced Janan Luwum. How do you reconcile that?Thank you, Mr Speaker.5.37MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Henry Kyemba lying here has had an impact on the lives of many. A lot has been said and a lot will be said. However, from my standpoint, upon completing Makerere University, I tried to get jobs but luck was not on my side.I ventured to say that there is a tribe in Uganda that lacks literature and that tribe was the Basoga. In 1997, I went to offices and interacted with the Rt Deputy Prime Minister, Hon. Alitwaala Rebecca Kadaga, I met the late Hon. Basoga Nsadhu, I interacted with the late Hon. Henry Kyemba and I told them “You are a powerful community but you do not have a newspaper.” They encouraged me and gave me the fire and the zeal to start that newspaper.The Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister seated here sent the late Basoga Nsadhu to launch the Lusoga newspaper and I was the Executive Director in Jinja. I thank Hon. Henry Kyemba who is lying here and Mama Janet. Kodeyo . No wonder Hon. Nabeta, a year later, started a media radio called Kodeyo,  the foundation that Henry carried and moved forward. Mr Speaker, to cut the long story short - we can talk until the cows come home. The point I want to draw close to is that from that Lusoga newspaper, I would come to the gallery here 10756TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBAlike a journalist and I got inspired and motivated to become a member of Parliament. I said, “If these Members of Parliament talk like this, I think if I get the opportunity, I will be better.” The opportunity came in 1998 during the youth elections. I went to the young people and told them, “I am going to be a better Member of Parliament because every day, I am in the Public Gallery and I know what happens.” That propelled me to victory. However, that was not enough. During that campaign, I went to Hon. Henry and Mama  Janet over there and others. They supported me and I got votes in Busoga. (Applause)Recently, in 2001, I was faced with a challenge - like climbing a mountain - the late Hon. Henry Kyemba was so close to the Late Ateker Ejalu and Paul Etyang, the then Deputy Prime Minister. The Late Etyang was the one who came from the constituency in which I had an interest. I consulted the late Hon. Henry Kyemba and he told me, “We have talked to our colleague and we need to retire, but I do not know whether he will. I give you the blessing. I am going to retire, so try your luck. God will be with you.” Hon. Henry, my family, my generation and I will forever be indebted to you. In this country, we lack one important thing - we need to enact the National Cemetery Act so that men like Hon. Henry Kyemba are not buried in the village where they were born. This is because, in 150 years, the children of this country need to know that we had men like Hon. Henry Kyemba. In 50 years to come, those memorial sites will disappear. Mr Speaker, I therefore, commit myself to come to your office to ensure that we bring a Bill called, “The National Cemetery Bill” and create a memorial that will last for generations. I thank you. May his soul rest in peace. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I am trying to give – and I want to be honest – Members of Parliament from Busoga- I will give them an opportunity to speak.5.42MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am honoured to pay tribute to this great father. I bring condolences from Bugiri to Mama , my sisters and brothers, and all the people of Busoga and Uganda at large. I learnt of the death of Hon. Kyemba a few days ago. I only knew that he was an uncle to Hon. Nabeta. However, having read about him, when I saw that he had been honoured with a state burial, I decided to take an interest in reading about he. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Official burial.MS TAAKA : Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I read about Hon. Kyemba, I learnt of a man who had served our country from my region and I felt the pain of loss.We have been in a kind of fragile relationship in Busoga, as leaders from the grassroots and at the national level. I always think that we need some senior people - and I do not know where they are - to come in and make the centre hold. I feel that we have lost somebody who would be of great importance to us, not only Busoga as a region but even as a country. Right now, there is debate on a lot of factions and I do not want to repeat what Hon. Mao has said but we are somewhere around where we need to transform to somewhere where we do not know. I request that we have a profile of our elders; national leaders and former national leaders but elders from every region who will be at the forefront as our consultants so that we are able to sail through this period that we are in. As I conclude, Hon. Kyemba was a family man and I commend him and Mama  for nurturing their children well. You heard Hon. Nabeta introducing most of these people coming from the UK, and wherever, but when [Mr Ekanya]10757THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023you look at them, they depict people who were well nurtured. The way they are dressed - most of us as modern parents - Sometimes we have failed at it. For instance, you see our children at graduation ceremonies moving in skimpy clothes. Even at certain ceremonies like this, when a parent has passed on, you could see how somebody has presented themselves and you look down to them as an African. Thank you, Hon. Kyemba. May your soul rest in peace. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I am one of the beneficiaries of the generosity of that family because Hon. Nathan Nabeta has been my great brother, even before I became a Member of Parliament. Then, after, of course, I met Alfred and Syria who have also been very good friends. Therefore, I have benefited from the generosity of the family. It is a great family. (Applause)5.46MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the elders speak for many minutes, for me who is averagely aged, I have to speak for a few minutes. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for respecting Hon. Kyemba, allowing his body to be brought to Parliament and we eulogise together. I am new in Parliament but while we were waiting to receive the body of the late Hon. Henry Kyemba in the morning, you took a few minutes to arrive. My colleague whispered to me and said, “The Speaker has delayed. I hope we shall not get the same shock as when one person died and the Speaker almost failed to appear.” Therefore, when you arrived, I was really energised. Secondly, when you extended the time of discussion from two hours to five or six hours, I assure you that Hon. Kyemba is looking at you and appreciating you. You have all the blessings. (Applause)   Mr Speaker, in 2010, I was a political assistant to Hon. Gagawala Wambuzi, who is my political father. One time, we went to his house in Jinja because there was a very contentious issue in Busoga. When we sat with this man, I felt privileged to sit together with an icon of wisdom at the same table. The counsel he gave us cooled my temper because at that time, I was also angry. Before we left, he asked me, “Young man, what do you do?” I explained to him. He gave me a book titled “A Leader Without a Title”. The second person who has ever given me that book is the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. When I won the elections, the same Hon. Gagawala took me to his place and told me, “You now have a challenge because your district has only one kilometre of tarmac. Go there and represent the people.” When a dead body is lying before you, you should never tell a lie. I have been very quiet here; most of the words that have been spoken by all Members are the truth about Hon. Kyemba. I would like to testify to you that this man has been one of the few pillars and elders of Busoga but he did not at any one-time influence who should be elected in any constituency or who should be the mayor of any municipality.The man has now left us. Hon. Kyemba, I would like to report to you that we are scared because some elders who have big offices are coming for our positions. I request that you appear to them and continue counselling them. (Laughter)  Thank you very much. May your soul rest in eternal peace.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see you have started giving assignments to the departed. (Laughter)  I do not know how the answers will come. However, it will take both sides, as leaders from Busoga, to work together. It is about the country; it is about your region, so work together. (Applause)Honourable colleagues, you have noted the issue of time. Let us do this quickly. 10758TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. HENRY K. M. KYEMBA5.51MR HENRY-MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It did not require anybody to either work or stay with the late Hon. Kyemba to admire and copy the best that everybody testified, wrote and knew about the smiling icon of the leadership of this country. I was in Busoga College Mwiri for six years but there was not a single day, when we had a big function, that the head teacher or anybody who came from outside the school would fail to talk about the late Kyemba. That is the man lying there. He was a passionate Rotarian whom everybody admired; the one who had a deep sense of patriotism and practical commitment to the principles of justice, equity and balanced development who was very committed to give hope and put a smile on many faces of the unprivileged. Mr Speaker, we lose a generation. I heard Maama  Cecilia Ogwal talking about the late Aggrey Awori. Between 1957 and 1962, Makerere University had a generation of a team that shaped the politics of this country. We should emulate the late Hon. Kyemba and the late Hon. Aggrey Awori. We had Hon. Wanume Kibedi, Hon. Mayanja Nkangi, Mr Abubaker Kakyama Mayanja, Hon. Adoko Nekyon, Mr Akena Adoko, Hon. Mathias Ngobi, Mr David Lumu, to mention, but a few. That was the generation; they shaped the politics of this country. Where are we? Hon. Henry Kyemba was God-given. If you trace the history of the late Hon. Kyemba, he survived two assassination attempts. There was the one in Lugogo, when he was with the President and the one in December 1969, when he was coming back from Port Bell with the then Vice President, Mr John Babiiha. Many people died but he survived that time. Mr Speaker, this was God’s message that Hon. Henry Kyemba was here to save many lives –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sorry, honourable colleagues. You have been complaining that I give you a short time. I gave you time today but you all want to speak. Do you now understand why I usually give you a few minutes? No, the family needs to take the body.5.55 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (COOPERATIVES) (Mr Fredrick Gume): Mr Speaker, I stand to bid farewell to the late Hon. Kyemba, who I refer to as a very unique politician. Suffice to note that while Hon. Kyemba was a minister in this Government, at the same time, I was the district chairperson of Jinja and we are also neighbours. That is why I have been requesting for an opportunity to at least say a word of farewell to him. I thank my sister, Hon. Kyemba’s wife, Janet, the children and all those who have looked after him.It is also common knowledge that Hon. Kyemba served this country at the district local government level. He later on served as a Principal Private Secretary to the first Executive Prime Minister in 1962, and in the same capacity, to the first Executive President for a record time of nine years. He also served other amazing years because he served that time under President Idi Amin, both as a Principal Private Secretary and minister. His services to President Obote, President Idi Amin and the current Government qualified him to be referred to as a politician of unique character. He saw and did it all.The other aspect is that he used the power of a pen in his book, “The State of Blood”,  to educate the whole world on the social, economic and political turmoil in Uganda at the time. In my district chairmanship, I respected him because he understood the decentralisation policy in detail. I used to consult him quite often while I was the district chairperson of Jinja. When he retired, he retired to a quiet life. He was not antagonistic, but consultative. [Mr Kibalya]10759THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 24 OCTOBER 2023I, therefore, have little reason not to name him as one of those who contributed to the liberalisation of this country. He is gone, but any critic should let him rest in peace because he can no longer defend himself. Thank you.Rest in peace, Hon. Kyemba. (Applause)5.57MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Oyam District, the UPC party in the Parliament of Uganda and on my own behalf, I join my honourable colleagues in paying tribute to the deceased before us for the tremendous work that he did for this country, which has left a very rich legacy. Mr Speaker, it is memorable to note that the deceased had first been appointed by the late President, Dr Apollo Milton Obote and in his service, as the Assistant Private Secretary and the Principal Private Secretary, he worked tremendously well. This is a true testament of how the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) Government identified and mentored leaders who did not shame this country. I believe that we have a lot to learn from this identification of cadres. Furthermore, Mr Speaker, a man lying before us, worked with a lot of dignity and patriotism. He was an outstanding leader and because of that I would like to extend my sincere gratitude as a UPC Whip to the deceased and his family for standing with our founding father of this country and the UPC party President, Dr Apollo Milton Obote.Finally, allow me to join colleagues in thanking him for being who he was and urge my honourable colleagues to learn from him as leaders. Thank you, very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I now put the question that the motion to pay tribute to the late Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba, former minister and distinguished civil servant be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Motion adopted. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, please extract the resolution and transmit it to the family together with the Hansard  so that they can have a true record of what transpired. Honourable members, I am sorry for not being able to pick you. Maybe we needed another three or more hours. I can see disappointed faces but we had to end somewhere. Tomorrow, I will start with those I did not pick today.  The East African Community AnthemThe National Anthem(Exit of the late Hon. Henry Kisadha Magumba Kyemba.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.(The House rose at 6.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 October 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)