Wednesday, 2 October 2013 

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, in chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is not properly constituted. There is a Member whose membership of the House has been temporarily suspended but he is in the House, so the House is not properly constituted; we cannot proceed until he is out of the Chambers. I am referring to hon. Ssemuju Nganda, Member of this House, who has been suspended. This House is suspended for ten minutes.

(The House was suspended at 2.32 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.05 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As earlier instructed and communicated both in writing and orally on the Hansard, the honourable member has declined to do so; I hereby order the Sergeant-at-Arms to get the honourable member out of the Chambers. 

(Member ejected from the Chamber.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is now properly constituted, so we can start business. 

With great pleasure, I would like to announce that one of our own, Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta, has been appointed a member of the Advisory Group of the United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund in New York. This appointment has been communicated to the House, to the Speaker. We would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the honourable member for his appointment and recognition this time not only by Uganda but by the whole world. Congratulations. 

Honourable members, I will amend the Order Paper; I will move forward item No.10 to come immediately after item No.4. This is a matter on the petition of the traders of South Sudan. This matter can be sorted out quickly. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Sezi P. Mbaguta): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a statement on the payment of emoluments and benefits to the former Vice-President and the former Prime Minister. The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act 2010 provides for the salaries, allowances and benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister while in office and upon ceasing to hold office in accordance with Articles 106,108 and 108A of the Constitution . 

On Wednesday, 28 August 2013, Parliament requested the Ministry of Public Service to present a statement on the progress made so far by the ministry in providing the entitlement for the former Vice-President and the former Prime Minister. This statement relates to following former leaders: Her Excellency Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, the former Vice-President from 1994 to 2003; His Excellency Professor Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya, the former Vice-President from 2003 to 2011; and the Rt Hon Professor Apolo Nsibambi, former Prime Minister from 1999 to 2011. 

Benefits to the above former leaders are listed in the 8th and 11th schedules of the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister’s Act 2010, which I hereby lay on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is already an Act of Parliament.

MRS SEZI: Action Taken: The following are the steps that have been taken by my ministry to provide emoluments to these former leaders mentioned above:

Former Vice-President, Her Excellency Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe 

After the enactment of the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister Act 2010, the ministry sought advice from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs as to whether her Excellency Specioza Wandira Kazibwe qualified for the benefits under the Act. 

In June 2012, the Attorney-General clarified that Dr Kazibwe is entitled to the benefits provided under section A in the Eighth Schedule of the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister’s Act 2010. Accordingly, in June 2013, the Ministry of Public Service effected all payments due to Dr Wandira Kazibwe, including arrears that had accrued, as follows: 
    • Shs 519,456,000 as her outstanding emoluments as a retired Vice-President from the period of May 2003 to July 2012 was paid; 
    • Shs 4,638,000 on a monthly basis from August 2012 to date, and it is broken down as follows: 
    i) monthly pension, Shs 2,100,000; 
    ii) fuel allowance, Shs 850,000; 
    iii) medical allowance, Shs 700,000; 
    iv) utilities, Shs 700,000; 
    v) two domestic staff, Shs 280,000; 
The total is Shs 4,638,000 monthly. 

The following benefits have not been extended to the former Vice-President due to budgetary limitations: 
    • a house purchase fund equivalent to 15,000 currency points; 
    • a chauffeur driven car for town running, attending state functions to which she is invited, and one trip to her country home once a month; 
    • an allowance equivalent to 500 currency points for furniture; and 
    • an allowance equivalent to 250 currency points for replacement of old furniture after every five years.

Former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya 

The former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya has also been receiving from the Ministry of Public Service the following:
    • a monthly benefit of Shs 4,638,000 since March 2012 to date, which is broken down as follows: 
i) 	monthly pension, Shs 2,100,000; 
ii) 	fuel allowance, Shs 850,000; 
iii) 	medical allowance, Shs 700,000; 
iv) 	utilities, Shs 700,000; 
    vi) two domestic staff, Shs 288,000; 
   The total is Shs 4,638,000.

The following benefits have not been extended to the former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Balibaseka Bukenya due to budgetary limitations: 
    • A house purchase fund equivalent to 15,000 currency points; 
    • a chauffeur driven car for town running, attending state functions to which he is invited and one trip to his country home once a month; 
    • an allowance equivalent to 500 currency points for furniture; and 
    • an allowance equivalent to 250 currency points for replacement of old furniture after every five years.
  
The former Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. Professor Apolo Nsibambi has been receiving the following:
    • A monthly retirement benefit since March 2012 broken down as follows: 
i) 	a monthly pension, Shs 1,560,000; 
ii) 	fuel allowance, Shs 750,000; 
iii) medical allowance, Shs 700,000; 
iv) 	utility, monthly, Shs 600,000; 
v) 	two domestic staff, Shs 288,000. 
This gives a total of Shs 3,898,000.

The following benefits have not been extended to the former Prime Minister, Apolo Nsibambi: 
    • a house purchase fund equivalent to 12,000 currency points; 
    • a chauffeur driven car; 
    • an allowance equivalent to 350 currency points for the purchase of furniture; and 
    • an allowance equivalent to 175 currency points every five years to replace the old furniture.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service has been paying monthly retirement benefits to the former leaders but has failed to provide the other benefits, namely, house purchase fund, funds for furniture and purchase of new vehicles due to budgetary constraints.

Recommendation
It is recommended that in the next financial year, the Government provides the Ministry of Public Service adequate funds so that all benefits are provided to the former leaders. The budgetary requirement for the three former leaders is Shs 2,000,000,320,000. Mr Speaker, that is the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it Shs 2 trillion or Shs 2 billion?

MRS SEZI: It is Shs 2 billion, Mr Speaker. On this statement, we have attached the Eighth Schedule that relates to the benefits the former leaders are supposed to take.  I thank you.  

3.16
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Rt. Hon. Speaker, thank you very much. I want to thank the minister for the statement. However, we need to clarify some of these issues because they are going to bring in some illegalities and some management questions. 

One, you have a leader getting pension and being paid from the Consolidated Fund like the former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya. He is getting salary from the Consolidated Fund because he is not out of service. Secondly, you get the former Vice-President, Dr Kazibwe; she is a Special Presidential Advisor and she is being paid and she has a car from State House or President’s Office. So, how can you have double pay? Here, we do not even see former Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. Kintu-Musoke or the wife of the former Vice-President, Rt. Hon. Kisekka. 

We, therefore, need to harmonise and see that we are not proceeding illegally. I would call upon the Attorney-General to revise this issue of hon. Bukenya being entitled. I am not a lawyer, but I disagree with you as double payment is really questionable. I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have a response on that?  

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, I occasionally miss the deep voice of my colleague. The issue he has raised will be studied across Government and appropriate advice will be given. 

As in the case of the former leaders - For the benefit of the House, Mr Speaker, can I actually mention the former leaders that have all been paid? Former leaders include Sir Edward Mutesa, Dr Apollo Milton Obote, Idi Amin Dada, Yusuf Kironde, Godfrey Lukongwa Binaisa, Tito Okello Lutwa, Justice Saulo Musoke, Wacha-Olwol who is still alive, and Justice Nyamuconco. All those were paid their benefits partly, other than the Presidential Commission which included Wacha-Olwol, the late Justice Nyamuconco and the late Justice Musoke.  

The former Vice-Presidents have been paid, the former Prime Ministers have been paid, and this includes Kintu Musoke who is still alive; he has also been paid among the past leaders. The former Speakers and Deputy Speakers of Parliament have also been paid. That is the category that has been paid. 

I would like to say that we were given Shs 11 billion as a budget but in provision, we got Shs 5.6 billion. We used that money to pay part of what was due to the former leaders and this financial year, we shall settle the total bill of the former leaders. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a matter from Maracha District.

3.20
MRS RUTH LEMATIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have listened attentively but on the list that has been presented by the minister, I did not hear the late Gad Wilson Toko. He served this country as a Vice-President under Tito Lutwa and he hailed from Maracha. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please take note of that. You do not have to respond now but take note of it, please.  Can we say that for all other persons who have not appeared on that list, they should submit a list? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the information that I want to give is that the pensions which the honourable minister has mentioned, which are being paid to former Vice-Presidents and Prime Ministers, are governed by a law.  That law was made by the Eighth Parliament and it is limited to the former leaders who served from a certain period. That is why we have Vice-President Kazibwe - if you have a copy, I could find the provision – but the other former Vice-Presidents are not catered for by that provision. So, the provisions of that law do not apply to the former leaders who did not serve from a certain period of time to now. 

For somebody to say that paying Kazibwe is double payment – no. This amount of money mentioned is pension and not salary. It is for service rendered. It does not mean that if somebody served as Vice-President, he or she cannot get any other employment where they are paid a salary.   

I want to also inform you that this law provides that the pensions paid to those people are charged on the Consolidated Fund. So, there are people who are paid from the Consolidated Fund, and the provisions of Article 158 of the Constitution are very clear: “Offices the remuneration of which is charged on the Consolidated Fund 
(1) Where any salary or allowance of the holder of any office is charged on the Consolidated Fund, it shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage after he or she has been appointed to that office.” So, you cannot now dream of reducing this, other than increasing. I thank you very much. (Laughter) 

MR KWIZERA: Rt. Hon. Speaker, what the Vice-President has read means that they cannot reduce the amount of money you are earning. What I am talking about is double pay - if you are earning salary, like the former Vice-President Bukenya who earns salary here, and it is from the Consolidated Fund. So, I still think that the Attorney-General should come up and advise us because this is double pay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the point was that what the former Vice-President, who is a member of this House, is being paid is pension and not a salary, which is an entitlement under the law.  

MR KWIZERA: But you realise that the former Vice-President Kazibwe is a Special Presidential Advisor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is also a getting a pension as the former Vice-President and that is it, but not a salary as Vice-President.

MR KWIZERA: But it is paid from the Consolidated Fund.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I understand the feelings of hon. Wa Gahugu Kwizera and I remember at one time, some members of the Commission had similar feelings. The Vice-President is a former Speaker who is entitled to his pension as a former Speaker - [Mr Ssekandi: “And I am getting it.”]- Laughter. 

As a Commission, we had to seek wise counsel of the Attorney-General and very many learned people, including the legal department of Parliament. They did advise that this is an entitlement, which cannot be severed because somebody is benefiting from the Consolidated Fund. 

Other information I want to give is that there are so many Members of Parliament here who are earning pension from the Consolidated Fund but they are being paid as Members of Parliament. I thank you very much.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.27
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, this is my statement in relation to the award of Shs 13 billion to Severino Twinobusingye in Constitutional Petition No. 47 of 2011. 

Brief Background

Mr Speaker, a one Twinobusingye Severino filed a case in the Constitutional Court seeking to challenge Parliamentary resolutions passed on the 10th and 11th of October 2011 during the oil debate. The matter was heard and decided upon on 21st February whereupon court held that it was unconstitutional for the Legislature to ask members of the Executive to step aside.  

The Constitutional Court went ahead to find that Article 116 made it a prerogative for the head of the Executive to appoint or disappoint his Cabinet ministers. Therefore, the action of asking the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and two Cabinet ministers to step aside by the Legislature was declared null and void.  

Mr Speaker, the Constitutional Court ruled that resolution 9 (b), which required members of that ad-hoc committee to have high moral standards while carrying out their assignment, was merely stating the obvious. 

The issue of the award to Severino Twinobusingye was raised by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi - initially it was that we had not appealed against this award and then later, it changed to appealing out of time. On the issue of costs, court held that this is a matter of great national importance and timely for the maintenance of the rule of law and constitutional harmony and peace in this country. Therefore, on those grounds, the petitioner was awarded two-thirds of the costs in this petition. 

Mr Speaker, I must clarify here that in that ruling or judgment, no money was mentioned.  The petitioner then filed a bill of costs in court claiming a grand total of Shs 23.6 billion. On 5th July and 16 July 2012, the Attorney-General’s representatives appeared before His Worship E.O Kisawuzi, the then Registrar of the Constitutional Court, and vehemently opposed the costs that Severino Twinobusingye had filed in court and proposed a sum of Shs 30 million.  

In his taxation ruling delivered without notice – Now, at the hearing of 5th and 16th July, it was agreed that when the Registrar is going to read the ruling, the Attorney-General should be served. However, the ruling was delivered on 24th December without notice to the Attorney-General. In his ruling, the Registrar awarded the petitioner an unprecedented high amount of Shs 12.9 billion.

We learnt about this award through the New Vision newspaper of 19th February. We were not given notice, the ruling is delivered on the 24th December, on the eve of Christmas, and we first learn about it in the New Vision of 19 February 2013. Whereupon, we proceeded to try and obtain a copy of the ruling and find out what transpired in this matter. However, it was found that the court file could not be traced.

I remember calling the Solicitor-General and the Director of Civil Litigation to my office and instructed them to immediately get copies of the file as soon as this story appeared in the newspapers, but the file could not be found. It was found that the court file could not be traced and we wrote a letter seeking the court’s indulgence to locate the same. Mr Speaker, a copy of our letter is attached to this statement as Annex A. I hereby lay it on the Table.

We were informed on the 1 March 2013 that the court file had been located. Now, 19th February is when we first learnt about this award through the newspapers, and on 1st March is when the file was located. We proceeded immediately to peruse through the same and immediately filed a taxation reference in the matter. A copy of our letter is attached to this statement as Annex B, which I will lay on the Table.

Mr Speaker, we also proceeded to file an application to validate our late filing of the application for a taxation reference, since we were only able to access the court file on 1 March 2013. By then, we were out of time in accordance with the Court of Appeal rules that require that a taxation reference be made within seven days from the delivery of the taxation ruling.

This application to allow us file our taxation reference out of time was subsequently argued on 21 June 2013 before the hon. Justice Nshimye of the Constitutional Court. On 12 August 2013, we received a ruling in our favour, validating our late filing of the taxation reference and highlighting the error of the learned registrar. This ruling is also attached to this statement and when you look at the last two paragraphs, you will find that the judge found that the registrar was the one in error. So, the ruling is attached as Annex C.

We are now waiting for a hearing date from court for the taxation reference, from where we will proceed to argue this matter with the objective of reducing the manifestly high amounts of money awarded to the Speaker - no, to the petitioner –(Laughter). I want to reiterate, Mr Speaker, that we are totally opposed to this award.

I prepared a brief on this matter to the Clerk to Parliament and copied it to, among others, the Speaker of Parliament. This was on 5 August 2013. I wish to clarify that no money has been paid out to Mr Severino Twinobusingye.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this statement on the Table. As I pointed out, annexed to this statement are two letters that we wrote on this matter and a copy of the ruling of His Lordship Justice Nshimye. I would like to urge everybody to read it so that they can appreciate the effort we have put in to fight this award.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the statement from the Attorney-General together with the attachments – the two letters and the ruling of the court on this matter.

3.36
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, if you look at the domestic arrears of Government, one of the highest elements is the outstanding court bills that have been awarded or earned against the Attorney-General.

When you read this case, you realise that it was out of the conviction of the newspaper industry and the pressure from Parliament that the Attorney-General’s Chambers was awakened to what was happening and he took the action that he did. If this had not happened, most likely this amount of money would be part of the outstanding arrears against Government.

I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. Have you tried to evaluate the court awards that have been awarded against Government and which have accumulated into large sums of money? Have you tried to find out whether there has not been connivance on either the side of the courts or your Chambers in order to make Government lose money? That is the clarification I want to get from the Attorney-General- whether any due diligence has been done on those costs that have been awarded. Also, what can we do to prevent this from happening again?

I also want to find out from the learned friend, – because these are issues determined by another arm of Government – are there court rules that guide on how awards are determined, so that when somebody files a case they know how much one is likely to be charged or likely to be paid? If those rules do exist, what do they say? In the absence of these rules, what do we need to do to induce the other arm of Government to have clear rules so that the citizens of Uganda can be protected? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MR DENIS HAMSOM OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to seek two clarifications from the Attorney-General. 

I am happy that he has stated his position loud and clear, that he is opposed and that no money has been paid. However, from the onset of this case, this institution - the temple of legislation - has departments and there is a department in charge of legal services. I am aware that the Parliamentary Commission applied to be joined to this petition, but the information we have is to the effect that this good move was blocked by the legal team from the Attorney-General’s Chambers. Maybe the Attorney-General should also clarify on that.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer, I am not, and the Attorney-General is a lawyer. I would like to challenge the Attorney-General because if this ruling is not challenged, it will appear that Uganda will have set a precedent for the entire world, where a petitioner argues with the respondent for four hours in court and an award, in costs, to the tune of Shs 12.9 billion, is given. This is unprecedented. So, I would like the Attorney-General to clarify if there is any case in this world where people have argued in court for four hours and one was awarded the equivalent of Shs 13 billion in costs.

Those are the two clarifications I would like to seek from the Attorney-General.

3.41
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had never been to court until I was taken there after defeating my competitor, Mr John Kazoora. In that case, I was awarded only Shs 67 million. The lawyers took Shs 47 million and they gave me Shs 20 Million. (Laughter) 

I have never seen a case that is decided very fast like the one in which this man called Severino Twinobusingye was involved. So, to me this is a paradox. If these things are going to keep happening here, the country is going to be taken for a ride and all the money will be taken within a month, something that will make this country very broke.

The other point that I want to give, Mr Speaker, is a procedural one. I raised the issue of Kuber, which people smoke. Tomorrow I will be going for the burial of Maj. Gregory Matovu and I was saying tobacco is killing Ugandans. I do not see the Minister in charge of Trade and Industry but I would like to request the Chair that we should not leave this Chamber without Government pronouncing itself on what will happen. Have we completely abandoned the issue of Kuber, because both ministers responsible for trade are not available?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it has just been deferred, awaiting for the minister to come in.

3.42
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Attorney-General for giving us this statement. 

When this matter came up in court, I think all people in the country became extremely suspicious about the abnormal amount of compensation that had been awarded to a one Severino Twinobusingye. Out of a lot of pressure exerted by this House, I am happy that some response is now being exhibited by the Attorney-General’s Chambers. However, Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. 

When you look at the ruling by His Lordship Justice Augustine Nshimye, to me this is almost a declaration of no confidence in the person who gave this award without reference to the Attorney-General. So, I would like to seek clarification because for the normal civil service, we have the Ministry of Public Service, but I also know that for the Judiciary we have the Judicial Service Commission. Now that court ruled that the registrar erred in awarding this exorbitant amount in compensations, what steps is the Ministry of Justice taking against the registrar?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, was the error in the amount or in not serving the Attorney-General?

MR MULIMBA: It was in not serving the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR MULIMBA: So, I would like to know, now that the ruling by the learned justices is very clear, what steps Government has taken in respect to the registrar who erred. 

Mr Speaker, this is a breach. When you commit a breach that results into another very big mistake, we cannot rule out conspiracy. This is just one of the many cases in this country that has been brought to light. I know there are so many out there. People are bleeding; so many cases have come up and taxpayers’ money has been given to fraudsters. Those cases have not come here. So, in order to deter other actors from going this way, I thought the Attorney-General would pronounce steps to be taken by Government. 

Mr Speaker, like Dr Medard said, we have seen a number of cases. I also had a case against Government. Imagine I had been disqualified from the race, which eventually brought me to this Parliament. I had to go to court. I was disqualified on 22 December 2010 and I was reinstated on 22 January 2011. How much time did I have to campaign? You can imagine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are here now.

MR MULIMBA: Yes; fortunately, I came here. Can I tell you the story?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, honourable member, you are now crossing the line of relevance.

MR MULIMBA: Mr Speaker, I really wanted the Attorney-General to show seriousness on the part of Government by telling us what is now going to happen in respect to disciplining people who want to simply give out Government money. I thank you.

3.46
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate the Attorney-General, for the effort he has put in to rescue taxpayers’ money.

Mr Speaker, when I listened to the Attorney-General, he sounded vulnerable and yet all our eyes are on him because we know he is the person who can save Government from all the bureaucratic red tape that is in there. When the Attorney-General says he could not even trace the file, I wonder, because I have seen this as a common phenomenon. In my constituency, every time there are cases at the Police, tracing these files is a nightmare. So, there is a disease called “disappearance of files”. 

I think this is now an eye-opener. It should awaken Government to the fact that there is something in the Judiciary that we must really deal with. Yes, we have been looking at all the sectors, but I think there is a lot of corruption in the Judiciary that we are not taking very seriously and now it is affecting Government business, including all those contracts which are being sabotaged by those various crooks. So, we should use this case as an example to curb that corruption that is in the Judiciary.

I wanted to raise this point so that the Attorney-General can tell us – If he is finding it very hard, what can we do to support him so that he can bring order in the Judiciary?

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. I also want to congratulate the learned Attorney-General for the wise way he has handled the Severino case, although we had talked about it here before.

I would like to inform the House that we are working on a computerized system for case management. We shall soon be coming here to ask for permission to computerize the registries of the ministry, the Police and the courts so that all the information that comes into the justice system is integrated. For that matter, no files shall be found missing once again because once the information has been put in – (Interjections) – if they steal the computer? Mr Speaker, if all men were saints, there would be no laws, no jails and no police. So, we shall cross that bridge when we get to it.

First of all, we cannot just give up because these things happen; no, let us see how we can prevent it. When challenges arise in the future, we shall see how to address them. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you think we should close this particular matter for now? Okay, let us have Butambala.

3.48
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Attorney-General for his statement. However, I would like to say that I have been on this Floor before and asked people to declare their interest and also to declare how much we, Ugandans, owe some people. We are talking about Mr Severino Twinobusingye, but who is he? Mr Severino Twinobusingye has non-biological parents and some of them are even in this room.

Mr Speaker, there are people who want to get richer and richer and when you block one route that they were using to steal, they resort to using the courts to steal Ugandan’s money. I do not believe that this award was not influenced by the non-biological parents of Mr Severino Twinobusingye. This must stop.

In this country, for you to get a position or to have money, you must know somebody who is strong or powerful. That is the only way you can succeed. Many people have gone to court and have had cases that are far beyond – they are sounding cases - but they have never got such an award. As Parliament, we applied to join in this matter but we were not allowed; the Attorney-General himself objected. I am wondering why he is even now crying to this House. Things would have been different. 

Mr Speaker, my people need this money for roads, hospitals and for agriculture. Our teachers are crying; they are sleeping on empty stomachs and teaching our children and somebody called Severino - I do not even believe that Severino is indeed this Severino we are talking about here – wants to swindle this money and go and build castles in the air. As Ugandans and as leaders, we will not allow this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.52
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. Speaking after I thought the level of debate was coming down but it is rising again, I am afraid that the clarification that I wanted to seek from the Attorney-General – (Interjection) - Yes, the honourable Attorney-General, I wanted to seek clarification from you and this is in support of hon. Obua. 

Hon. Obua cited a four-hour argument, and I want to add that it was done within less than three months or about three months. I know that you are doing all that you can. My experience is that bills of costs are made and they are argued. I know - I want to give information - that one of the lawyers in this case is a very good lawyer in arguing out taxation, bill of costs. Was it just some failure in countering this argument or was it the justification?  

Here it says that the justification is that it is a matter of great national importance, – wonderful - constitutional harmony and causing of peace – wonderful. This is a matter in which we wanted to cause harmony in a constitutional- Would it not be the right case to award no costs at all if it is a matter of national importance? This is because when you go to court, in most cases constitutional petitions are purely for the good and rule of law of a particular country. It is not a civil wrong, nobody has suffered any wrong. This petitioner, especially, did not suffer any direct damage but he went there to enrich the jurisprudence of this country. 

Attorney-General, do you think our team – I was there until lately - was able to counter the law? I know he is a good gentleman. You talk about notice; you should not blame the registrar for that. What would have happened if you were given notice on that day? Would you have stopped the Shs 13 billion? The argument was made and this was the ruling; you cannot change anything on the ruling day. 

Let us see how we can support the Attorney-General’s chambers to make a better case. If this is a matter of national importance and Parliament was wrong in the resolutions made on 10 and 11 October 2011, then don’t you think it is a lesson taken and the country should not suffer twice?

3.56
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, the honourable member has raised the issue regarding the justification of the costs that were awarded to Severino. I was worried that we were beginning to tread where we should not go because the matter is sub judice. We appealed against this award and I would not like to debate a matter that is in court. Actually, that is the substance of the matter that is on appeal - whether the costs were justified. By that rule of sub judice, I am not allowed to air my views as to whether the costs were justifiable or not.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, hon. Dombo said that the Attorney-General’s chambers did not take up the matter until it was raised in Parliament. This is wrong. I have made it very clear that we first learnt about this matter from a newspaper, the New Vision. As soon as I learnt about this matter, I called the Solicitor-General and the Director of Civil Litigation and instructed them to get us the documentation regarding this award. So, it is not true that we acted because Parliament is the one that woke us up.

Mr Speaker, regarding the performance of judicial officers in court, when a judicial officer is presiding over court and he is exercising those judicial functions, it is the Judicial Service Commission not the Ministry of Justice responsible. In case they note something wrong, they should take action against that judicial officer. In this case, this matter was presided over by a judge of the Court of Appeal. When you read the ruling, you will find that he definitely found the registrar at fault. So, it is that judge to take up this matter, if he feels like it, with the Judicial Service Commission.

I want to reassure the House in reference to the issue that was raised by hon. Dombo regarding the amounts of money that Government may have lost. I want to assure this House that we are handling Severino Twinobusingye’s matter with dedication and commitment. We have handled cases like the Heritage case, where we saved over US$ 400 million. We are handling the Tullow case, just like we handled NSSF where we were going to lose billions and the way we handled Salim where we were losing Shs 60 billion. I have given a list of some of the cases we have handled and saved a lot of money to the Speaker. So, we have that dedication.

As to the quantum of damages or costs, that does not depend on the amount of time you spend in court. You may spend one hour in court and you get a certain amount of costs. It is not because they were there for four hours - in fact, four hours is long; it may take one hour or two hours for you to be awarded a certain amount. So, it is not the amount of time that determines the amount that you are awarded.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we are working on a Bill that will give guidance on awards of compensation and damages. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should go to the next item.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Rt Hon. Speaker, I still have a problem with Ugandans and our children that are being killed by cancer of the lungs-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the honourable minister here now?

DR BITEKYEREZO: He has come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to item 3(2). 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TARDE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I apologise for not being here earlier. It is because we had a function with His Excellency; he was opening a factory. The statement is being circulated. This is a statement by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to Parliament on the importation and consumption of Kuber drug. 

Mr Speaker, following a debate on the above matter on the Floor of Parliament, I would like to thank hon. Bitekyerezo Medard, MP Mbarara Municipality, for bringing out this matter of great importance to the whole country and to our society. My ministry and UNBS have been made aware of the emerging threat of Kuber and have embarked on some measures to address it. 

I would like to inform the honourable House that it is a scientific fact that Kuber falls under the category of drugs like narcotics and marijuana, among others. As such, it is a banned substance on the Ugandan market. Being a drug, Kuber is therefore under the mandate of National Drug Authority (NDA), with which we work closely to regulate its importation and consumption in the country. Indeed, NDA is already aware of this substance and has actually shared its report on this matter with our Uganda National Bureau of Standards, following the research that they undertook together.

Mr Speaker, we are also aware that these drugs are sometimes imported camouflaged and packaged as tea, which is a food product, or tobacco which is a chemical. We have, therefore, through the Pre-Export Verification of Conformity (PVoC) to Standards, which we recently reintroduced, instructed the service providers to ensure that this product is blocked from entry into the country.  

Intended Action

My ministry has decided to take the following measures to control the importation and consumption of the Kuber drug in Uganda: 
1. 	Issue a statutory instrument within the next 14 days to ban importation of Kuber as a banned drug or substance, which is harmful to the health of Ugandans as research has already indicated. 
2. 	Upon issuing of the statutory instrument, UNBS and NDA through their surveillance teams will take action to get rid of Kuber from the market.
3. 	Anyone found distributing Kuber will be considered a drug dealer and prosecuted under the relevant laws. 

In conclusion, the threat of Kuber is real and I call upon all honourable members to support our ministry and all associated agencies in the fight against this emerging and dangerous threat to our community as we work for a better future. For God and my country. Thank you.  

4.05
MR AZA ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the Minister. Recently, there is something people smoke called shisha. I think shisha also falls under this category. I do not know what clarification you can give us as far as that is concerned because it is destroying our youth. Thank you very much. 

4.06
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I have one issue to inquire about from the minister under the recommendations, specifically recommendation No.1 in relation to item No. 5 on page 2. 

How are we going to verify the transportation of this substance when it also comes in different forms? Under No. 5, the minister has said that at times it is camouflaged as tea and tobacco. So I want to know how it is going to be verified or checked. Thank you.

4.06
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for the statement. 

Under the intended action, it says that after issuing of the statutory instrument, UNBS and NDA will take action to get rid of Kuber from the market. I think this would be taking a long route. This product is available in many supermarkets, from what the honourable Member for Mbarara told us. Now that the ministry has found out that this is a banned substance, even before the statutory instrument is issued, can’t the ministry write to all these supermarkets and inform them that they have a banned substance or product on their shelves and they should remove that product from their shelves? Can’t he do that as we wait for the statutory instrument to be passed? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.08
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Minister for the report. When you read the interventions, the Minister is proposing the following under No. 2: “Upon issuing of the statutory instrument, UNBS and NDA through their surveillance teams will take action to get rid of Kuber from the market.” I do not know whether the Minister has taken into consideration the financial implications. We do not want him to come here and say -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What has happened to the microphone?

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, I was referring to No.2. We do not want UNBS to come and say they do not have money to be able to do the surveillance. 

I would like to use this opportunity, since UNBS is in charge of checking standards and quality of goods, to say that we have a problem with the current transformers being imported into this country. Last year when we were discussing the ministerial policy statement, I did raise the issue of the substandard transformers that are being imported into this country and the minister promised to bring a statement to us on what steps she was going to take. As I talk, about four transformers in my constituency have blown and no action has been taken by the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now crossing the line. (Laughter) I think the subject matter is Kuber. However, also the matter raised by the honourable member is important. Since the Minister of Energy is here, she should take note and respond to that. However, we cannot go into discussing transformers.

4.10
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is a little bit disheartening to see the way Government officials conduct business on very important issues in this country. If the Members of Parliament did not raise this issue on the Floor, what would Government do about this very dangerous toxic substance being imported into our country? I, therefore, want to seek clarification from the minister; could there be other substances, which have not been mentioned by Members of Parliament but which are equally harmful and are not being envisaged on the “banned list”? What exactly are we going to do?

Secondly, if the importers change the name from Kuber and they call it something else, what will Government do and do we have the capacity to deal with this? When banning, are we banning the trade name or are we banning the chemical composition of the product? What exactly are we prohibiting? 

Mr Speaker, whereas I respect the views of my honourable colleagues, I would like to say that you do not treat banned substances by writing a letter to the supermarkets. These substances must be confiscated; that is the only way we can bring sanity into the affairs and health of this country. Can the minister tell us what the banned substances are? Can he produce a list of the banned substances in this House so that Members of Parliament and the entire world can be part of the surveillance team? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.12
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am thinking very hard on how to package my – 

THE SPEAKER: Should I give you time?

MR KABAKUMBA: No, Mr Speaker. To me, this statement is written and cemented without in-depth thinking and research. In paragraph No. 3, the minister says that Kuber is under the category of narcotics and marijuana and as such is a banned substance. He goes ahead in paragraph No. 4 to say that indeed, the NDA is already aware of this substance and in the way forward he says that he is going to issue a statutory instrument within the next 14 days; a statutory instrument to do what? 

If Kuber is in the category of substances that have been banned and they are already aware, what is the statutory instrument for? Is the statement intended to make us feel good as Parliament that the minister responded to our questions and concerns? He did not even have to come to Parliament to tell us because he already has the powers and NDA and UNBS are already mandated to withdraw, confiscate and destroy these banned substances.  

4.14
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Let me start by requesting that when our ministers and our clerks are writing reports, they should be gender sensitive and say, “Rt Hon. Speaker”. Many times we read “Madam Speaker” or “Sir” when we have a different person in the chair. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, our country, our families, our children, the young generation, are under attack. In 2008, here in Parliament, I raised a matter of national importance about marijuana and mairungi; it is everywhere in schools and the problem is going on unattended to. As you drive in the evening, the smell of opium engulfs you as you pass through a trading centre and the Police are even walking around. If you go near the functions of our artists, it is the perfume. 

We are now talking about Kuber; I think the problem is that we need a much more comprehensive approach to this problem. Very soon, you are going to have a lot of mental cases in this country. Rapists, robbers and the butayimbwa that you hear of get courage and audacity from using these drugs. So, we really need to seriously handle that. 

I do not know what we are going to do to make sure that right from family to school level, to the faith-based organisations, something must be done. As we address the supply side, we must also address the demand side. May I request the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and URA to make sure that we do not wait for this commodity at the supermarkets but we check this at the entry points? That is where we will be more effective because we do not have the capacity to police the supermarkets and the shops. It is at the entry points that we can reduce these incidents. I thank you so much.

4.17
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I was talking about this Kuber for the first time, I told people here in the House that this is a combination of tobacco which has got three to four times more nicotine than the normal cigarettes which we smoke. I talked about the other content which is delta 9-tetra cannabidol and cannabido, which are marijuana. 

I also talked about the problem of these drugs being imported by Big Boss Universal Limited, a company based in Makindye. I said that in Mbarara, the drug is sold at Pearl Supermarket at the zebra crossing. I further said that right now, it is being parked in Nakumatt here in Kampala. I even liaised with the media, Madam Naluyimba and another person, and we went as far as Kyengera and found packets and boxes of the same Kuber being dispatched to western Uganda. That is why those young people in western Uganda were going on strike. 

Mr Speaker, I also said that Kuber is taken by taxi drivers. I said this drug increases the sex drive; that is one of the reasons why some of these people are raping people. I said this drug causes infertility, even among our children. If this is a banned drug, can the minister issue a statement now? The government is ours, the children are ours and Ugandans have entrusted us with this country. Can’t we issue a statement tonight and say, “no more sale of Kuber”, as we sort ourselves? If we keep quiet, even tonight our children are –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give relates to what you have actually just talked about. Recently, we had a series of strikes in schools in Sheema and almost all schools were being burnt down in a similar manner, both boys’ and girls’ schools. There was tension in Sheema. We actually had to get a Police detach because people were just cutting each other; they would just cut people and not steal anything. We believe that this is because of those same drugs that people are using especially Kuber. 

While in a security meeting, one of the people actually testified and said that parents need to check the suitcases of their children when they are going back to school. That guy was so shocked because he did not check his child’s suitcase and he later found that the boy was using Kuber and that Kuber was changing into marijuana. So, we need to be strong.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that information? (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I moved this as a matter of national importance for the good of my country. I was not sabotaging anybody; I was saying my children and your children are going to take Kuber. My problem is, if the minister wants us to give him 14 days, then what happens to this Kuber that is already on the market tonight, tomorrow or two weeks later? People are just being killed.

Mr Speaker, it is good that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here. Surely, you are the Leader of Government Business, can’t you help us? This thing is very important; your children are being killed, your voters and your grandchildren are getting a problem. I kindly request the government to take appropriate and immediate action so that we can prevent our children from making mistakes. 

Everyday people drive taxis to Jinja, Mbarara and Gulu but they are dying in accidents because the drivers are taking Kuber, which is marijuana. Let us stop carnage on the roads, rape and strikes by banning this drug immediately and by tonight. Thank you.

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr Julius Mutende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank all Members who have expressed concern over this issue. It is true that we have a product called shisha which has now become very common on the market. You will find it mainly in modern and upscale bars and restaurants. It is now coming to our knowledge that it also contains some of the toxic substances and we are going to take action.

Regarding some of the contradictions which have been mentioned, I want to say that firstly, the service providers we are hiring now, under the PVoC scheme that I talked about, are intended to check these substances which come into the country right from their country of origin. We are aware that our borders are porous and we cannot guarantee that everything that comes in will necessarily go through Malaba, Busia or Mutukula or these other border points. So, the best thing to do is to check them right from their country of origin. 

Kuber, or whatever name it comes under, is a chemical substance. First of all, food items are among those to be checked and that is where they are hiding most of these commodities. Kuber, under whatever name it comes, is obviously composed of some chemicals and it is the chemical composition that our service providers will look out for. Even if you change its name and call it Jack or John, it will still have the same chemical composition and it should be checked right from the country of origin.

On the issuance of a statutory instrument, what we are looking at is to make the penalty that can be levied against such importers even stricter than what it is now. The fact is that it has been banned but because the penalties which come with importing it are very light, it is important that we review to make them more punitive and more risky for people to get involved. However, as has already been mentioned, we are already moving on to arrest those people who are involved so far. I want to thank the Member from Mbarara Municipality who has given us even more clues as to where some of these substances are located, like in Kyengera and supermarkets. We shall simply notify our colleagues, particularly the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Police, so that we can see how to move fast on this. We completely appreciate the danger caused by these substances.

On the financial implications that may come up as a result of removing Kuber from supermarkets, I do not think that there should be any fear. Uganda National Bureau of Standards is mandated to carry out routine inspections of supermarkets and all service providers like petrol stations. It is just a question of telling them to put emphasis on supermarkets. The law gives them a mandate to go to any retailer or wholesaler and check what they have. So, it has no special financial implications.

On the standards of transformers, I will leave that to my colleague who will come and talk about it.

Hon. Dombo raised the issue of Government being lax in its way of doing business. He said that if it wasn’t for the MPs raising this issue, probably Kuber would still be a problem on the market. That is partly true, but you remember that recently we came here with a bundle of fake products and counterfeits as samples to show you what we are doing to eradicate some of these commodities from the market. Certainly, the others may have been less dangerous than Kuber because some of them were pads, cables, but the truth is that in reality, we confiscate several products every other day. Indeed, we know that by doing so, we have saved very many lives. Certainly, Kuber will get special attention and we believe that in the long run, we shall solve this problem too. (Interruption)

MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI: Honourable minister, you are telling us that we shall get a solution in the long run; are we on the same page? We heard the way the Member has described the problem. Looking at your statement, you are saying that you are aware that these drugs are sometimes imported and packed in tea; of course, you are spoiling my market for tea since I am a tea producer. Honourable minister, do you want us to believe you when you say that you are going to provide a solution in the long run? Is this the statement we should go with?

4.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not have a clear picture of this problem but from what the minister is saying, this is a narcotic and a banned substance and yet it is still on the market. Obviously, it needs immediate action. (Applause) So, I will convene a meeting with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Trade and the Ministry of Health tomorrow morning. We will discuss it and agree on measures to be taken to control the situation in the country. (Interjection) It is tomorrow morning; I will inform them about the time. Thank you. (Applause)

4.29
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concern on the importation of substandard goods, which may include transformers. However, I want to clarify on the matter that hon. Mawanda has brought up, involving four blown transformers in his constituency. 

Mr Speaker, before transformers are procured for use in the sector, technical specifications are given, factory acceptance tests are carried out and those transformers are procured – (Interruption)

MR FREDRICK MBAGADHI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. While I appreciate the response being made by the Minister, there is an issue that I feel should be raised. The Member raised an issue concerning those transformers but I can assure this is not an isolated case; there are very many similar cases throughout the country. 

I also want to remind Members that sometime back we had issues with Umeme and this Parliament came up with an ad hoc committee, which presented a report on this Floor but it was not debated. We have been waiting for that report to be debated on this Floor. I actually remember that that issue went under business to follow on the Order Paper and later it disappeared from the Order Paper. So, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to –(Ms Ann Nankabirwa rose) – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member is raising a procedural point; do you want information on procedure? (Laughter)

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to now start debating this issue piecemeal?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was raised and like all matters that are raised, they need to be responded to as fast as possible. That is why the minister was making this preliminary response. Certainly, this report has got to be debated and it has to be scheduled as soon as possible. (Applause) Clerk-at-Table, please make sure that this matter comes to the Order Paper at the next sitting. We will then have your comprehensive response in the course of that debate. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, you remember that this particular statement should be comprehensive to open ways for other things that had been stayed, pending this particular statement. 

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a statement in reference to the Auditor-General’s observations on loans signed prior to Parliamentary approval for financial year 2010/11 and financial year 2011/12. 

Before I go to specific issues, allow me to briefly take you through the process of acquiring loans: 

1. 	Identification of a Need 
	This involves identification of funding requirements and priorities by the sectors. It is done through the sector working groups and the Executive, consistent with the manifesto of the ruling party, NRM, within the framework of the National Development Plan. 

2. 	Identification of a Funder 
	This involves identification of specific projects or programmes by the Government for which financing can be sought from multilateral or bilateral development partners. It is done following an assessment of the critical needs for each financial year and Government of Uganda’s ability to finance them through domestic resources and development plans. If there is a financing gap, Government resorts to borrowing to fill this gap. 

3. 	The Executive, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, initiates discussions with development partners for possible financing through loans consistent with their lending cycles and country assistance strategies. The lending cycles are on average over a period of three years. Competition for these resources does not allow for holding onto country allocations across cycles for non-performing countries. 

4. 	Project Programme Preparation and Appraisal and Negotiations 
	Here, identification, preparation, appraisal and negotiation missions are fielded at successive stages to firm up the project for funding. It is at the identification, preparation stage that the needs of the sectors are identified. 

	The development partners then send a technical mission to work with Government counterparts to prepare for the project. This is followed by an appraisal mission to firm up the project programme components and all financing arrangements. At this stage, a project appraisal document is prepared for approval by the lenders board. Upon the board’s approval, then the negotiations begin between both parties. 

	At the end of the negotiations, the parities initial or sign on the commitment. At the negotiations, it is compulsory for the Solicitor-General to participate in order to, among other reasons, provide legal advice on the constitutionality and the consistency with the laws of Uganda in any borrowing. In fact, no negotiations can proceed without the Solicitor-General’s involvement. 

5. 	The terms and conditions are agreed to during the negotiations as well as implementation execution arrangements and all critical details. On successful conclusion of negotiations, the parties usually initially sign on all documents which include the minutes of the negotiations, project appraisal documents, draft financing agreements and any other documents related to the proposed financing.

6. 	Approval of the Loan by both Government and the Lender
i) 	Cabinet 
	The Ministry of Finance submits a prepared Cabinet memorandum on the borrowing to Cabinet to seek Cabinet approval of the proposed borrowing.

ii) 	Parliament  
	After Cabinet has approved the borrowing, a brief to Parliament to request for borrowing is then prepared by the ministry and forwarded to Parliament for consideration in line with Article 159 of our Constitution, which gives Parliament the mandate to clear all government borrowing. 

7. 	The Attorney-General’s Legal Opinion 
	At this stage if Parliament, after due consideration, approves the borrowing, then my ministry submits the Parliamentary resolution authorising the borrowing together with the agreed terms and conditions of the borrowing and all relevant documents to the Attorney-General for his or her legal opinion. If Parliament rejects the borrowing, the lenders would accordingly be informed and the loan would be cancelled. No lending institution can declare the loan effective until there is evidence of Parliamentary approval and the legal opinion of the Attorney-General.

8. 	Declaration of Loan Effectiveness 
	It is upon satisfying the lender with both Parliamentary approval and the legal opinion of the Attorney-General that the loan is declared effective. 

I now turn to the observations of the Auditor-General. Having described the above process, I want to recognise the observations that were raised by the Auditor-General and concur with some of his findings. I want to inform this august House that we have further received additional information to improve the system of loan acquisition. This information is also being furnished to the Public Accounts Committee which will update this august House at the conclusion of their work. We further acknowledge that the above stated processes need improvement to avoid delays in procurement of the loans. 

In view of the above observations, I beg to move that we allow the Parliamentary Committee on National Economy to submit their past reports on loans for the new projects, which are very important for economic growth and social economic development of our country. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not here but I have been briefed that in the course of the budget debate, a matter was raised by the committee on finance about some issues that had been raised by the Auditor-General. This matter was brought back to this House in the course of the debate on the budget and a decision was taken by the House referring this particular issue to the Committee on National Economy for further examination. A decision was taken that any other loan should be stayed pending a proper brief on this situation of loans that were apparently taken without Parliamentary approval. I think that is where we were.

So, this is the statement that was required by this House. This was to clarify on those matters and have a debate on it and we resolve it. We can then clear the way for other borrowings that were not part of this in the past and for future projects that members identify with and found necessary for the execution of important issues, which are affecting people in this country. 

4.41
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the report. It really puzzled us as Parliament and if you hear other persons in this nation also; it is as if the powers of this Parliament have been usurped. Parliament no longer has power in this nation or country. 

Article 159 of the Constitution tells us about the power of Government to borrow or lend. It says, “(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source. 

(2) Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament. 

(3) An Act of Parliament made under clause (2) of this article shall provide- 
(a) that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament…”

Mr Speaker, you realise that this Parliament just discovered that Government had already signed for a loan to the tune of about Shs 1.3 trillion on behalf of this Parliament even before laying it on the Floor of Parliament. This was too much for us, and this was done during a period when Parliament was sitting. We were not on recess but here in Parliament. We wondered what prevented them from bringing this issue to us so that we discuss it as a Parliament and authorise them to go and borrow.

Mr Speaker, time will come when there will be delays in the borrowing and Parliament will be blamed when the Executive is not doing the right thing. What is the use of this Parliament of Uganda? Please, Executive, give us the power as we are mandated to approve some of these things. We are mandated to debate them on behalf of our people. Do not render us useless as a Parliament. This is the position, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister, in his statement, has recognised and concurred with the findings of the Auditor-General. He has said that the same have been forwarded to the Public Accounts Committee for further action. Is it procedurally right for us to continue on a matter that has already been forwarded to the Public Accounts Committee and which report shall be submitted to the same House for debate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What has been forwarded to the Public Accounts Committee are new improvements on procedures. They have been adopted and they are now being forwarded to the Public Accounts Committee for their information and for further application in the scrutiny of other things that might come before them. That is what I heard the minister saying here. It is not that this particular report on the issue of borrowing without parliamentary approval was forwarded to the Public Accounts Committee. That is what I heard.

MR ISABIRYE: Rt Hon. Speaker, I may be corrected if I am wrong, but it is the Public Accounts Committee that is responsible for scrutinizing reports of the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that is correct, but now they are saying there are new negotiation frameworks that have been adopted and incorporated in the current procedures. These have now also been forwarded to the Public Accounts Committee for their application to other matters that might come before them, so that they use a broader framework for analysing them. It is not that this matter was referred to the Public Accounts Committee. Okay?

4.46
MS ROSE AKOL OKULLU (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to debate on this matter. 

The Committee on National Economy has been interacting with the minister and some explanations were given on this matter. We have a problem with the process as to when these loans are regarded disbursed by our partners and then also the process here in Parliament, that is, the approval process. That is where I see a challenge. 

At the same time, we also recognised that the Auditor-General, with his independence, actually looks at all these processes and must have queried these transactions and written a management letter to perhaps Ministry of Finance and requested for answers. I believe they were not satisfied with those answers and that is why they had to put these issues in their report to Parliament. 

The minister is not explaining some issues that would make Parliament perhaps believe that this is a mere procedural matter. On page 4, the minister says, in the middle of the last paragraph and I want to quote him: “I want to recognise the observations that were raised by the Auditor-General and concur with some of the findings.” It is very important that the minister actually gives us the details of those findings he concurs with and those he does not concur with so that we can have a good debate on this matter.

Two, these are resources we have to compete for, and I know there is a lot of competition, so you have to commit yourself before you get parliamentary approval. However, I know that a loan is only disbursed after parliamentary approval. There is that period, a time lapse or window period, before you receive parliamentary approval. Assuming it is 120 days and then the approval is got after 240 days, between the 120 and 240 days, there is interest that accrues even before the loan is disbursed. So, we would like to understand: when do our partners consider the loan approved so that they start charging interest? We need to understand this process. Why do they charge interest before the loan is disbursed and before the approval of Parliament, which they consider a very important matter? 

I know that is one of the issues they consider before they release these loans. So, we need an explanation as to why interest accrues before parliamentary approval is given. I think those are the issues I want the minister to clarify on. Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is point of procedure; is it raised by you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank Rt Hon. Prime Minister for yielding the Floor. My point of procedure follows what hon. Isabirye raised and what the minister has stated. 

The minister has said he has some information regarding the system. As you are aware, Mr Speaker, this matter is also being looked at by the Public Accounts Committee. I think the minister has also gathered some information and forwarded this information to the Public Accounts Committee for consideration. 

It would be, in my opinion, procedurally right if we took this statement –(Interjections)– Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to allow this matter to be handled by PAC, since PAC is looking at it, and then now we move forward? When PAC comes back, we can go on. I am sure that PAC will go into the specific issues, which hon. Rose Akol has been referring to. I think that would help us to move forward on that issue. Would it be procedurally right to move that way, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: There was also guidance from the Prime Minister; is it on the same subject? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is really more less the same. The issue before Parliament was: did the Ministry act unconstitutionally in the past? If that was the case, shouldn’t we take action, which brings back our actions in line with the Constitution? What the minister has endeavoured to explain is that it was within the Constitution. However, there are some issues which the Auditor-General raised, which are in the Auditor-General’s report that is before the Public Accounts Committee, to which he has responded in detail. Without giving us that detail, he says he agrees with some of the findings of the Auditor-General. 

It appears to me, therefore, that since this matter is handling past loans, which we had already approved anyway, and we were looking at the loans which we need to take now in order to continue running the business of the state, it would be prudent to wait for the debate on the actions of the Minister of Finance in detail when we receive the report of the Public Accounts Committee. We can then handle what is required to be handled at hand without pre-emptying what may come from the Public Accounts Committee. That was the opinion –(Interruption)–

MRS ONGOM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to give some clarification to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

When we got this information, Parliament resolved that we will not pass another loan request until we get clear clarification, which he gave in his statement. There are some issues also that the Auditor-General in his report brought out, a situation where some loans were repeated - loan No.7, No.6 and No. 5 - on which he has not given us clarification. All these issues were referred to the Committee on National Economy. They were not referred to the Public Accounts Committee; they were referred to the Committee on National Economy. 

It is our opinion that if we could hear a report from the Committee on National Economy and also Ministry of Finance apologises to this Parliament, it would be a step forward. Other than that, you are usurping the powers of Parliament. You are abusing the powers of this Parliament and things may not go right. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on what subject are you rising on?

MR BESISIRA: I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, on what point are you rising?

MR BESISIRA: I am informing this House. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, the issue that is being debated arose from the report of the Auditor-General that was presented to this House and as usual, was referred to the Public Accounts Committee for discussion. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, whereas I am always ready to yield ground whenever any colleague wants to give information –(Interruption)–

MR BESISIRA: And I was giving information that would assist you. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I just want to reassert my right here that if anyone wants me to yield ground for information, really I must be asked. So, if hon. Besisira wants to give me information, he will ask me and I will give him way - [Mr Besisira: “Can I give you information?”] - Yes. (Laughter)

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I said I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee and the issue that is being discussed arose from a report of the Auditor-General, which was handed to this committee. As is the practice, it is supposed to be handled by the Public Accounts Committee. 

This morning, one of the issues raised was that it is important for us to handle this issue and report to the House as we have always done. We have always received these Auditor-General’s reports in the Public Accounts Committee and after all the controversies, we come and report and we give our recommendations, which are either accepted or amended by the House. So, I would like to inform you that we are already preparing to handle this particular item. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the chairman of the Committee on National Economy.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The matter before us is very important. Different committees of Parliament have different mandates and responsibilities. The Committee on National Economy as a subordinate of the plenary got an assignment from the plenary arising from a finance committee report to the effect that some alleged unconstitutionality had occurred in the procurement of loans. The recommendation then was that the Committee on National Economy investigates this matter and reports to Parliament but Parliament also went ahead to slap a moratorium on further borrowing. 

Before I talk about what we have done as a committee, I find myself, as chairman, and some of my members, already constrained because of duplication. The assignment was given to the Committee on National Economy and whereas in the meetings we have been inviting them to come and join us, continually they have been reminding us that we are actually interfering in their sphere of influence, if I can call it hegemony –(Interruption)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and the matter we are talking about has been in our committee. This morning, we held a meeting and we resolved to have a mini-report from our committee. I am surprised now that the chairman is giving a verbal report to this House concerning this very important matter yet as members of the committee, we resolved to present to this House a mini-report in written form, which we can refer to just in case of any other issue arising out of this discussion.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for a chairman, well aware of the requirement of consent of the committee members, to bring a verbal report to this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe he was introducing it. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the usual wise ruling. I was coming to that. I said that before I go to what is pertaining in our committee, I want to give the context of the different roles of committees. 

I must also add that this assignment, which was given to us, mixed two issues. Whereas the intention was to probe the earlier loans, on the Floor here there was a mini moratorium on any other borrowing. However, what we are discussing is delay of loans, non-performance of loans and yet we are hurting loan requests that are innocent or beneficiaries who do not even know who in finance signed wrongly, if they signed at all. So, we have had those problems. 

At committee level, I must say we have had four meetings with different stakeholders including the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Uganda, the Auditor-General, the Solicitor-General, and the matter is not concluded. We had the last meeting today and at lunch time just before we came here, we were, in anticipation, trying to make an interim report. 

What my honourable colleague from Butambala is alluding to is what we had wanted to do before coming here. We wanted to have an interim report just in case this matter came on the Floor, but we are not ready yet. I must say we are not ready yet - Mariam is aware; she has not appended her signature. Do you expect the chairman to present a lone report? We have not got the conclusive information because just this morning, while interfacing with the Auditor-General’s office and the Solicitor-General’s office, there were new findings which require further inquiry and this would take time. That is why I agree, entirely, that we separate the future borrowing from the suspect borrowing. 

Also, the Committee on National Economy shall continue, as instructed by the plenary, to complete this report. However, I would be happier if in future we avoided giving instructions in a mixed way because PAC now thinks we are trying to do their work and yet we are not dying to do their work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Prime Minister finish. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I have very abundantly benefited from the information given, and in a way it really makes the case I wanted to present, that this matter is before PAC and they are handling it in great detail. It is also before the Committee on National Economy. You have heard from the chairperson and the honourable member there saying that they are still considering it and that they are not ready to give a report. Even if we urged them to be as expeditious in handling this as possible, we cannot tell exactly when they will come. 

Would it be prudent, surely, for us to subject the acquisition of loans to run the programmes we have for this country to the resolution of those issues, which are being handled any way? As I said, these are loan requests that we have already approved; we are only looking at technicalities. If we find that anything went wrong, we will take corrective action, which will have no clear bearing on the loans that we are getting now. Wouldn’t it be prudent, therefore, that we continue to handle the loans that we need now as our own process of looking into possible misdemeanours in the management of past loans, which we had already approved, goes on?

THE SPEAKER: Well, that was a request from the minister. If I can read it again: “In view of the above submission, I beg to move that you allow the parliamentary Committee on National Economy to submit their report on loans for the new projects, which are very important for economic growth and socio-economic development of our country.” 

It raises one issue, which is for the House to decide: would it contradict any previous decision that was taken by the House if we move this way? 

5.08
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank the Minister of Finance for the statement he has made. It is a very important statement. However, I would like to seek certain clarification from the minister on specific key things. 

One, I have been informed, again subject to clarification, that our total debt portfolio as a nation is about 38 per cent of our GDP, climbing up. There are commitments that we have made as Government in the past and a number of loans are either non-performing, non-effective or our contribution to activate the loans in terms of 10 per cent to a larger extent has not been made. 

The third point is that there are certain loans that we have acquired, for example there is a loan which was  acquired from the World Bank of about US$ 3.4 million for procurement of radios, which were about 11 or 12; this loan and the equipment remain still idle in the stores of the Ministry of Information at UBC. The main equipment, which you see in front of UBC, the satellite antenna, up to now is not functional. This is US$ 3.4 million, and there are many other loans like that. 

The issue is, we have done a lot of work but it is important, Mr Speaker, that we take value for money. Some of them have become due; we are paying for them and our children are paying for them. It is, therefore, important in its oversight function, for Government and us as Parliament to see to it that the Committee on National Economy comes and appraises or reports to this Parliament on the performance of the loans that have been acquired, working closely with the Ministry of Finance. We want to know how the loans that we acquired in the past are functioning or how they have been disbursed and whether there is value for money. 

It is also important for us to note that there are certain bilateral agreements that are on-going now, which are good for us. A case in point is the Karuma Dam, Ayago, Isimba, the road between Entebbe and the Kampala- the express highway. These are very important for us as Government. They are now in advanced stages. As the people in charge of the country, we want to see that these loans, as we acquire them, help the economy develop because these are major infrastructural developments. However, the important point here is that it is important that the sector ministers work very closely with the committee so that they can be able to appraise them on the development, so that when these issues are brought on the Floor, they do not cause a problem.

I would also like to suggest, through my colleague, the Leader of Government Business, that at an appropriate time, in our usual cocoons, we sit down and discuss some of these issues –(Interjections)- in our caucus, sorry. (Laughter) It is important that we have the opportunity at an appropriate time to discuss some of these critical issues. It is very important for us as the ruling party to see that the money we require to attain our manifesto and to make it realistic is discussed internally, so that when we come on the Floor of Parliament we are not divided - there is no variance in ideas. 

I would like to say that those points that I have raised are very important. I would like to urge my colleague, the Leader of Government Business, to take note, and also the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy to review and see how you can help the Parliament appreciate some of the challenges we have had. 

Fortunately, some of us have been members of the Committee on National Economy before. I was a member in the Sixth Parliament and there are a number of loan requests that were passed, some of which are still fresh in my mind. I know some of the loans have not been optimally utilised. I, therefore, think that we need to review this position and help the Executive perform effectively. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, from a presiding officer’s perspective, why are we having this debate? We are having this debate because in the course of the Budget debate, some issues arose and those issues were referred to the Committee on National Economy. The committee has presented a situation of contest between the committees on national economy and public accounts, from what the chairman has just said. This now means that a lot of work has been stayed, pending what will come from the public accounts and national economy committees, which now is clear is not going to happen very soon. 

The issue is that we have some requests on the Order Paper that are new - Opuyo-Moroto electricity transmission line; the Uganda Energy for Rural Transformation Adaptable Programme loan; the Hoima-Nkenda power transmission line and associated substation; –(Applause)– the Kampala-Entebbe power transmission line project; –(Applause)– the national food security through the increased rice production project. These are the ones that are on the Order Paper today. I am reading them from the Order Paper. We cannot now handle this one because of the preliminary issues that arose during the course of the Budget debate and so on. The question now is: How do we move?

MR JACOB OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have rightly guided us and listening to the Leader of Government Business was quite helpful and also the chairman of the national economy committee.

Mr Speaker, I have a copy of that report from the Minister of Finance. The matter is before the national economy committee and PAC. The question that you raised, I also raise again: should we now stifle other projects, awaiting the outcome from these committees? Let us assume that the answer will be in the affirmative, and God forbid - Supposing the national economy committee came up with a finding that the procedures were not followed, are we going to stop borrowing? Is this Parliament going to stop approving loans? So, what will it be? 

I think this comes back to what the Prime Minister said – remedial action will be taken. Now, we cannot continue to tag this debate to the other loans and whoever would do that would be quite selfish in my view. Mr Speaker, I pray that Members find it comfortable –(Interruption)

MRS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are all Members of Parliament who were sent by the electorate and we all need service provision. Everybody needs power; I equally need power. The Constitution guides us on what we are supposed to do. First of all, before we approve these loan requests, the law provides that we should know the level of our indebtedness – how much we have in terms of loans and the modalities of paying them. –(Interjection)– Wait, I am about to give the point of order. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the loans that we are acquiring will be paid back by this government from the monies that we generate. Our children will actually pay them. Is it, therefore, in order for the Member of Parliament from West Budama County South to stop us from carrying out this inquiry, yet it is our mandate as Parliament to know what we have acquired in terms of loans, our level of indebtedness, the modalities of payment? 

Sometimes we approve loan requests blindly and then we discover that we have over acquired loans. This is our mandate and nobody should stop us. We are not stopping the loan from being approved but please, clarify some of these things to the Members of Parliament. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, in listening to what you have just said, I find that you actually agree with the honourable member for West Budama South. (Laughter) Yes, you are both on the same page and the question is: When do we raise those questions? I think that is the question he is asking and it is also the same question you are asking. 

Our level of indebtedness - when do we raise that question? Is it at the time when we are examining a particular request? Are we correctly proceeding with the Opuyo-Moroto power line asking for US$ 80 million dollars without knowing our level of indebtedness so far? Would that not be the proper time to assess those levels of indebtedness? Do we just get a separate session to assess the level of indebtedness first, without attending to any request, and then we bring loans and we start assessing again? 

That is why I am saying that you are both on the same page; the question he is asking is the same question you are asking. The question is: When do we as Parliament ask those questions? The Member for West Budama is saying, we can ask it in the process of examining the next loan but you are saying that we should examine it before we examine any other loan. But it is still the same question; Parliament will ask those questions anyway. 

5.23
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, you have rightfully guided the House and colleagues have been able to appreciate that fact that we have got a lot of business to undertake. In view of your ruling and guidance and the importance of the matter before us, I beg to move that this House adopts the prayer of the Minister of Finance on the motion to the effect that in view of the current need by Government to acquire more loans for development of the country, the House adopts the recommendations, the statement of the Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, there is a motion moved by the Member for Soroti Municipality, seconded by both Members for West Budama North and West Budama South and Member for Koboko; Member for Dokolo – I think those are enough secondments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to understand that this does not stop the question of our level of indebtedness. A time will come to examine that question during another loan. But what is our level? The minister will explain that but it is still a legitimate question. Can I put the question to the motion – 

5.25
MR RAPHAEL MAGEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that in addition, the minister for finance, within the next 14 days tables before Parliament a full statement on the status of the previous loans – let me repeat. That within the next 14 days, the Minister for Finance produces a statement on the level of indebtedness of this country. I beg to move.  

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give information to the effect that the Committee on National Economy has already indicated in the Business Committee that we are ready to give a report on the state of the economy and also the debt stock. But let me also remind colleagues that every time the Minister of Finance presents a budget, he lays on Table the report on loans, grants and guarantees. I followed it up; I received copies in my office and I supervised the process of distribution to ensure every pigeonhole gets a copy. It is that report that honourable members should read and every sessional committee should get interested in its sector. 

Just last week, we invited the Committee on Education to explain to us why they are delaying the technical schools in the different parts of this country and we encourage every committee to engage their ministries on why their loans are not performing well. That is the docket of the sessional committees. 

Mr Speaker, we request that immediately we return from the Independence celebrations, let the committee be given space on the Order Paper to present these reports. We have been queuing up on the Order Paper for the last five weeks because of the budget, but these reports are ready. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think with that, I withdraw my proposed amendment. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of the Committee on National Economy. Precisely, what my chairperson has said is the information I want to give this House. In this Parliament, those questions keep popping up but there was guidance from the Speaker that each sessional committee should get interested in the loan performance in their sectors. So it is not a preserve of the Committee on National Economy, but the sectoral committees should also pick interest in this. 

5.30
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make an amendment because this issue, I should say, is a bit embarrassing that the word out there from people, including our development partners is that they are wondering whether it is true that Government can go ahead to disburse a loan without parliamentary approval; it is a serious matter. 

So I want us to commit ourselves to clear this matter once and for all. I would like the chairperson for the Committee on National Economy to be given a time frame within which to bring this report – (Interjections) – no, it was national economy which was assigned by this Parliament. Let them bring a report specifically on this item because it would be another serious matter if this thing comes up again in the Auditor-General’s report. 

I know it is a matter of procedure, which we need to realign and we can only realign this procedure – the procedure I am talking about is when Parliament should approve and when should Ministry of Finance approve a loan before disbursement. It is a serious matter which has cost implications. If you are given 120 days, and Parliament approves that loan 240 days later, that time lag of 120 days accrues costs to this country. We do not want to incur more costs. We need to realign the process. 

I propose that the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy prepares and forwards a report on the matters raised and forwarded to that committee within two weeks from today. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion was for the adoption of the requisition from the minister that the Committee on National Economy submits their report on loans for the new project, which are very important for economic growth and socio-economic development of the country. The amendment which is not contradicting is that the same committee should within two weeks present a report on the other aspects. I think they are consistent because it is the same committee. The committee should be allowed to present its report on the loans, which are pending now and the same committee should, in the course of two weeks, present the report on the other issues that were raised previously. 

Yes, as long as the committee is ready and as soon as we convene, you can present the report. No, I think it is clear, honourable. It will not come in the way of us handling these other ones but we give the extra burden on the National Economy Committee to solve the other issues and also bring it back to Parliament. I put the question to the amendment -

MR BAHATI: I just want some clarification, Mr Speaker. We know that this House directed the Committee on National Economy to look at this aspect but also PAC, through its normal procedure, received a report from the Auditor-General and there were some issues relating to this matter. Did our directive mean that once National Economy has looked at it, PAC will not look at it? And if PAC is going to look at it, if you give a timeline to National Economy - really in my opinion, this is a very serious matter and we should probably give PAC time to look at it and we close it at once. I think it is very important to have a comprehensive way of looking at this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, let me put it this way. The Chairman of National Economy has just said that over lunch, they were contemplating preparing an interim report, which means they are basically ready with their aspect because some matters were referred to them and in any case, it is their sector. 

Public Accounts Committee, on the other hand, is only dealing with those issues raised in the report of the Auditor-General. The difference is that they are bound to what is raised in the report of the Auditor-General. That is what PAC does but the National Economy Committee has the full mandate of the House in dealing with matters concerning loans in Parliament. Isn’t that correct? So there is no inconsistency. 

There is that, which was already referred to the committee and now we are just giving a timeline within which they should compile and complete and we process. I do not think there is any contradiction, Members. There is no contradiction. Can I put the question to the amendment? I put the question to the amendment proposed by the Member for Bukedea.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion as amended with those two provisions.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE COMPENSATION AND RESETTLEMENT OF THE WOMEN AFFECTED BY THE PROPOSED GOVERNMENT PLAN FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE OIL REFINERY IN BUSERUKA COUNTY, HOIMA DISTRICT

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As discussed last week, the Speaker guided that we hold further consultations on this motion and indeed the movers of the motion, together with the different ministries, are already consulting and the different schedules have been made. We still need more time to handle these issues and I request that you give us more time. When we are done with the schedules and the meetings that we have set, we will come back to you and bring the motion back to the Floor of Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, so that the matter is handled in a more comprehensive manner and so that the motion is sufficiently informed. I grant you that permission.

MOTION FOR A PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PETITION BY THE UGANDA TRADERS IN SOUTH SUDAN

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have ten minutes.

5.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for this time to present a report and a motion for presentation, consideration and adoption of the report from the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the petition of Ugandan traders in South Sudan.

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that since the members have the copies, you would allow me to make a summary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Make a summary.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The report I am going to read has an annex of 11 documents as presented on page 2.

It was on 24 July 2012 when hon. Kakoba Onyango, MP Buikwe, presented the petition on behalf of the Uganda traders in South Sudan on the mistreatment and harassment by authorities in South Sudan. Mr Speaker, you directed that the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry considers the petition and thereafter report back to Parliament.

I would request that Members read the background but in the methodology, we held meetings and I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the meetings we held and a copy of the report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report and the minutes of the meetings.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, the committee travelled to South Sudan and held meetings with the following people: 
    • The Speaker of South Sudan National Legislative Assembly, Rt hon. Wani James Igga; 
    • The Clerk to South Sudan National Legislative Assembly, Mr Mark Nyikang Yomon; 
    • The chairpersons and vice chairpersons of the committees and Members in the South Sudan National Legislative Assembly chaired by hon. James Lual Deng, Chairperson, Committee of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation;
    • The Deputy Interior Minister, hon. Lt Gen. Salva Mathok Gengdit; 
    • The Inspector-General of Police of the Republic of South Sudan, Gen. Acuil Tito Madut; the Commissioner of Central Equatoria State, Maj. Gen. Abraham Angal; Assistant Inspector-General for Crime and Investigation, Maj. Gen. Gibson and the Director of Nationality, Passport and Immigration.
    • The committee also met the Ugandan-South Sudan Community under their umbrella organisation of Ugandan Community in South Sudan; 
    • The Director General of the South Sudan National Prisons Services, Gen. Makon.

The meeting with the petitioners; that is the Uganda Traders Association in South Sudan 

The following were highlighted in the meeting with this group about the membership and role of the Uganda Traders Association of South Sudan. The plight of Ugandan traders in South Sudan since 2009 to date and the proposed interventions in the following areas:
    1. Supporting the facilitation of Ugandan Traders Association of South Sudan, lobbying and advocacy efforts to ensure the governments of South Sudan and Uganda accelerate the compensation process for the affected traders.
    2. To support, especially in facilitating the provision of short term technical assistance and financial support to ensure that Ugandan traders remain in competitive business in South Sudan and that South Sudan counterparts create a favourable business environment for all the stakeholders.

The documents were submitted as annex II.

The meeting with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

The committee met with these institutions and in their response to the petition as annex I, the following were highlighted:
    • Trade related issues and claims: Trade relations between Uganda and South Sudan were provided for in the Framework Agreement on Technical, Economic, Political, Social and Cultural Cooperation of 2009 and this was reviewed at the ministerial meeting of the Joint Permanent Commission of the two countries.
    • At the Joint Permanent Commission meeting, the ministers acknowledged the existence of outstanding claims and complaints and noted that a trade dispute and arbitration committee had been established to resolve the disputes.
    • That as a way forward, the ministers agreed to the need to expedite a resolution of the outstanding claims in a report of the Joint Permanent Commission where it was decided that:
        i) Existing memoranda of understanding be fully instituted.
        ii) The trade dispute arbitration committee be established as soon as possible to verify claims made by both countries by the end of June 2013.
        iii) The joint non-tariff barrier committee by both governments be constituted to compile a list of non-tariff barriers. 

Related Trade Facilitating Issues
    • Following complaints of mistreatment and harassment of Ugandans, the petitioners requested Government to intervene in addressing these issues including institution of appropriate policy and the mechanism to ensure that the Uganda Traders’ Association in South Sudan members are secure and treated fairly by both agents and the Government of South Sudan.
    • The Joint Permanent Commission held in December, as in annex 1, discussed the issue and took note of the challenges relating to cross border movement and the interaction between their people and agreed to the full operationalisation of the memoranda of understanding in Police and Prisons cooperation which are already in place. 
    • Other key decisions made on this and other issues were:
        i. That the parties issue travelling documents of at least one year validity and one month for the trans-boundary community; and
        ii. The ministries responsible for border matters conclude and sign a memorandum of understanding on joint border verification and demarcation. 

Construction of a market in Juba
    • The opening of the border with the Republic of South Sudan opened an opportunity for Uganda’s export products. An amount of $844,539.64 was released to the Uganda Embassy in Juba by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in financial year 2009/2010 as initial funding for the project. Before the contract award could be finalised, the Ministry of Finance wrote advising that Government did not have the required funds to complete the project so the project should be scaled down by 70 percent from the original estimate of $4.5 million. This led to the stalling of the procurement process for the construction of the market. The Central Equatorial State ran out of patience and reallocated the land for other use. 
    • As the procurement process stalled, other intervening factors came up which necessitated a review of priorities for investment in the Republic of South Sudan. Circumstances for the need of a market in Juba changed: Permanent markets had been constructed where Ugandans could rent space for trading and Juba was becoming safer. Besides, the project had been heavily politicised and would have exacerbated the hostilities between Ugandans and South Sudanese. 

    • In view of the above, cabinet approved the reallocation of the funds for construction of the chancery for the Uganda Embassy in Juba. This is in annex 3.

Meetings in South Sudan -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, please give summaries now. 

MS KABAHENDA: We held the meetings in South Sudan as shown in the committee report as distributed to the Members. We held a meeting with the Rt hon. Speaker of the South Sudan National Legislative Assembly; the Clerk to the South Sudan National Legislative Assembly; Chairpersons and Vice-Chairpersons of various committees in the same assembly; the committee members of the South Sudan National Legislative Assembly and; the Deputy Minister for Interior. The response from His Excellency the Minister of Interior - maybe you will allow me to give the responses right now, Mr Speaker.

The response from His Excellency the Minister of Interior
He admitted that Uganda played a very important role in the liberation of South Sudan at the time when the rest of the world had abandoned them. He expressed his sentiments about Sudanese families that were staying in Uganda with some of their students on scholarships in Ugandan education institutions. He stated that some allegations mentioned were true but he implored members to understand that for some Sudanese, Uganda was like home with their families residing and children going to school there. 

The response from the Inspector General of Police whom he invited
He noted that some of the allegations in the petitions had happened due to insecurities related with new governance. He stated that not all that was stated in the petition was true and that there was need to investigate the allegations as issues of security and trade. The issues of detention without trial would be handled by the Ministry of Justice and in order to resolve some of these issues, he stated that he had signed a memorandum of understanding with his counterpart in Uganda, the Inspector General of Police, on the following areas: terrorism, training and capacity building, joint operations, border and highway patrols, exchange of security information and arms trafficking.

He further informed the committee that the - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have three more minutes to go to the recommendations. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just remaining with I think three more pages. He further informed the committee that the Ugandan community in South Sudan had been asked, through the Ugandan Embassy, to register all its citizens living in Juba, specifying what they were doing and where they were staying but unfortunately the turn up had been poor. He assured the members -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you go to the findings of the committee in 7.0 on page 18 and then you do the recommendations.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, just allow me - maybe because there is - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go to page 18 on the findings of the committee.  

MS KABAHENDA: Page 18: the committee findings and observations.
    1. The harassment and mistreatment of Ugandan traders was real and was happening. 
    2. Some Ugandans were in South Sudan illegally and did not possess the required travel documents. 
    3. Whereas there was a deliberate plan for other nationals helped by their governments to engage in bigger businesses, most Ugandan traders were involved in petty and small businesses.
    4. There were no Ugandan owned banks in South Sudan and this sector had been taken over by Kenya.
    5. The lucrative construction sector was mainly dominated by Eritreans, Ethiopians and Kenyans. 
    6. Uganda may soon lose its market share in South Sudan because it has not positioned itself strategically in lucrative business.
    7. Internal markets, for example, Konyokonyo were to be demolished and the land allocated to Eritrean developers for construction of a hotel.
    8. The relationship between Ugandans and the Uganda Embassy in South Sudan was not cordial.
    9. That the government reaction to the plight of the traders was lukewarm.  
    10. Some traders, mainly grain traders, were partially compensated. However, the small traders’ claim requires a joint verification which has not been honoured by the Government of South Sudan and is planned to be completed by June 2013.
    11. The Government of Uganda committed funds for the construction of a market for Ugandan traders in South Sudan but that the funds had been diverted by a cabinet decision as in appendix 3.

Recommendations
    1. The committee strongly recommends that the process of the verification of claims by both governments of South Sudan and Uganda be concluded within 60 days and the traders compensated.

    2. Government urgently takes keen interest in the affairs of Uganda Traders Association in South Sudan and facilitate a conducive trading environment for them.

    3. The Government of Uganda should encourage investment in the banking and construction sectors which are lucrative in South Sudan. 

    4. Government facilitates trade between Uganda and South Sudan; a border market be expeditiously constructed at Bibia.

    5. An extradition treaty should be signed between Uganda and South Sudan to enable Ugandan prisoners in South Sudan to be tried from home.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. The rest are annexes as attachments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that lots of Ugandan traders have had these issues. Why I opted to bring this matter forward was because for us in the Office of the Speaker and in the Office of the Deputy Speaker, we have heard all kinds of people coming to see how far we have gone with this matter. 

I thank the chairperson for having completed this work earlier. It would be a proper time for us to have a debate and look specifically at those recommendations and see how we can move this matter forward. If there are some doubts, we see how to clear them - we limit our contributions please; let us not take very long. Would two minutes be enough for each? I will start with the Member for Adjumani. 

5.52
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for this report. Under the recommendations, I have issues for clarification especially on the construction of Bibia Market. I want to understand why the construction is delaying and when the ministry intends to start construction. 

Secondly, in recommendation 5.4, I totally agree with you because our people are really suffering. Once you get arrested in Sudan, bailing you out is a problem. I have members from my community who have stayed for even over two weeks and, therefore, I totally agree with this recommendation that our people be tried from the home country. 

Lastly, for us to be able to benefit from this trade cooperation with South Sudan, we must enrich our products. Many of the goods that we take to Sudan are perishable; for instance, from Adjumani, what people normally take is charcoal because it has market there but this is affecting our environment. So, I think the relevant ministries should join hands with the Ministry of Trade so that we enrich our products in order for our people to benefit. Thank you. 

5.54
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): I thank the committee for having made such a wonderful report. Mr Speaker, I am one of the businessmen who have suffered at the hands of the Sudanese. I suffered tremendously to the extent that it is four years down the road and no payment has been made to us. We secured loans from various banks here and placed really heavy properties as security. We had to go to the point of selling some of the properties in order to pay the banks to maintain the PRD good records. I sent two aircrafts into Sudan and I had a very difficult time securing the aircrafts to bring them back. 

Mr Speaker, in Sudan, the biggest problem is the law - the jurisprudence in Sudan is not at the same level with ours. Obviously, I do understand that they are a developing nation but the applicable law is difficult for you to exert law in that area even if you have a court order. Somebody just flouts it. The level of impunity in South Sudan is amazing. Many of our businessmen have lost huge properties. I have a colleague here, hon. Bahati; he is now at the mercy of the banks. We have some of the biggest traders who have supplied maize into Sudan; they have lost their houses in Kololo and so on. 

I was chairing the committee of the traders initially to try and find a common position. I would like to thank His Excellency the President who has done his best but the recommendations contained herein need to be taken seriously. There is no way a country like South Sudan - and I am very sure a colleague will come in and harness it more - will come into the East African Community when they do not practice common trade and appreciate the difficulties and the challenges colleagues in Uganda undergo to supply and have common border trade. It is very difficult. 

So, I really would like to suggest that the relevant ministers also take opportunity to sit down with the traders as often and as regularly as they can because the trade between Sudan and Uganda has gone down by over 82 percent –(Member timed out.)

5.57
MR MUDIMU WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the committee for the report. I have relatives who up to now are missing. They sold a car to the Sudanese and when they followed up the balance, they never returned. It is now two years and we have failed to trace them. The challenge we have, much as we have large trade volumes of export to South Sudan - and I want to get clarification from the Minister of Trade whether they have a focal person at the embassy who is handling issues of trade because most of these traders – (Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that you said you wonder whether the Ministry of Trade has an officer at the embassy in charge of trade. Even if the officer is there, one thing I have seen is that these people at the embassies are not out there to assist Ugandans. You recall the experience I had in India; hon. Members, the embassy in India could not do anything. They were getting instructions from here and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs seemed not to care about Ugandans who are abroad. That is the information I want to give you. 

MR WAMAKUYU: So, much as there are those weaknesses, if I am supported, I would like move that we implore the Ministry of Trade to at least have a focal person at the embassy who can deal with the issue of trade specifically. 

On the issue of the market, this Parliament passed money for the construction of the market and again in the report, they say they need to establish a market. What happened to the previous funding?  

5.59
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the committee. In the spirit of Pan-Africanism, when South Sudan attained Independence, I moved a motion in this Parliament that was unanimously passed congratulating South Sudan and we thought that was independence for the black race. Two years down the road, I am disappointed. I am moved and I am deeply touched at the way South Sudan is handling fellow Africans from Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I support all the attempts being made by the Government of Uganda and that of South Sudan but I want to put South Sudan on notice through this Parliament that if the worst comes to the worst, they have applied to join the East African Community; I am going to bring another motion on the Floor of this Parliament urging the East African Community not to admit South Sudan until they put their house in order. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, you taught me human rights law at the Law Development Centre and we are three students here taught by you: myself, hon. Karungi and hon. Mwiru. Until South Sudan adheres to the principles, the notions and the ideals of human rights, we cannot continue handling them with kid gloves even if they are the market for products from Uganda. We must have political solutions because this is also something that is politically motivated. So, I would like to give this notice through this debate that if the worst comes to the worst, where negotiation fails, we are going to move a motion here and this motion must move to the East African Community Secretariat to the extent that South Sudan should never be admitted to the East African Community until they adhere to all the principles that govern the Community. I want to add this as an additional recommendation. Thank you.

6.02
MS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I heard one of my colleagues say, “At last.” I was wondering whether I had become too invisible to catch your eye for the past two sittings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just short-sighted.

MS OKWENYE: I will have to move closer such that you can easily see me. Mr Speaker, the issue of the Government of South Sudan mistreating our citizens in their territory has dragged on for a very long time. At first, we thought it was just the issue of security but as time goes on, we have come to realise that it is an issue of attitude. Very many of our traders have suffered; I have somebody in my constituency who lost over $500,000. He supplied maize to the Government of South Sudan but he has never been paid. And when you go to claim for your money, you are threatened. 

Mr Speaker, we have lost very many of our citizens in South Sudan; they are arrested, detained and they disappear because they are killed. I strongly support my brother, hon. Hamson Obua’s view that we actually put South Sudan on notice; that we Ugandans are tolerant of them – they freely move in our country and you find them everywhere where they blend with our people without anybody pointing a finger at them or making their life difficult. They go to our schools; their wives and children are here and very comfortable.

I would also request them – if they are watching and listening – that it is high time they changed their attitude. This is not just a bilateral issue; I think it is really about attitude as I mentioned before. Let them sensitise their citizens and tell them that the world has developed and they are no longer in their cocoon which they used to be in. Since they are now a republic, they need to adjust. And if they are to join us – I know they really want to join us – they need behavioural change –(Member timed out_)

6.05
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. There is this recommendation No.5. I highly support it and we have the law we passed here concerning the transfer of convicted persons. I would urge Government – if it has not operationalised it – to put it into practice. We would like to be informed whether the Act has been assented to; why don’t they apply this bill that we passed here? So let it work because our people are languishing in prisons in South Sudan. 

Secondly, at one time there was a commission of inquiry that was set up and they submitted a report to the president of South Sudan. I hope the Minister for Trade is aware. But I do not know why they have not fast tracked the implementation of the recommendations therein. We need to be clarified here because the truth was found out – because it was a jointly carried out commission of inquiry – and the Ministry or the Executive should fast-track to see to it that the recommendations are implemented so that we have a cordial relationship. Thank you.
 
6.07
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their excellent report. Ugandans are really disappointed in what the Sudanese are doing to our citizens in South Sudan. The Sudanese should be aware that we have been hosting them since 165 when their first war started. And since then they have been coming here and we educated them. The current leaders in South Sudan like MPs and ministers got their education in Uganda. And up to today they are here enjoying our hospitality. But when we go to South Sudan it is a different story.

Even at the border some Kakwas are in South Sudan while others are in DR Congo. When you cross the border, you must pay Shs 20,000 whether you are going for a funeral or business. You can imagine! Then when the businesswomen go there, they are raped and when they come back their husbands reject them because of that. Those are the kind of things they are doing to our people. When drivers get involved in accidents and kill somebody there, they kill more than two people in that vehicle. So many Ugandans are dying there while South Sudan has forgotten what we have done for them. 

This issue of border markets should be expedited; already in Koboko we have a very large piece of land for the market. Let us build a very big market so that the South Sudanese can come to collect food here instead of us going with our food there and be mistreated along the way. I am sure we shall even get more revenue and I doubt if they will mistreat us.

I want to assure the Government of South Sudan that we are brothers and sisters; we are black Africans and we must love one another. And there are Kakwas who live in South Sudan, DR Congo and Uganda, which is a very good fraternity. We hold international meetings at the border from time to time. As soon as you complete the meeting you hear that our people were killed in South Sudan. So I urge the Government of South Sudan to have the law implemented because some people have decided to take the law into their hands. People can now do anything they want against Ugandans. And since Ugandans are astute in business, the South Sudanese are now jealous. Please learn from the Ugandans and do business side by side and we can support. Thank you.

6.11
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here although my side – the Opposition – is not in the House because most of the petitioners and those who have suffered live in Kampala. And I am under a lot of pressure to be here and plead their cause. 

Right now, Mr Speaker, there is a situation that is alarming in Kampala – where people are talking of retaliation. And I think we should be aware of that. Some of our youth are saying that they want to retaliate because they have been sent back and they want to revenge on the South Sudanese who live here. So I think the Minister of Internal Affairs should know that if we do not handle some of these things expeditiously, we will see bloodshed and we will now have to answer why citizens of another country are being harassed and maybe killed in Uganda. This is because Ugandans are fed up; if they are being chased away from south Sudan, why can’t we chase away their nationals from Uganda? In a layman’s language, I think an eye for an eye is easier and when you look at the issues that are raised in the report, you realise that our government seems to think that we should always be on the giving side all the time. The rest of the people around us should always be on the receiving side. 

Ugandans feel there is nothing more to give; we have been sucked; we are suffering. Our traders are so poor right now; the economy is not doing well; at least in the eyes of the traders. And when they lose trust in what Government can do to help them, then our people will abandon business and target the foreigners. 

Mr Speaker, I want the cabinet ministers who are here to take note and not just resign as if nothing can be done. I see resignation in the faces of the ministers because the situation is above them –(Interruption) 

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening very attentively to hon. Nabila. Her sentiments are legitimate. But for her to cast a casual glance at the Front Bench and then say we are resigned and it seems we are unable to do anything – what is the evidence to that effect? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the hon. Member raised the point of order on behalf of all the Front Bench Members because otherwise it might be the dog that is hit by the stone that always makes noise. Honourable member, this is the Government; do not forget. It is awake and alert; bear that in mind. 

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I hope that is an assurance by the Front Bench that the recommendations of the committee are going to be acted upon, and we need a timeframe for the actions that the Front Bench is going to undertake. 

6.15
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this very good report. There is an observation, which says that the Government of Uganda committed funds for construction of a market for Ugandan traders in South Sudan, but the funds were diverted by a cabinet decision. We are here crying that our people are suffering in Sudan. But why was the money diverted? It is the government making these people suffer because if you do not provide funds for our people to own a market, what do you expect them to do?

We have been talking about USE funds and you are coming up with very hard conditions. Honestly, what do you expect the people of Uganda to do? If Government was serious, we would not encounter most of those problems. 

Another thing in the observation is that most of our people do not have travel documents. First of all, we have a problem in this country; we do not even have national identity cards. Who is causing this problem? That is why our people are moving in all directions of East Africa and they cannot identify themselves. Perhaps the Sudanese fill our people are terrorists or robbers and that is why they cannot be identified. 

So to me, it is not Sudan to blame; it is Government of Uganda to blame for not providing its citizens with enough revolving funds, especially for the youth and are not constructing markets to engage our people. 

And when you read the report, you find that it is Ugandans doing petty jobs. Why isn’t this government giving enough money to our traders so that they can be competitive when they go to Sudan – (Member timed out.)

6.17
MS ROSE AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here as one of the people living along the borders of South Sudan. My district borders South Sudan. It is true that the South Sudanese are inhuman. I remember last year, we lost two soldiers – (Interruption) 

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, much as we are discussing a very sensitive topic, is it in order for the honourable member who has been holding the Floor to use un-parliamentary language saying that, “South Sudanese are inhuman”?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Constitution which I am holding here prohibits inhuman and degrading treatment, which means there are actually people who act in inhuman ways. The word “inhuman” is actually in the Constitution. That means there are people who do things that way. 

MS ROSE AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I want to alert my colleague; I live on the border. The South Sudanese walk on foot to my constituency and they come armed. You know very well that the Karimojong were disarmed. So they come with their guns and find women who are in the gardens and take away their things. That is inhuman; why would you find a poor woman in the garden and take away her hoe? 

Mr Speaker, I say they are inhuman because last year, they came at the border and caught two soldiers – (Interruption)

MR ASUPASA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to give information to this House. At one time, our brothers from South Sudan arrested Members of this august House in a very degrading and inhuman way; they took them hostage into Sudan. That was not humane. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you my colleague for that information –(Interruption) 

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matters that we are discussing are very weighty matters. They are matters that have a bearing on our relationship as a country with a neighbouring country. We have had instances particularly when South Sudan took a decision to ban boda-bodas across the board. There were reactions in Uganda where Sudanese were actually being kidnapped by different people. As a ministry, we received those complaints and even police, some were actually stabbed. 

I just wanted to make an appeal to colleagues that we should express our sentiments as strongly as we can but at the same time be sensitive to what could be the impact of the statements we are making particularly to the ordinary Ugandan who is already angry, they have been treated badly and now is looking for justification to maybe even carry the law into their own hands.

MR MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I observe with a lot of respect the submissions which have been made by a colleague the Minister of Foreign Affairs in charge of East African Affairs. But the quota concern my colleague is raising is a matter of xenophobia which is being practised more by the Sudanese. That is a matter that is very critical that in my own view, he should be taking it up for a reciprocal approach. I therefore would like to urge you as a minister in charge of this matter, to pursue it to its logical conclusion.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am really bleeding inside my heart because of the way the minister was talking; we have buried people killed by the South Sudanese in my district – (Member timed out_)

6.24
MS BENNY BUGEMBE (NRM, Woman Representative Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Members of this committee who made this report that is an eye-opener to the Government of Uganda and all Ugandans. I want in the strongest terms possible to castigate the people of South Sudan who are mistreating Ugandans after lending them a helping hand. 

What is more disheartening to me is observation number 8 on page 19, which says that the relationship between Ugandan traders and the Ugandan embassy and South Sudan is not cordial. Mr Speaker, this has been lamented by hon. Mawanda my neighbour here. What happened to him in India was not very good. There is a problem that these are people who are disowned by one of their own. While away from Uganda, your embassy is supposed to be your home. But the embassy of Uganda in South Sudan is not a home to Ugandans. Neither the embassy in India was a home to hon. Mawanda.
 
I want to inquire from cabinet whether the people who work in these embassies undergo induction training. Maybe they don’t know what they are supposed to do when we are out there.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much for yielding the floor hon. Member. The information I want to give you is that some of the officers in these embassies I think have not been trained. There is an officer in India I think he was a trader or he can’t even do anything. When you go to see him the man hides. When you have a problem, you have no body to see. In fact as the honourable member has said, these embassies and consulates are doing a disservice to Ugandans.

MS BUGEMBE: Thank you very much for the information, I think cabinet has been listening; we have a problem which has to be addressed. Let these people be inducted in the kind of job they are doing such that they do a good service to the people of Uganda.
 
MS AUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way. The information I would like to give my colleague is, let us appreciate the challenges that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is going through. 
Many times we have come to the floor of Parliament saying that the resources that are given to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are not sufficient enough to really consider the problems of the Ugandans in Diaspora.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member to confuse us that the resources are not enough for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to be able to give even simple consular services, to be told that go there and see a doctor? You don’t need to have money for somebody to give you such kind of consular services, it is not the question of money but it is the question of public relations in our embassies. So is she in order to say that the issue of money is the reason that chanceries or the embassies are not rendering services to Ugandans?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this House has been briefed very many times that our embassies are not very well resourced and this house has received such reports many times. That might be contributing to the morale of the people working there. So it might be something we need to consider instead of trying to stop the member from raising the same issue.

MS BUGEMBE: Right Honourable Speaker I think I have gotten enough information –(Interruption)
 
MS AUMA: Honourable Speaker, thank you so much for your right ruling. I do agree with my colleague that there are challenges of procedures in the embassies, how they handle people who seek assistance. But I want to add that just like some of us; you know what a voter would require from you. Some of us would like even to avoid the calls of our voters because of what we presume a voter would want from - (Member timed out.) 

MS BUGEMBE: Mr Speaker, I have received that information, however much as we have very little money, you cannot fail to do some little PR kind of work. This is what we are inquiring from these people. I also want to inquire from cabinet that as Government of Uganda, do we know how many Sudanese are in Uganda. If not, can we make a census for these Sudanese - (Member timed out.)

MR WILSON ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to add my voice to support the requisitions of the committee but I want to wonder loudly why the Government of Uganda does not guide Ugandans about their plight in foreign countries. 

This document talks about the plight of Ugandans in South Sudan. It is known in every corner of Uganda that whenever you step in South Sudan, you will either come back normal or your merchandise will be taken, or you will be tortured, or somebody will be raped, or some goods will be stolen. It is not safe, can the Government of Uganda come out with a statement and guide Ugandans going to South Sudan.
 
Just this incident that happened in Kenya, many governments guided their nationals: “Please, don’t travel to Kenya”. Can Ugandans be guided in the same way? Can we really know that when you go to South Sudan, we shall wait for you and you come back? We need guidance from Government. 

Mr Speaker, instead of the Minister for Foreign Affairs talking about diplomacy we really do appreciate it, but Ugandans first when you are Ugandan. Why should we simply lament around? Tell our country, come up with a statement, and let us listen to something. How should a Ugandan expect to do when he is going to South Sudan? We cannot go on lamenting every day, it is happening today. Much as Government has gone there, they have discussed, do you see anything happening for the better? A thousand Sudanese improving - do they reciprocate? Maybe our assistance one time that we contribute to their – 

Mr Speaker, Uganda is becoming a big donor in this region because wherever there is instability with our neighbours, we do donate ourselves to go and assist in the hope that we shall enjoy the African spirit of socialism. When things happen, we shall enjoy with them and trade with them and socialise with them. But I really do not see it happening. Right now we are in Somalia – (Member timed out.)

6.33
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I want to thank the committee for the work done. But I do not see the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because this is their mandate. But when you see the Inspector General of Police going to solve the street problems, it is really absurd. This is the work of Foreign Affairs - when I was still in Government, I was in charge of the Great Lakes Region and there is a mechanism – [hon. Members: “As what?”] - as a consultant. (Laughter) There is a mechanism to resolve these issues under the International Conference on the Great Lakes.  

I want the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to tell this committee why we do not have a joint permanent commission between Uganda and Southern Sudan - a mechanism that addresses how issues are handled.  

It is very unfortunate to see that we are now in Somalia, we have been in South Sudan, we were in Rwanda, in Burundi and DRC but how is Government helping us to do business. You are only allowing boda-boda people. If they chased boda-boda people, should it be a problem? If an Indian traded kabalagala here in town, immigration would arrest them. So what kind of business are we doing there? It should be a very important thing and regulated.  

We have a liberal economy and if there is anything, then we could have a quid pro-quo - if they are mistreating our Ugandans, why can’t we also pay in the same currency without mistreating them with quid pro-quo - (Laughter) - (Member timed out.)

6.35
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report that they have come out with. 

I am equally hurt by the harassment that the South Sudanese are causing to our people. I would like to report that many of our people from Kapchorwa have died and many of their bodies have not been seen. Many have lost property, trucks, cars and they have come back home poorer than before. And this is a very serious issue. 

I would like to recommend to Government the following: That if the South Sudanese continue to harass our people, why can’t we deport the Sudanese here and call back the Ugandans so that we remain at peace? I thank you.

6.36
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have just received a message and I will read it verbatim, “Ugandans are extremely perturbed that our brothers…” mark you they didn’t say our sisters – “…from South Sudan have forgotten so easily, so fast that at their time of need, Ugandans and the whole country unreservedly stood by them.” And they have further gone on to say that we who are debating this very important matter as their representatives - it is ending here and I am going to debate on mine. 

As their representatives, they will not sit and watch as they see their brothers and sisters who are being mistreated and it is clearly signed by Ugandan citizens.  

Article 24 of our Constitution mandates respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment. We vividly recall, as hon. Denis Obua said, that this august House strongly supported this motion and even at the time where this country lost the lives of our brothers, our sons and even the equipment, the helicopters, we stood by South Sudan. We did not –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I have the ministers respond briefly on the issues raised so far then we see how to move. The Minister for Trade.  

6.38
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the chairperson and members of the sectoral Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the comprehensive report and petition of Ugandan traders in South Sudan.  

As noted in the report, my ministry has been at the fore front in addressing the challenges being faced by the Uganda business community. I personally visited South Sudan in February 2012 and met various officials and my counterpart also came to Kampala and we held meetings here. We have a permanent joint commission and we held a meeting here between the two countries in Kampala to resolve these matters. And among the issues they raised - although they stated that they had not compiled the list of the claimants we had already compiled ours and we submitted it to them and they said they were going to reconcile with theirs but apparently they have never got back to us since that time.  

We had another meeting with the Inspector General of Police from South Sudan and ours whom we met under my chairpersonship, and he signed a memorandum of understanding with the IGP here that they were going to take charge and that they were going to make sure no incidents were going to re-occur especially incidents of torturing Ugandans. I have also met the South Sudan ambassador several times who has assured me that they are working on the issue. 

The biggest challenge for the Ugandan business community in South Sudan requires a major shift in the trade practice. Mr Speaker, from the ministry’s perspective petty trade in a foreign country, I think, should be a temporary phenomenon since the challenges they counter are difficult for us to resolve on a daily basis. In this regard, the ministry shall promote trade with South Sudan through the construction of a border market at Elego, Nimule.

We have already acquired land, we have already presented a proposal to COMESA, we have already acquired a title for that land and have already done the architectural drawing and this is only a sample of some of the drawings we have made and COMESA is going to start construction.

We prepared a Cabinet Paper, which we propose to present to Cabinet. In this paper, we mention the predicament of the Ugandan traders in South Sudan. We also propose that Uganda establishes a revolving fund of Shs 1 billion, which the affected traders would access on concessional interest rates while we wait for South Sudan to sort itself out.

However, we presented this matter to Finance and we are waiting for financial clearance from the Ministry of Finance. I strongly believe that if this fund was availed, it would help all the affected traders to get back on their feet while we urge the South Sudan Government to compensate them.

Unfortunately, Finance hasn’t responded; maybe they will. We are going to put pressure on them. But I am glad to say that the construction through the funding from COMESA will soon commence like I stated and will be able to build the same markets along borders. But we have given Amuru District - we have given it a level priority and we are about to commence on that.

Mr Speaker, the region is our single biggest market, which accounts for 61.8 percent of our total exports. I feel it is important that we maintain our economic relations with them because it is the main trade destination that we have among our neighbours.

I once again want to commend the committee but before I finish, I would like to comment on some of the issues that have been raised by the Members.

Do we have an officer at the embassy? Yes, we have Maj. Gen. Rusoke as the Acting Ambassador. We had dispatched a commercial officer called Cleophas Ndoleire and he has done a good job. But after six months of his stay there, Government realized that it didn’t have sufficient funds to pay for his salary and we withdrew him. So, he is no longer there. But Maj. Gen. Rusoke is there. We just – maybe the minister will be able to comment about that.

I must admit that the IGP has also stepped up his involvement in that struggle. He has been there for several days. He has had engagements with the IGP and I hope he will be able to resolve some of the issues that have accrued ever since that time.

I would like to commit our ministry that we are going to struggle to ensure that at least this market issue is sorted out. At least, if the first phase is sorted out, then our people will be able to operate from this market instead of going into South Sudan. This is because it is apparent that actually South Sudan has not fully stabilized as far as security is concerned. And you may recall, the first two years in government were quite turbulent. We had the Kony insurgency, the Lakwena insurgency – a lot of people died including foreigners. So, we should be mindful of our past as well, if we have to solve these problems.

Mr Speaker, Uganda shall be holding a Joint Permanent Commission Meeting from 10 to 11 October 2013 in Juba in which the protection and promotion of Uganda’s trade and security interest will be paramount.

I will be holding separate meetings with banks, insurance companies and major exporting companies to strategize on how we can all go in together so that our people go as employees of these institutions rather than going there on their own. I have advised traders to form companies or associations instead of going in there alone. And I must admit that the Ugandan traders have actually companies - that is why they now have a concerted voice in fighting for their cause. I pray that we shall continue to negotiate with the South Sudan Government. 

Unfortunately, all the ministers that were dealing with this matter are no longer ministers. The new ones – when you approach them, they say they don’t have sufficient information. That is another challenge we have encountered. But let us hope that on 11th and 12th after we have held that Joint Commission Meeting, we will be able to give you a feedback on the issues that might emerge from that forum. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the honourable members. Thank you very much for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are five recommendations. I see the minister holding the docket of Foreign Affairs – yes, procedure.

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, I have seen a copy of one of the architectural drawings placed on the Table. So, I don’t know whether it wouldn’t be procedurally right for the minister to officially lay it on Table in conformity with our rules such that it becomes part and parcel of what this institution must take care of. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has not requested for permission to lay it. So –

MRS KYAMBADDE: Okay, Mr Speaker and honourable members – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you lay it on Table, it becomes property of Parliament.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay the proposed cross market architectural plan to be constructed at Nimule Border on Table for your reference.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that for – yes, procedure.

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for her eloquence. However, I have not cited, from the recommendations that have been made by the committee, the fact that there is a very clear time frame – whether the 60 days is workable or acceptable or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are coming to that. We are doing them one by one, in which case they will respond. Yes, Minister of Foreign Affairs.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My senior colleague has ably responded to a number of issues, which members had raised. I can only add a few comments on the responses she has made.

As Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we appreciate what the committee did. It is quite a commendable job. The report was well researched and very well presented. We do not have a problem with the recommendations made by the committee.
That said, I just want to beg the indulgence of Members that all the concerns expressed here are very legitimate and they are actually speaking for their people and for Uganda. What I want to put right is the impression created that Government is not bothered or that Government is not doing enough. 

I want to inform this House that actually, the problems in South Sudan are literally a day to day issue of engagement by all the people concerned in government at the highest level be it in terms of the Police, Defence, Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs and even at the level of the leadership of this country.

What we should know is that South Sudan, like my colleague said, is coming out of a very difficult period, having attained independence just two years ago on 9th July 2011 and it has no working institutions. You must have heard just a few weeks or days ago that the entire Cabinet was dissolved by the President including the Vice President. It is a very unusual situation that the entire Government is dissolved, including dropping a Vice President.

But this should be indicative to us that South Sudan is going through a very difficult period and requires our support and encouragement to ensure that it lives up to the standard we expect and that is the spirit in which all the member countries in East Africa are handling and engaging South Sudan. Of course all these problems are correct. Our traders have been mistreated and there has been lawlessness in different areas but what do you do in a situation like we have just seen? 

You may find, in some areas in South Sudan, where a police officer can act as the arresting officer, as the prosecutor, as the judge and also execute a sentence. You can actually be privately locked up because the institutions are not yet in place. 

What have we been doing? As I said, the President is in constant engagement with his counterpart President Salva Kiir. My colleague has talked about a meeting that is due to take place this month. My minister, hon. Kuteesa, will be leading a delegation to go and discuss these issues, among others.

It does not pay, in situations like these, to resign ourselves to the situation or even engage in hate speech. We can condemn it and criticise but the more appropriate thing to do, in my view, is that we should treat case by case and say this case has been noticed, what are you going to do about it?

On 19th September, I held a meeting with the Ambassador of South Sudan, Samuel Luate Lominsuk after having received so many complaints. I put all these questions to him like we have put them before to the other ministers but one of the questions I raised with him was, look Ugandans are losing patience. We have been accommodative. You have been saying institutions are not in place; you have been saying we should give you time but Ugandans are saying, how much time do you require to put things right so that a Ugandan can come across to Juba or South Sudan and feel safe that he is going to trade lawfully and come back peacefully and shortly? He was – (Interruption)

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the hon. Minister for giving way. Given the situation as it is, I would imagine what we need at our embassy in South Sudan is to make sure that we strengthen relations through diplomatic means. I know that there are normally two sections; the diplomatic section, which normally handles day to day diplomatic affairs and then the consular section that handles issues of trade and also issues of citizens of that country, for instance, Ugandans in South Sudan. 

I would imagine that we need to strengthen the embassy. Given the circumstances under which we are, why did the ministry think of withdrawing a commercial attaché who, in my view, would actually do the work better or strengthen the embassy? I believe this would have strengthened the embassy and Ugandans would have been protected. I thank you very much.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for raising that important issue. We have been discussing that question with hon. Kyambadde and briefly, it is a matter we are taking up. We had some budgetary constraints but we are trying to find resources and sooner than later, we shall have that situation rectified.

As I was saying, we have a difficult situation in South Sudan and I beg the indulgence of Members that we have noted all the questions and issues raised and these issues are going to be taken up at the highest level, particularly in the meeting that is going to take place later this month. We are going to report to you the outcome of that interaction. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. There are five recommendations and we need to process them now. I will start with the first one. 

“The committee strongly recommends that the process of verification of claims by both governments of South Sudan and Uganda should be concluded within 60 days and the traders compensated.” I put the question to that recommendation.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I happen to have been involved at one stage, under the directive of the President, in trying to verify these claims by the Ugandan traders. The Ministry of Finance had been ordered to find out how these traders could be compensated. We got in touch with our counterparts in Juba but that verification exercise proved almost impossible. 

Therefore, in view of the complexity of the matter, maybe the Minister in charge of Trade could also supplement on this. I wonder whether we would be taking a possible and feasible decision to have this concluded within 60 days. I doubt very much, Mr Speaker.

I know very well that the Ugandan traders have suffered injustice. When I interacted with them, some of them had contracted loans and these loans became due. Some of them had their property auctioned by the loans - were closed. I would suggest that we give this exercise a minimum of four months.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee has proposed two months. Hon. Members, we are aware from the petition that some of these verification exercises have already been conducted and it is on-going; the bits that are not completed. So these 60 days are suggested based on current information. I do not know when you participated as minister but this might be more current than the last time you participated in this discussion. So, please, let us have a discussion on this. The Minister has said 120 days; the committee has proposed 60 days. 

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker I wear the shoe that hurts most for this matter. And I know of my colleagues - Aponye, a businessman; I know of a man called Kaijuka. We exported maize together. They have lost property and up to now some of them are actually undergoing foreclosure. The minister may talk at his level, yes, but I am aware and I know that the verification on Uganda’s side is complete. 

My view, to be fair, is that the timeframe of 60 days at the bilateral level is something which is adequate and can be used by the traders to leverage with the banks. If you give 90 days, which bank now surely can you give 90 days or 120 days? Which bank? And as we talk, the interest rate which has been mounted on some of these people is at 36 percent. I am being as honest as possible - 36 percent. Now, surely, I think it is only fair that our government, that we love so much, and our colleagues that have been appointed to do the job, bear the pain and the big pain that the traders and the businessmen are going through and try as much as possible to enhance their diplomatic and bilateral engagement for the good of our businessmen. This is a private sector-led economy. Let us help the private sector. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. I put the question? Hon. Minister. 

MRS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, I would propose that we go for the 60 days because these traders have gone through a lot of hardship. Some are in debt and it is going to affect our economy in the end. So, let us go for it. We can scramble and look around for money but then at the same time let us put pressure when we go for the joint commission. We are going to put pressure on the South Sudanese Government because now they seem to be faring well with oil; they seem to have got leeway. We could put pressure on them to at least pay something as compensation to our people.  

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to the submission of the minister, she said most of the trade in South Sudan is petty trade and which I suspect is very highly informal, undocumented and the process of verification itself may be calling in challenges. That is what you said on the Floor. Do you think this proposition here is going to give us legitimate results given your own view and your observations?

MRS KYAMBADDE: It is going to give us results because there are also formal claimants. We have a list already and it is going to give us results once we follow up on the presentation we gave. Informal trade is also there, we must admit – the boda-bodas, markets - but we have an association which also has a list of the people doing petty trade. It is a big percentage. 

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to my colleagues. I want us to set a precedent but also set a foundation which will be able to address the wider problems not only in South Sudan but also in other areas. This is my concern.

Recently, we saw a tobacco company coming from Kenya to Uganda, robbing farmers and going back to Kenya - Continental company. It was debated on this Floor and so far we have not made any specific arrangements to have those farmers compensated. I wanted us to handle these issues so that we are seen to be fair to all farmers, to all traders, to all people who are involved in trade and have been cheated in their – I thank you. 

MRS KYAMBADDE: My honourable colleague, I am really not so sure what position you are taking because I support the recommendation and I have outlined the solution to our problems in future. And about Continental, there was a petition here and we faulted Continental. We actually withdrew their licence. They managed to pay some farmers but they have not paid interest. So we have been following up on that matter as well. I thank you. (Applause)

MR DENIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, I support the position of both the committee and the minister but I think that recommendation should be specific because when we talk of 60 days, 60 days would include Saturdays and Sundays because - the discounted marathon. I would want to really be fair to the minister because when we put 60 days including, Saturdays and Sundays that would be a bit unfair. Why don’t we say 60 working days? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is an amendment. You can speak to it and - 

MR BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, I had restrained myself from speaking because the flow of the information we were getting was really very clear and anyone would understand. The person whom we would be helping would be the minister because we would imagine that she will be working over weekends, perhaps even other holidays will be in but she has conceded that according to her capacity 60 days are okay. Mr Speaker, I would request that you put the question and we vote on the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sixty days are two months and two months are two calendar months. So, it is 60 working days, hon. Members. Please let us resolve these issues. 

MR KAKOBA: I want to be guided by way of seeking clarification. We are talking about compensation but the recommendation is not very clear. Who is compensating: is it the Ugandan Government or the South Sudanese Government? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Both. There are two partners who should take responsibility. I put the question to 60 working days. So, I put the question to the amendment of 60 working days.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to paragraph one as amended, for compensation within 60 working days, arrangement for verification and so on. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next; “Government should urgently take keen interest in the affairs of Uganda Traders Association of South Sudan and facilitate a conducive trading environment for them.” 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move an amendment. Because a “conducive trading environment” is not specific, I beg to add the following: “… should assist the association to identify and register all Ugandan traders in South Sudan and to regularize their travel and other documents.” But to leave it just hanging wouldn’t be adequate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, when you start listing then you confine yourself to what you have listed. That is the problem with listing.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to add “with” because throughout the report, these are the key things the committee has identified; that the traders there are not known, that they do not have the necessary documents and to me, these were basic. We should really bring it out. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I think “conducive” here is very involving; it is wide and I do not know why hon. Raphael Magyezi wants to limit it to a list. “Conducive” is not really a limiting statement. Legally, it would mean so many things including but not limited to what you are proposing. So, I think the word “conducive” is appropriately here and it sounds good and looks good too. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose an amendment whereby at the end of the sentence as at is, we should add “… the government should sensitize Ugandan traders on formalizing their businesses.” I am not quite sure about the conducive environment but one of the issues that has been pointed out in the report is that many traders do not bother to keep updated travel documents. So, it means that many of these traders are unaware about the importance or they do not take it to be an important issue that they have correct travel documents. When you talk about “conducive”, if the Ugandan government provides an embassy that can update the travel documents, that is the conducive environment but you can provide water to a horse and it doesn’t drink it. What I am saying is that the Ugandan Government should sensitize the traders on the importance of formalizing their businesses and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the proposal here is “and facilitate a conducive trading environment to facilitate that trade.” What does it mean? Part of the sensitization is that we want to make people aware - registration of companies, partnership and things like this is what will make the whole package instead of trying to break it down again. I put the question to the proposal as stated by the committee in 2.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three, “Government of Uganda should encourage investment in the banking and construction sectors which are lucrative in South Sudan.”  

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I lieu of this, I do support the recommendation but I need clarification. It has been said many times that Uganda participated in the liberation of South Sudan but after liberating them, what was our policy as Uganda? As the country stabilized, many countries came in to do business with that country. What is our policy as Uganda? What is our strategy? We have been informed that the Eritreans are taking on the construction industry and of how Kenya is taking on banking; how strategically are we coming in as the Uganda Government to assist our people to also participate? The hon. Minister has mentioned and she is right that actually, we have very many Ugandans in South Sudan who are in petty trade. Therefore, as a country, what is our deliberate effort into this? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this recommendation is specific. “Government of Uganda should encourage investment in the banking and construction sectors which are lucrative in South Sudan.” This is the recommendation and if you want to amend it, then do so. 

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The recommendation is okay but I think we can improve it. I therefore move that “The Government of Uganda should encourage investment in banking, construction and other lucrative sectors in South Sudan” so that we do not limit it to banking and construction.

MR OBOTH: Further amendment to that is that why do we have to say “lucrative” when we know all investments must be that? If we could do away with the phrase “which are lucrative in South Sudan.” This is a mindset that would impute to anybody reading this document that you are very exploitative. Why can’t that be inside us? Why must we deduce it in ink, in black and white? Therefore, I move an amendment to the effect that the phrase “which is lucrative” be deleted. 

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I just want to seek clarification. When we say, “Government should encourage investment”, what exactly do we mean because it could be a phrase that does not provide any specific issue on Government and it could be leeway for escape? What exactly do we mean? First of all, when you look at the Government of Uganda here in the banking industry, as government, we are performing very badly. So, if we are going to encourage investment in the lucrative banking industry in South Sudan, what exactly are we trying to do? So, can we be specific so that we understand exactly how to do it? 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to react to that and that was my proposal; Government should assist Ugandan traders to invest in banking, construction and other strategic investments in Sudan. I think it is important to say either “assist” or “facilitate.” Thank you. 

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to what hon. Magyezi has suggested, picking a leaf from what the chairperson presented in the report on how other governments are helping their nationals, maybe the chairperson would help us identify from your benchmarking ways in which those other governments are helping their nationals. Thank you.   

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The word “encourage” that we chose was fully packaged because we debated it in the committee and we could not exhaust the list but it concluded incent, reviving, capacity building, enabling, facilitating and support so that the traders are encouraged to invest in the said sector –(Interruption)

COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to clarify further on what the honourable member has said; what have other governments done, for example? The Government of Kenya paid off the traders and signed a bilateral loan with South Sudan; why can’t Uganda do the same? Thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter is very sensitive and I would like to thank my colleague from Nyabushozi who has brought in a very important ingredient. The Kenyans put in a very strong bilateral team led by the Vice-President; they flew to Juba and were able to make certain undertakings on behalf of their traders. When they made these undertakings, it cured the acrimony between the traders and Government of South Sudan. And that is why when it came to compensation, the Kenyan Government paid it and left a team to deal with the South Sudanese. At this level, in order to cure this, I think it would be important for us to marry and find a way in which we create some sort of leverage. 

I propose that a standing bilateral committee at a ministerial level between Uganda and South Sudan be established as part of the recommendation. (Interjection) If it is there, then it is important that recommendations No.2 and No.3 include a wording where this standing committee becomes operational in propelling all these recommendations we are talking about; it mandates that committee to achieve this objective. I do not know whether that cures the problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us resolve No.3 because we are moving away from it.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move an amendment; the word “encourage” is very weak. Rather, I would like to introduce the word “support” because it can be in form of training, or facilitating with money, ideas and so on. So let us say, “Government of Uganda should support the traders….” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me read it again: “Government of Uganda should encourage investment in the banking and construction sectors.” This is what we are dealing with. So, hon. Baba Diri is proposing that instead of “encourage” we use “support”.

MS OKWENYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The amendment I wanted to propose is that: “Government of Uganda should encourage and support Ugandan traders in banking, construction and other service sectors such as hotels and “– 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ugandan traders in banking?

MS OKWENYE: I mean to say: “Government of Uganda should encourage and support Ugandan investors in banking, construction and other service sectors such as hotels and others”.

MS RWABUHORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The word “support” in Uganda here can mean something that may over blow the whole thing. We came up with the word “encourage” because, from experience, we felt that “support” would lead to over ambitiousness and expectations. I could say that we use “encourage and promote” but not “support”.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I think in order for us to move quickly, we are very clear that the economy is private sector-led. We do not have single commercial bank that Government can push to move to South Sudan. I am of the view that recommendation No.3 is redundant, incompetent and should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation No.3 says: “Government of Uganda should encourage...” You see the challenge you will have with the words “facilitate” and “support” is that you do not know whether you are going to Article 93 of the Constitution. This is because when talking about facilitating or supporting you cannot almost rule out financial implications. We do not want to push this thing to get there. 

Let us hear the clarification from the chairperson.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are guiding us well; but the reason we are trying to run away from the word “encourage” is because it becomes shallow. I asked a question at the beginning that: What is our deliberate policy – after liberating the people of Somalia, those in South Sudan, we have put in a lot of taxpayers’ money – (Interruption)

COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I wish we were careful with the words that we use; we did not liberate South Sudan – we just supported them and encouraged them and they liberated themselves. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to say that Uganda liberated South Sudan?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Kyankwanzi, take advice from the retired commander because liberation is different.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I am not an army commander but Ugandans gave support to the South Sudanese. And in so doing we feel, as Ugandans, that our support must be recognised by the Government of South Sudan. That is a young country but I asked what deliberate policy my Government has. That is why I am saying that when we use the word “encourage” it becomes shallow; when we use the word “facilitate” it takes me to the question you asked, Mr Speaker – that is Article 93. That is actually where we are heading.

What is wrong with my Government guaranteeing a trader? That is how governments have come in to help by levelling the ground for competition in these countries. Unless we move towards that direction, Ugandans will continue being petty in countries where we have assisted in liberating. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point I am making is that when you do that, then it has to come from the government. Therefore, we cannot make an amendment that has an effect of imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund – unless it is brought by the government. That is why I am guiding you on this.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank you, colleagues, for acknowledging that I have right of audience. Mr Speaker, we should not reduce this debate and recommendations to semantics. Whereas we cannot ignore the meaning and the power of words, there are certain things, like you have rightly guided, that we cannot legislate or make recommendations on the above because they have a charge on the Consolidated Fund. 

Whereas I agree that there is need for policies, but there is no reason why we cannot make a recommendation to encourage. How about Uganda opening the first bank in South Sudan? I do not see any problem with such a recommendation. I only want to modify further as someone else had proposed that the word, “lucrative” be deleted - this was from hon. Magyezi: “Government of Uganda should encourage investment in the banking, construction and other sectors in South Sudan”, as simple as that. It brings out the meaning we want to give it. 

But when we talk of “lucrative, facilitating” or “supporting” – you support what is already in existence, but you can encourage what does not exist to come into existence. To “encourage” is for someone to make an initiative or innovation; that is my understating of those words. 

Mr Speaker, you had rightly guided that the question be put and we go and do other things. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that proposal from the hon. Member of West Budama South. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next one is to “facilitate trade between Uganda and South Sudan, a border market should expeditiously be constructed at Bibia –“ 

MS ALEPER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That particular recommendation seems to me an open-ended one, which would require a time frame. My proposal is, it should read: “To facilitate trade between Uganda and South Sudan, a border market should be expeditiously constructed at Bibia by 2014” or “2015” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you do not have to say, “Expeditiously”, you just say by that period; are you proposing two dates or by 2015. 

MS ALEPER: Mr Speaker, I propose by the end of 2014. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this recommendation, but according to government plan, there are other markets which are supposed to be constructed. For example, there is one in Koboko, for which they have already acquired land. And if we mention only Bibia, they will forget about the other areas. So could we include, “...and other proposed markets”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can just say, “Border markets”.

MR TOM ALERO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wholeheartedly support recommendation number 4, but where there is a market, there is always an element of lawlessness and mobs. So there is need for security. 

My proposal is that apart from establishing the market, we should also demarcate the borderlines so that we can know our areas for security reasons. Someone can commit crime on the Ugandan side and then hide on the other side and the reverse is true. So let us include; “The borders should also be demarcated so that we can know our borderline for security reasons”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with this one first: “To facilitate trade between Uganda and South Sudan”. The proposal now is that it should be “border markets” rather than “a border market”. The Member is saying that it should not be limited to one area or be left open-ended; that is the recommendation from Kotido.

MR BIGIRWA: I totally support recommendation number 4, but my concern has been, if you talk about facilitating trade between Uganda and South Sudan, we seem to indicate that it is only markets that we facilitate. We have been categorical in this one as if to say that if we are to facilitate that trade, it is only the market that is required. To borrow from what my colleague Ann was talking about; the foreign policy in regard to our communication strategy – we cannot facilitate trade unless Ugandans know what opportunities are in South Sudan. If we just build a market; what are we supposed to sell in it? 

I propose that after we have built border markets, we should include: “...and a business communication strategy should be put in place”. The strategy will facilitate what will be put on the market.

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, on that issue that the honourable member who has been on the floor is talking about, my understanding is that border markets are meant to facilitate informal traders; what the minister referred to as “petty traders”. For the bigger strategy, there should be another strategy; like those we talked about in part three, who are going to invest in construction and banking. Those are bigger and formal in nature. So the border markets will target the informal traders who have a few kilogrammes of maize they want to sell. 

So this matter of a communication strategy needs to be married with the issue of the petty traders who are targeted.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, what we want to bring out today is that a border market is not only a market for petty traders; it is a modern market where we will have even warehouses. Some members of the business community have already booked space; warehouses for coca cola, Nile Beer and others. So it is more of a cosmopolitan entrepreneurship. It is not a local market, but a modern border market with security, revenue authority, immigration and all such offices represented. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So we say, “To facilitate trade between Uganda and South Sudan, border market should be expeditiously constructed”. I put a question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The last one on the recommendations, “An extradition treaty should be signed between Uganda and South Sudan to enable Ugandan prisoners in South Sudan be tried from home.”

MR ODOI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I propose to amend recommendation number five by total deletion and replacement of the same with the following: “Governments of Uganda and South Sudan should sign a transfer of convicted offenders’ agreement to enable the exchange of prisoners to serve their sentences from home.” 

It’s not legally possible to try a person from Uganda when he has committed an offence in South Sudan. The laws are different, the sentences are different neither can we try a Sudanese who has committed an offence in Uganda in Juba in South Sudan. So, recommendation number five is not tenable as it stands now. And the committee wanted to have the transfer of convicted offenders, which is impossible. I beg to move.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I just want to agree with what hon. Fox Odoi said, and also inform the House that in the discussions we have had with the Sudanese leadership we have raised the complaints by Ugandans that since the systems are not yet fully functional in South Sudan, if a person commits a crime maybe there should be an arrangement for that person to come here. That is the general complaint by Ugandans. But of course like hon. Fox Odoi is saying the laws are actually different. 

What we really settled for was to ensure that anybody who breaks the law in South Sudan whether Ugandan, Kenyan, Ethiopian, or even South Sudanese should be subjected to the due process of the law and appropriately punished. 

And any South Sudanese who is here in Uganda who breaks the law should also be subjected to the due process of the law in Uganda and punished accordingly. That is what we agreed, Sir, and I think it is just fair instead of saying we actually have South Sudanese tried in Juba or South Sudan and vice versa. 

Incidentally, this recommendation in a way of course it gives a suggestion which is unpalatable from the perspective of South Sudan to say an extradition treaty should be signed between Uganda and South Sudan to enable Ugandan prisoners in South Sudan be tried from home. You don’t add and vice versa. Basically you are saying look, your systems are nonexistent, we don’t trust your institutions just let our Ugandans come back. 

This is not really very good approach to issues. So, I want to suggest that the committee and the House agree to what we already agreed with the authorities in South Sudan that the due process of law will be applied to every law breaker.

THE DEPUTY: No, but it is not complete honourable minister, so where –

MR KIYINGI: Within the country where the offence is committed, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then it has to have that detail which goes back to what honourable member for West Budama North has proposed.

MR KIYINGI: What I am saying is that the best recommendation is problematic.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there was an amendment. Are you supporting that amendment?

MR KIYINGI: Yes

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, he is supporting the amendment, madam chair you agree to this, we resolve it.

MRS KABAHENDA: I concede, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to restate it now for the record?

MR ODOI: Mr Speaker, the amendment reads as follows: “The governments of Uganda and South Sudan should sign a transfer of convicted offenders’ agreement to enable the exchange of prisoners to serve their sentences from home.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, the due process will take place in the different jurisdiction, and then it is only the transfer that we are talking about.

MR ODOI: Yes

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put a question to that amendment to run as proposal No 5 on recommendation of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, during my submission, I had proposed an amendment to No 6, which should state that “Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Cooperatives should expeditiously appoint a commercial attaché to offer support services to traders in South Sudan on matters of trade and other related activities.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Agreed? Are you amending what he has proposed?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with him, it’s only that I find that a bit limiting, we are now talking of a commercial attaché but I thought the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs assured us that they are actually building their capacity to handle issues of Ugandans in South Sudan. So I beg to broaden it a bit by proposing the following: that “Government should strengthen the Ugandan embassy in South Sudan, to enable Ugandans access efficient diplomatic and consular services.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the two points can still be both separate. Because a commercial attaché is a specific office; it is not a consular there. So the minister of trade you agree to a commercial attaché?

MRS KYAMBADDE: Agreed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can you now propose it properly?

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, I propose that “Ministry of Tourism, Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should expeditiously appoint a commercial attaché to offer support services to traders in South Sudan.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To offer support to Ugandan traders in South Sudan?

MR KAKOBA: The proposal to have a commercial attaché is alright but when it comes to appointment, I don’t think the Minister of Trade has the power to appoint a trade attaché or a diplomat. No, the way things operate, this is a responsibility first of the president and he delegates to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. What the Ministry of Trade can do is to recommend.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we then say “Government of Uganda”? “Government of Uganda should expeditiously appoint a commercial attaché to our mission in South Sudan.” Is that okay? I put a question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The proposal now for number seven would read as follows: “Government should strengthen the Ugandan Embassy in South Sudan to enable Ugandans access efficient diplomatic and consular services.”
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please restate it. That is the reason why I wanted to listen to the Member who was making an amendment.  

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The proposal is, “Government should strengthen the Ugandan Embassy in South Sudan to enable Ugandans access efficient diplomatic and consular services.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, Members? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable member for Soroti Municipality.
 
CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I propose to move that in addition to the recommendations that we have made on one; that the “Minister for Trade and Industry reports to Parliament on the progress that has been made on that matter” because it is a very important matter. It is a captive point in all the recommendations here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you proposing a time frame? 

CAPT. MUKULA: I am proposing a time frame: “After the 60 working days, the Minister for Trade and Industry reports to Parliament on the progress made.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to say periodically?

CAPT. MUKULA: Specific to this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Or just to report? 

CAPT. MUKULA: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Yes chair?

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much. I think our giving of these 60 working days requires that the minister gives us the status and that we may not need to really overplay it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The 60 working days and thereafter – that is what the Member is saying that thereafter, they should report to Parliament. Something additional to one that we have adopted – yes - the responsibility was given to Government.

MR OBOTH: If I understand the honourable member from Soroti Municipality, I think it could be a stand-alone recommendation since the minister is, here 60 days is tagged to certain activities, verification and compensation and thereafter, after 60 working days – maybe 70 or 80 days, she can come and report back to Parliament as a stand-alone recommendation from the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So that when you have finished and that period has elapsed, you come back to Parliament and say this is how far we have gone – yes, after the 60 days period. But if there is a matter that you really need to draw the attention of Parliament to, you do not wait for the 60 days. This is your House and you can come back and say this is happening and I might need your support in this area and things like that. So, it is a consultative effort and a discussion. So the proposal is in what form now? That will be number eight now?

CAPT.  MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I agree to the recommendations made by my colleague to say that this recommendation remains a stand-alone to the effect that the minister will report to this House as you have guided in order to ensure that we have a result-oriented recommendation. And if that is seconded, it becomes recommendation eight. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that the minister will report to Parliament on the progress made. So, I put the question that - it will be the Minister for Trade and Industry - the specific ministry handling that. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have been able to finish this and I have two announcements to make. 

One is that the Kampala Capital City Authority will be holding the Kampala City Festival, 2013 in Kampala and all Members are requested to participate. It is on Sunday 6 October 2013. I am sure you know where it is normally held at the city grounds. So please attend.

The second announcement is that transport to the late hon.  Gregory Matovu’s burial in Ngarama will depart from North Wing Parking at 6.00 a.m. sharp tomorrow Thursday, 3 October 2013 and this comes from the Public Relations Manager. It is dated today.  

Honourable members, tomorrow we have the burial of hon. Matovu and the House will not be able to sit but we have very urgent business and we have a big day on Wednesday but we have a Tuesday that is free. I am asking all of you to come back on Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock so that we finish the issue of these loans now that we have resolved other issues, and then we can go and celebrate Independence knowing the budget we have passed will now be financed. The projects we have proposed in the budget will now be properly financed to cover all those areas where the project will be covering. Yes, Kiboga East.  

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, if you said that we come back on Tuesday next week –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR KABAJO: Because Tuesday next week will be –(Laughter)– okay when I was checking my calendar it looked it was the 9th.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a touch screen? (Laughter) You know in my place, the phone they call a touch screen is the normal little phone where all the numbers or writings have disappeared and that is what they now call the touch screen. So is that a touch screen?

Honourable members, this House is, therefore, adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock. I thank you.  

(The House rose at 7.59 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 October 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)




