Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 3 October 2019

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting but again I apologise for the late start. I think time has come for the House to move a motion so that we have a Panel of Speakers. Otherwise, today, I had many meetings. I hope that when we return, Members can move a motion so that we have a Panel of Speakers that will do some of the routine work as I concentrate on other serious business.

Secondly, we had informed you that we shall have the 21st National Prayer Breakfast on 8 October, as we normally do. This time, it will be at Pearl of Africa Hotel, starting at 7.00 a.m. The President of Uganda will be the Chief Guest.

We have also invited Pastor Enlow from the United States of America to come and minister to us. The theme is, “The Power of Character in Leadership.” It is coming from the book of Titus 2: 7-8.

Honourable members, since we have enough transport, we are hoping that you come and park your cars here and use a bus to take you to Pearl of Africa Hotel so that not everyone drives their cars there. Otherwise, it is not very far from here. Those who want transport should park their cars here and the bus will take them to Pearl of Africa Hotel.
	
On the 7th October, we shall have the Women’s Forum. We have separated it from 8th October because it takes long and it will mean that the women will stay there from morning until later in the day. Because of that, the Women’s Forum will be on the 7th October at the Pearl of Africa Hotel. 
Honourable members, we are expecting Mrs Museveni to be the Guest of Honour. The women Members of Parliament are invited and their cards have been put in their pigeon halls. We look forward to seeing you there.

Honourable members, this week is not very good for us. We have just received information about the death of Prof. Asavia Wandera, a very long time educationalist. He was the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University for many years and the Chairperson of the Education Service Commission as well as an executive member of United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). He held many portfolios.
	
He will be buried on Sunday at Bwenyatole in Busesa in Bugweri District. The actual burial programme will be given to you. For now, I would like to ask that we stand up in honour of Prof. Wandera. I know many of you were in Makerere when he was the Vice Chancellor.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Honourable members, I will be altering the Order Paper to allow presentation of an urgent petition by Commissioner Mwijukye. He will be called at an appropriate time. Let us quickly run through matters of national importance. Let us have hon. Tayebwa - He is not here. Can we have hon. Ayaka? You have two minutes. 

3.06
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I have a matter of national importance concerning the Teachers’ Sacco in Uganda.

The Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Education and Sports allocated Shs 25 billion to be managed by the Teachers SACCO. However, in the financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015, this money was deposited by the ministry to the Microfinance Support Centre without the knowledge of the Teachers SACCO.

In 2016, the Teachers’ SACCO made a follow-up and it was resolved that this money should be managed by the Teachers’ SACCO through their own management system. The Ministry of Education and Sports then started depositing this money in the account of the Teachers SACCO from the Financial Year 2015/2016, although Shs 10 billion had already been deposited in the account of the Microfinance Support Centre.

To date, a total figure of - some money has been deposited in the Teachers’ SACCO account but a balance of Shs 7.8 billion has not yet been deposited.

On Tuesday, I went to the Teachers SACCO office because the teachers in my district want to benefit from this money but the people in the Teachers SACCO told me that they had run out of money and that the money was not –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Quickly say your prayers.

MS AYAKA: My prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Sports should honour the provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding, which was reached at with the ministry in 2015 to the effect that it should be the Teachers’ SACCO that should manage the funds. The other prayer is that Shs 7.8 billion should be deposited in the teachers account so that they can serve other districts like my own, which has never been served. I am sure a number of districts in this country have not benefited from this money and so, the ministry should expedite this process to make sure that Shs 7.8 billion is given to the Teachers’ SACCO to manage the welfare of the teachers. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Does the Ministry of Education and Sports have something to say or will they give us something when they are ready?

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for raising that concern. It is true there is a balance that the Ministry of Education and Sports is supposed to send to the Teachers’ SACCO. However, I am request that I give more information when I am making a response to the issues that have been raised.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We shall get the answer a little bit later.	

3.09
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I am raising a matter of public importance concerning abandoned projects by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Yumbe District.

UNHCR initiated drilling of water sources that were supposed to be powered and piped. This was in the budget of 2017/2018 and about five water sources were drilled in Kei subcounty; one in Palaja Parish. Another water source was drilled and piped in Arilo sub county in Joke Parish, Orijini village. In Kochi subcounty, there was a water source in Kerwa subcounty, one was done in Rodo.

These water sources were supposed to benefit areas that acted as refugee receiving centres but since then, these projects have been abandoned.

Madam Speaker, when I tried to follow up the matter, UNHCR told me that these projects should be taken up by the district, yet, this was not an initiative of the district. It was a project that was started by UNHCR and they were using their own engineers not the district engineers.

I would like to pray that through the Office of the Prime Minister, UNHCR should be tasked to complete these projects. Otherwise, what is left is production and distribution. The process of production and distribution should be fulfilled. 

There is also one in Drajini, which is abandoned. 

Therefore, I pray to the Office of the Prime Minister that these projects be completed such that it can benefit the community. Madam Speaker, you will recall that the idea of the policy of resettling refugees within the community –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Are they only in Yumbe District?

Mr onzima: I was sharing with hon. Ogama on this issue. He told me that some of these are also abandoned in Rhino Camp in Arua District. It should be something, which cuts across in most of these districts. 

Therefore, we expect them to fulfil their obligations as they promised. This should be done because the idea of resettling refugees among the community was to ensure that activities and projects that are implemented should benefit both. However, if they are abandoned, the community will have nothing to reap from UNHCR. More so, most of these communities have given this land for free to settle the refugees.

The Speaker: Rt hon. Prime Minister, water for the community is important. We also do contribute to the United Nations (UN). If it is true that they started constructing water points and abandoned them, they should be called upon to complete them so that our people can use them.
 
3.13
The FIRST deputy prime minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the matter raised by honourable Member of Parliament. However, I agree that raising the matter in the House is the longer route he has decided to take. All the same, I will still ask him, notwithstanding the action by the House, to come to the office tomorrow morning. We shall discuss and try to see how fast we can handle these problems as he follows his long route through the House. Thank you. (Laughter)

The Speaker: Please, take the detailed information to the Prime Minister so that he can quickly organise for the UN to complete the water boreholes next year.

Before I invite hon. Nanyondo, join me in welcoming three groups of children; teachers and pupils of Bright Day Boarding School in Kawempe. They are very smart. They are represented by hon. Munyagwa and hon. Sempala. You are welcome. (Applause)

Also, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Trust Education Services of Ayivu – Please, stand up. It is a very big group of children represented by hon. Atiku and hon. Mourine Osoru. They are very smart coming all the way from Ayivu. You are welcome. (Applause) 

The third group is that of pupils and teachers of Oyam Junior School, Oyam County North. They are represented by hon. Charles Engola and hon. Santa Alum. They are also very smart. They are welcome. (Applause)

3.15
Ms Carolyn nanyondo (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I represent a fishing community. I have received numerous complaints from the constituency where the Uganda Police Marine Unit confiscate fish from the fishermen giving flimsy reasons, like the absence of life jackets on the boats. They confiscate fish and extort money from the fishermen. I do not think that if they took fish and extorted money, they would give them life jackets. 

I wish to pray that the relevant authorities cautions the Police Marine Unit against this behaviour as it will erode confidence in the Uganda Police and stifle the livelihood of the fishing community in Kyamuswa. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Can I require the Minister of Internal Affairs to examine the incident in Kyamuswa where the Marine Police have mishandled the population. He should report to us as soon as we resume after the recess. That will be at the end of October.

Honourable members, we also have a group of the Uganda Association of Artisanal and Small-Scale Miners, who are here to witness the presentation of their petition. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.17
Mr Richard gafabusa (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. There is a looming natural disaster in Bundibugyo, Busaru subcounty in Bwamba Constituency. A large land mass of approximately two square kilometres is sinking. I visited the area on Tuesday and the land has sunk about three metres deep.

This problem started early this year. The authorities in the district reported to the Office of the Prime Minister, which has not responded. What started as small in one village of Bundyankunda has now spread to four villages. Right now, over 30 households are affected and we have advised them to move away.

The place where the problem started from is now entirely submerged in water. Community access roads, homesteads and crops have been destroyed and the problem is expanding.
When I last visited the place on Tuesday, I personally observed deep cracks.

My prayers are that:

    1. Government immediately sends experts especially Geologists and Meteorologists to help us understand what is happening. Bundibugyo is in the great Western Rift Valley. It could be something to do with tectonism and we may find ourselves sinking.
    2.  The Office of the Prime Minister should immediately respond. We have written but they are not responding. They think that there is no problem but people have nowhere to go and nothing to eat. They cannot go back to that land. It is very dangerous. I was personally scared.  Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable Prime Minister, I think this is a very serious threatening natural disaster especially because of the location of Bwamba in the rift valley, where we may find the country has sunk. We need urgent action.

Can we have the commitment that you will send a team there tomorrow or early next week? It is quite serious.

3.21
The FIRST deputy prime minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, it is a shock to everybody to hear that that part of our country is sinking. Again, I would like to thank the members of Parliament of the area; like I said before, whatever action we are going to take, cannot stop what is going on because they themselves could not stop it.

I advise that they do not keep watching. Instead they should start moving away because we do not know the development. I will ask our Office of Disaster Preparedness to begin thinking in that line.

However, once again, I would like to ask the member of Parliament to come to me tomorrow morning and let him bring the copy of the letter so that we follow, where, to whom and how fast we can take up the matter. That is the most practical thing we should do tomorrow. Thank you.

3.22
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka County South, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. About a day or two days ago, the President issued a directive in respect of the law on being idle and disorderly. He directed Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) officials and the police to stop arresting people and charging them under that law.

However, the law still remains on the statute books; people can still be arrested and charged. The magistrates are not going to cite the President’s directive. They will rely on the evidence to either dismiss or convict. If this law and very many others are irrelevant, archaic and have remained in the statute books for so long, what is the Attorney-General doing about it?

My prayer is that the Attorney-General should be called upon to work together with the Law Reform Commission to make sure that some of the provisions of the law that no longer fit in our times are repealed or amended accordingly. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The Attorney-General should come and update us on when he intends to implement the decision of the courts - and also lately with the decision of the President - on a number of offences that are no longer on our statutory books.

However, the issue of idle and disorderly is not just in Kampala; it is countrywide. It should be as soon as we return from the recess.

3.24
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, thank you for the guidance and directives on being idle and disorderly. As the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, when we first heard of that matter, we had taken it upon ourselves to perform the task but probably, now, if you could guide further - if the Attorney-General does not come up with it -

The committee will come and seek leave to process that amendment and I had tasked a few members of the committee - hon. Basalirwa and hon. Jovah Kamateeka - so that they process. This is a matter that should not exist.

Probably, if the Attorney-General does not come soon, it would be a ground for us to seek leave. It is a very small amendment, to delete this offence.

Where you get a head of state coming up - that should have been the law revision. Instead, it is the President saying that this law is not very good.
	
I wanted to provide that information and I will find out from hon. Basalirwa and his colleague how far they had gone but when it comes, we will be able to work together with the Attorney-General. Some of these provisions could be amended in one day. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since you have started on it, you move with your motion. I am sure that is one Bill that will have no financial implications and there are one or two others, which the Attorney-General has also completely forgotten about. You could also handle them and we delete those parts of the law. Thank you.

3.27
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Isingiro-Ntantamuki Road –(Interjections)- it is a matter of national concern, Members.

THE SPEAKER: It is a matter of great national concern.

MR KYANGWAGYE: Madam Speaker, in April 2019, Wanaik Construction Co. Ltd got a contract from UNRA to do some good works but since then, the road was attended half way.

As I speak now, matooke trucks, milk tanks and passengers cannot use the road because there was heavy rain and the road was washed away. The road is very useful and productive to us.

Madam Speaker, we have only one prayer. We would love to get some help from you. Use your office and powers to instruct the Ministry of Works and Transport in conjunction with UNRA to see how they can expedite the process on how our road can be helpful to us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of right of access of the population is important. The Ministry of Works and Transport is directed to expeditiously handle the issue of Isingiro Ntantamuki Road and update us as soon as we return from recess on why the contractor is not maintaining the road and what she intends to do about that lacuna.

3.29
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding waste disposal and the cleanliness of our towns. It is not a new subject but continues to be of great concern.
	
However, allow me to congratulate you, this Parliament, the NRM Government and the people of Uganda on the just concluded Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC). I congratulate you on ascending to the apex of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association as the President. We are truly proud of you and heartily congratulate you. 

As we debated the motion before CPC, we pointed out how important it was that we clean up our towns especially as these visitors were coming. 

Indeed, as we had hoped, some of these visitors after the CPC went to some of our tourist destinations; to the Equator, Queen Elizabeth National Park - yesterday you mentioned Luweero, the source of the Nile, Murchison Falls and other destinations, only to be greeted by heaps of rubbish in those towns. 

As we debated this motion, we hoped that the Minister of Local Government would pick up the issue and instruct that the towns be cleaned but nothing much was done. I take the opportunity to appreciate the Kabaka of Buganda who has instituted Bulungi Bwansi Week, as we saw on television. This should be replicated all over the country. Madam Speaker, a greater concern is that during this rainy season – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MS KAMATEEKA: The rubbish is washed into water sources and causes diseases and so, Ugandans spend money on treating diseases that are otherwise avoidable. It also raises child mortality rates.

My prayers are:

    i. That the Ministry of Local Government instructs all mayors and local administrators to clean up our towns and make sure they keep them clean.
    ii. That the minister instructs all local Governments to pass by-laws, instituting or putting in place bulungi bwansi campaigns with penalties for those who do not comply. 
    iii. That the performance of mayors and town clerks all over the country be pegged on how clean they keep our towns, among other things.

Madam Speaker, we all need a clean environment for our wellbeing and to enhance tourism and the socio-economic development of our nation. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kamateeka. You have raised a very important issue of public health. Can we ask the Minister of Local Government to come and respond to those proposals by telling us the plans he has for keeping our towns clean? (Mr Godfrey Onzima rose_) That is the chairperson of the Committee on Local Government; maybe he has some information.

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, I expect members to leave the chairing of the House to you because if they respond and try to interrupt, that is bad manners; let us stop that.

I remember I raised an issue here on the Floor of Parliament, particularly, to do with irregularities in budgeting. I said some of these municipalities were allocated monies, which were not meant for them. For example, Kira Municipality expected a budget of Shs 9 billion but what was appropriated for them here was only Shs 221 million. That means that in their local revenue collection, which they should have used to do cleanliness, what is given to them each quarter is only Shs 31 million. This is not the only exception; it is the same with Entebbe, Nansana and other municipalities.

We had a meeting during which we requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that if this was an error and that the figures they brought to us for appropriation were not the correct ones, our recommendation was for them to bring the right figures such that maybe we do an appropriation amendment. 

They said they were going to correct this issue through freezing funds - because some of the districts and municipalities were given more money than they expected and what they had approved and sent to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

In that case, they said for those that had received more money, the monies would be frozen. Those that had received less money should apply for a supplementary. However, we argued with them and told them that a supplementary can only happen when there is excess money. 

So, these issues raised by hon. Kamateeka could be a challenge faced by these local governments because of –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We had already said that the Minister of Local Government should come and respond to the proposals and also to answer whether he has returned the money to those who got less. The Minister of Local Government, as soon as we return from recess, please, come and respond.

3.35
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. About a year ago, Government announced a reorganisation of Government departments and agencies, which was to result into mergers, abolishing some agencies or scrapping them and returning others to their mother ministry.

Hon. Frank Tumwebaze, the Minister of Information, Technology and Communications and National Guidance announced a list of 53 agencies and Government departments, which were to be candidates of those mergers. Seventy Executive Directors and over 10,000 employees were to lose their jobs, bearing in mind that Government is the largest employer. This would save about Shs 1 trillion in salaries, wages and rent.

Of course, we welcomed the move as avoiding duplication, overlap of mandates and cutting down on waste. However, it occasioned staff a lot of distress, sleeping and getting up in the morning, not knowing whether they would have employment. Banks declined lending to some agencies. Some investors who would have invested in some agencies got nervous about that move and some donors, up to now, are nervous as to whether some of the agencies they are funding will continue existing or not.

Madam Speaker, we have been hearing all this or reading about it in the newspaper. If I am not mistaken, there has never been a –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

DR KIWANUKA: There has never been a briefing to Parliament. Madam Speaker, isn’t it time that Government briefs Parliament:

    1. about the timeframe for these mergers;
    2. give an update on the matter; and 
    3. on how Government is managing change, which we know always occasions a lot of stress.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter continues to cause anxiety and it is true that Government has not come here. Even some of the proposals for mergers were queer. For instance, the Higher Education Student Financing Scheme is like a bank. I think they were planning to merge it with something completely unrelated to education and finance. That was the proposal. Government published them and then kept quiet. 

Prime Minister, when will the country know whether you are merging or not merging so that people can settle down? 

3.38
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, it is true that this type of action has been taken. However, midway, it was realised that there are more complications. Some agencies are legally created and others are internationally connected and so, it was not going to be easy to finalise the matter.

Therefore, as of now, cabinet has asked the Attorney-General to guide in certain areas before this matter is completely finalised. I think the House should be patient with us. We have also found some difficulties in implementing what we wanted to do because of some of the problems I have mentioned above. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I know you want time to complete what you have mentioned. However, I cannot imagine if the Government has failed to bring the laws they proposed in the State-of-the-Nation Address, when will they bring all those Acts for repeal? Many of them are by Act of Parliament. I think you will bring here like 30 Bills to repeal. So, what should the public hear from you? You still intend to merge but you are asking the Attorney-General to help you how to merge or not to merge?

3.40
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, as the Member has stated, this is causing a lot of anxiety and you have heard from the Prime Minister, actually causing more anxiety –(Laughter)- by saying, “there is no merger but there is a merger. We are waiting for the Attorney-General to guide.”

I think it would be through you, Madam Speaker, that Government comes out clearly. There would be about a minimum of 53 pieces of legislation. If you touch every statutory body, there is a law that governs it. If you merge them haphazardly, you may get into all sorts of trouble because they have running contracts, international obligations and international relations. 

Therefore, some of these issues needed thorough study before undertaking that omnibus - I believe that the intention of Government in doing the merger is very good but I am sure that they are going to meet a lot of legal and procedural challenges.

I do not want to say that the Prime Minister was shy to say that there is no merger but I think he fell short of saying that, only to calm the situation. Those who are working in those agencies cannot access loans because the lenders think that they are going to be thrown out any day. We risk losing more resources because when people say, this is the last supper, there is going – (Member timed out.) (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, I think the country wants a clear statement. Are you merging or not? For instance, if a body has entered into a contract for 10 years and this body is dissolved after three years, who is going to meet that cost of breach of contract? 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to correct the honourable member who implied that I have been shy. (Laughter) I have never been shy in my life and I do not intend to be shy. I will not ask him to withdraw that statement but let him do it in his private time. 

I think I have made my position clear that efforts have started to merge and we have not withdrawn, as Government. Whether we will withdraw or not, we are not yet sure. However, we have asked the Attorney-General to advise us legally because we have run into legal problems, which we never anticipated. 

Therefore, I also pray that the House is patient with us. I do not know whether this is part of being shy but I would like to repeat my appeal that the House gives us a bit of time. When the Attorney-General advises us, we shall come back to the House to report what other steps we are taking; whether we are withdrawing or not. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, we are going the long route. (Laughter)

3.44
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to apologise to the Prime Minister that I will not go to his office again. 

I rise on a matter of national importance. The people of Katerera County and Rubirizi District at large were hit by a storm last night. Many houses were swept away and banana plantations were destroyed. I think this is a spill over from Bundibugyo because we are near them.

In most cases, we come here and lament but what goes through our minds is that the ministry may be corrupt in nature. This is because we report and the district writes but you hear that those constituencies, which have never got any catastrophe, received trailers of rice, beans and iron sheets. The last time when a disaster hit, I had to use my personal resources to support those people. 

Madam Speaker, this ministry should be investigated because it is too much. Last time, I spent about Shs 10 million in assisting my people because it was like a wave; it comes from Bundibugyo, down the national park and sweeps away the houses. When we come here and report, the ministry records the complaints and piles them up. Later, they aid the constituencies that they like. My prayer is that this time round, the ministry feels shy and takes something to the people of Katerera – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point. You have half a minute to conclude.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, it is not only my constituency that was affected. In Bunyaruguru County, the Magambo people were also affected.

My prayer is that before we conclude the recess, the ministry should go on the ground and take something to the people of Katerera and Rubirizi in general. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The Prime Minister’s Office is directed to go to Katerera and Rubirizi District to assess the issues there and also handle the emergencies arising from the disasters of nature, which have affected those areas. They should give us a report at the end of the recess. 

3.47
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Again, I regret what happened. Actually, the whole country is facing disasters of one kind or the other. It is not only one or two areas. However, it is true that when disasters occur, there is a standing procedure that the Chief Administrative Authority (CAO) of any district is the Chairperson of the District Disaster Committee. 

This committee, which is comprised of all the technical people in the district, should move to the areas affected and work out how much is required. That technical report must be generated. 

Whenever I stand here, I always remind colleagues and I am reminding hon. Katoto to talk to the CAO so that if they have not done the assessment, they should do it. We are compiling all these reports and we use them to seek funds if we do not have money. Always, disaster management has no money. 

I think that there is no section of the population or the Government that is against what is happening. Nobody has invited these disasters but we have to follow procedures so that we take action properly. That is the information I would like to give.

Otherwise, I am sorry, Madam Speaker, for what has happened. We have no way to stop disasters. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, I think the Member is saying that they have written in the past and there was no response. I think you should check whether, indeed, the people of Katerera and Rubirizi District wrote and no action was taken. Take an interest in whether they already lodged complaints and no one took any action. That is what he is complaining about.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Once again, I would like to meet the honourable member in my office tomorrow. This office is big. Let him come to my office; it maybe another shorter route which I have always advised.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, go to the General and not to the small people. (Laughter) Honourable members, as I invite hon. Tayebwa, join me in welcoming members of Mapendano SACCO from Mukono Municipality. They are represented by hon. Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome. I am sure the Minister for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will be happy to see an organised group like that.(Applause)

3.51
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on an issue of national importance regarding our people travelling abroad. Recently, I was passing by the Chinese Embassy and I found a line; by 6.00 a.m. the line was snaking along all those roads. 

Then someone who knew me stopped me and said “honourable, we have a problem. These days we have to sleep here or to pay people to sleep here and to book for you a space for submitting your visa application.” I went ahead and asked a few people. I found that it is a very big problem for our traders to get visas.

Madam Speaker, for Egypt, you need a certificate of good conduct and this is to a country whose livelihood starts from Uganda because the source of the River Nile is in Uganda. You need a certificate of good conduct to enter an African country. America and United Kingdom do not ask for it but our African brothers need it.

Madam Speaker, for Turkey, you spend around three months. Some of us here might not know that because of our passports and status. However, your people the traders down there are doing badly. My prayer this being a sensitive matter and appreciating Government for building diplomatic ties with several countries; is to request our Government to engage these countries and see to it on behalf of Ugandans how they can be helped to easily get visas to these nations because we are  -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Foreign Affairs should come here and we have a debate on this issue because he may not know which countries are restricting our people. Let him come and we inform him from here; then, he goes to address them. Therefore, as soon as we return from recess, the Minister of Foreign Affairs should come here to inform Ugandans how the visa issue will be managed with different countries.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS ON ACTIONS TAKEN ON THE PRAYERS CONTAINED IN THE PETITION BY THE FEDERATION OF MEDICAL INTERNS

3.54
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, allow me to once again thank you for inviting me to make yet another statement on the issue of interns. This may be the third statement that I am making in this Parliament on the issue of interns.

I will start by defining who interns are and then I will respond to the issues they raised. Medical interns are health workers who have completed their undergraduate training in the medical field from various universities within or outside the country. They include medical doctors, dental surgeons, nurses, midwives and pharmacists.

The objective of internship is to allow medical interns undergo supervised training to turn the theoretical knowledge they have acquired during undergraduate training into practical clinical skills in preparation for joining the health workforce. 

Internship is a mandatory and practical part of medical or health training that aims at providing the intern with practical professional skills as a prerequisite for legal and professional registration, independence to practice and employment in the Health Sector.

The 2019/2020 cohort has since raised several concerns about various aspects of the current internship training and I would like to respond to these issues as follows:

Rotation across Disciplines
Madam Speaker, medical interns have been complaining about the revised rotation during their internship training that the three months in each of the four discipline as opposed to the six months in two major disciplines. From the onset of training, medical interns when Uganda started training medical doctors, internship in Uganda was six months rotation; one surgical discipline and six months in one medical discipline for a one-year period.

However, in 2009, this was temporarily changed to three months rotation in each of the four disciplines as a trial with the assumption that obtaining skills in all the disciplines would enable the medical doctors to be able to work in Health Centre IV comfortably and with confidence but this has not been the case.

At the training centres, a lot of gaps with the three-monthly ward rotation were observed and the supervisors advised the professional regulatory councils and the Ministry of Health that this short period of rotation does not give the interns adequate exposure to learn the practical skills in each of the four disciplines. When you go to a ward, the first one month is getting used to the environment and the second month you are beginning to pick the skills and then you are leaving.

Therefore, it turned out that most medical officers that were graduating,  when posted to Health Centre IVs for example, could not even conduct simple surgical procedures or properly manage some medical conditions.

After 10 years of observation, in the best interest of patients and the interns themselves, it was recommended that the Ministry of Health reverts to the old rotation of six months each in a Medical and a surgical discipline. This will give interns time to acquire the skills and confidence to manage most of the common conditions in this country; especially in rural health facilities where they do not have specialists to consult immediately when they are faced with difficult conditions.  This position was also endorsed by the Inter-Ministerial Committee meeting on 9 April 2018 that was held with Ministry of Education and Sports.

There is overwhelming evidence that a medical officer who undergoes a six-month rotation can work and manage adequately the disease conditions in any part of this country as required by the Ministry of Health.

Madam Speaker, allow me to break down the rotations of internship according to the respective categories of medical interns. Within the 12 months of internship, the following rotations shall take place:

    1. Intern doctors shall rotate in two of the four disciplines of Paediatrics and Child Health, Internal Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynaecology and General Surgery. The duration of rotation shall be five months for each major discipline and one month in a minor medical or surgical discipline. The choice of the discipline to undertake depends on the intern.

    2. Intern graduate nurses shall rotate in all the four disciplines of Paediatrics and Child Health, Internal Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynaecology and General Surgery. The duration of rotation shall be three months for each discipline. 

    3. For the graduate midwives, they shall rotate in the five of the mandatory specialties of a) Adolescent Sexual Reproductive health, Family Planning and Gynaecology; b) Postnatal and Young child Health and; c) Neonatal/Special Care Unit; d) Antenatal Clinic and the ART Clinic for 2 months each and in the labour wards and operating theatres for four months. 

    4. Intern pharmacists rotate in the three mandatory specialties with one of the three elective specialties as follows: Hospital Pharmacy - six months (dispensing and compounding, pharmaceutical care including in HIV Clinic and Cancer Department); National Drug Authority (Pharmaceutical Law, Policy and Regulation) - two months; Medical Stores: National Medical Stores or Joint Medical Stores (Pharmaceutical and Supply Chain Management) – two months; Pharmaceutical factory (production) one month; Community Pharmacy (Veterinary pharmacy and Traditional Herbal and products pharmacy)- one month.

    5. Intern Dental Surgeons rotate in the four specialties; three months each in; oral and maxillo-facial surgery and oral radiology; oral medicine, pathology and periodontology; conservative dentistry; and orthodontic and paedodontic.

Madam Speaker, I wish to emphasise that this change was recommended by the specialist clinicians, who train the interns. The interns are under apprenticeship and therefore, cannot dictate their own training curriculum and methods.

Request for salaries in appropriate salary scale

Medical interns are not civil servants because they have not been recruited through the formal recruitment system and therefore, cannot earn a salary.

Interns are still undergoing apprenticeship training, after which, those who qualify can register as a health worker and obtain a practicing licensing in order to be able to apply for formal recruitment. It is a requirement that you produce a registration certificate and a practicing license for you to be recruited into service. 

The civil servants have a salary scale because they are recruited into Public Service either by the Public Service Commission, Health Service Commission or the District Service Commissions. Their salary scales are accordingly indicated in their appointment letters with the corresponding terms and conditions of service.

The Ministry of Health pays medical interns an allowances to facilitate their apprenticeship. The current allowance paid to the medical interns is what is available in the Ministry of Health medium term expenditure framework, taking into consideration the very high number of the medical interns. This year, we have 1,170 interns. 

The total amount of money appropriated to the health sector over the years is as follows; 2017/2018 – Shs 9.3 billion, 2018/2019 – Shs 9.3 billion, 2019/2020 – Shs 11.43 billion. 

As seen from these figures, the increment has been minimal whereas the numbers of interns continue to increase. In 2017/2018 - 970 interns, 2018/2019 - 1,045 interns and to date, we have 1,170 interns. These numbers will continue to increase as the numbers of universities increase and the medical courses also increase.

An intern is paid a gross allowance of Shs 940,000, of which Shs 600,000 is for allowances, Shs 250,000 is for meals and Shs 90,000 is for accommodation.

Unfortunately, this money is also taxed for Pay As You Earn (PAYE) of Shs 184,000, leaving a net allowance to an intern of Shs 756,000. Our requests to URA for no taxation did not obtain a favourable answer. For interns to be paid better, there is need to address five important policy issues, which have been captured in the interns' policy document that is currently before cabinet. These issues are;

    1. Regulation of enrolment into university and hosting of the internship programme; The numbers of interns enrolled into university is not a mandate of the health sector.  

The Interns are undergoing training. Perhaps, preferably, they would have been better off under the Ministry of Education and Sports because they are still undergoing training. Therefore, these are policy issues that we are yet to discuss. 

2. 	Increased financing for internship; the money has remained stagnant over the years and yet, the numbers increase and the health sector is expected to continue training these interns. 
3. 	Quality of training; previously, I have clearly brought out to this august House that the intern centres have remained stagnant at 39. The specialists to train the interns are not even there. We are not recruiting new people. You find one supervisor supervising over 50 interns.  The products that we are getting out are not of the required quality and so, it is an issue for discussion. 
4. 	Availability of supervisors (Specialists); the specialists are not there. 
5. 	Welfare (Accommodation and meals); because the accommodation that are in the intern centres were only meant to accommodate a certain number of interns, those numbers have gone over and above. 

Accommodation raised by the interns

Interns have also raised concern over inadequate accommodation in some training centres. It is not new. On behalf of the Ministry of Health, I would like to clarify that until the 1990s, medical internship was only for medical doctors and dental surgeons. That was what the structure was meant for. The medical doctors were only being trained by Makerere University and hence, the numbers were usually less than 300. 

The internship training sites were able to provide accommodation and meals. Since then, the number of cadres that have joined the internship has increased. These include Graduate Nurses, Midwives and Pharmacists.

In addition, many new medical schools have sprung up releasing over 1,000 graduates per year that require internship. The hospitals that provide internship training are limited in terms of infrastructure and capacity and are currently overwhelmed. 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, allow me to inform this august House that the Ministry of Health has developed a draft internship policy and submitted it to cabinet for consideration.

Furthermore, as Ministry of Health, we would like to clarify that we do not determine nor control the number of students admitted for the various medical courses in universities - as this is not within our mandate. 

We have been having discussions with the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to consider the best way to comfortably handle the big numbers.

In the meantime, we have advised the current group of interns, who are interested in doing internship to report to the centres, where they have been deployed, to start their internship training. The Uganda Medical Internship Committee will carry out regional induction training for all interns in order to orient them.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I do not know whether we should really debate this. I wanted to send it to the Committee on Health so that they can first invite the petitioners and give them this response, and then they can report to us. 

However, honourable minister, I am a bit alarmed. This degree is Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery but you said that there are people who, after graduating, cannot conduct surgery; how did they graduate? It is here in your statement that some of them cannot conduct surgery. 

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, the internship programme is where you learn practical skills. In medical school, you learn the theory. Therefore, when you go to learn the practical skills under a specialist, that is where you are taught how to operate. You first have to learn the anatomy of the body to know where the vessels and nerves pass. When you go to do internship, you learn the practical skills. That is why we are insisting that the internship training programme needs serious revisiting. 

THE SPEAKER: In the degree, what is that part called “surgery”? It is a Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery, and that is what makes a doctor. Where is that surgery which they graduate with? Where is the surgery, if they cannot perform even during internship? Why did they qualify in surgery if they cannot even –

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that for the five years of training, you learn theory - (Interjection) - I am a medical doctor. You learn theory and you observe what is happening. They observe what the senior doctors do during the ward rounds. 

When you go for internship, you get a temporary practising certificate from the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, then you start using the skills that you have learnt from the seniors and you are allowed to practise. That is when you learn the surgery.

THE SPEAKER: It is then a misnomer to say that you have a degree in medicine and surgery.

DR ACENG: It is not a misnomer; that is why there is internship. Internship is the practical part. We inherited that nomenclature from the British.

4.14
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Madam Speaker, I am surprised and disappointed. The Minister of Health is a trained doctor. Those doing Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery carry out surgeries as they study. They study on cadavers and this gives them the practical skills to do surgery. The students cannot wait to do practical skills after the five years of study. They practise on cadavers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Parliament is about listening to one another. Please, take your seats.

MR AGABA: What happens during internship is that the students are exposed to senior doctors who see patients on ward rounds. However, they do surgeries while they study. They study on cadavers. Cadavers are dead bodies, which are given to them to study anatomy –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, you are getting impatient with one another.

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, it is not correct to say that medical students, unlike other students like lawyers and teachers, get skills during internship. Medical students acquire skills as they study. The Medical and Dental Practitioners Council can never accredit an institution that does not expose students to practical skills while they study. I am surprised that the minister made a statement that the students get skills during internship. Internship is at the end of the course.

The students go through practical skills as they study and they are monitored by the National Council of Higher Education and Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council. What they do during their year of internship is to go on ward rounds with the specialists to see patients. They already know how to carry out surgeries and treat people. However, they acquire experience during the ward rounds. Thank you.

4.16
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that when you look at the experience we have got in hospitals from the time the Ministry of Health was handled together with the Ministry of Education and Sports, there has been a problem in the Ministry of Health as far as training is concerned. If we want our people to work in a certain way, the Ministry of Health should be separate, so that they handle their issues to their expectation. 

However, today, the Ministry of Health is being handled in the same way as the Ministry of Education and Sports. We train and go for school practice but for –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Complete your statement.

MS CHEKAMONDO: I would like us to look at the nurses. When their numbers are big, they improvise like we have improvised in education. When they train them how to inject, for example, they bring a tomato and use it for the training. However, when it comes to the real training, even today when somebody wants to put a cannula, it becomes difficult because they do not get the practical training. 

During that time when Ministry of Health was alone, if somebody missed a practical for two weeks, he or she was not allowed to continue. Today, one can stay away for one month or even two months and then comes and copies notes and passes. In actual sense, they have not had practical training. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Health should remain as it was and the Ministry of Education and Sports should also remain on its own. Thank you. 

4. 18
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first thank the minister. 

The question being handled here is a question of welfare. In my understanding, the person who raised the question and was seeking for answers was referring to welfare, not training. Whereas the matter of training is also important, what the minister has given us is diversionary and it is important that it is handled separately. The concerns of the interns are about welfare - accommodation, food and allowances. Now, who should provide the welfare? Is it the Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Education and Sports?

The training of doctors at the internship level has an element of service delivery. Whereas we agree that there could be some interns who are not able to deliver at their work, if you go to Mulago Hospital, Lacor Hospital in Gulu and Lira Hospital, you will find that interns are the ones running those hospitals.

The link between training and service delivery is where the responsibility falls on the Ministry of Health to give a bit of pay for the service rendered. However, the Ministry of Education and Sports should primarily bear the responsibility of welfare during training – 

THE SPEAKER: We would also like to hear about the court order. There was an issue of a court order on that petition but the minister did not say anything about it. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Fungaroo that the interns did not raise the issue of welfare alone. The other issue of contention is the rotation; we are proposing six months and two disciplines as opposed to three months and four disciplines. That is another issue that they raised. 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, my submission is that health is very important. If the Minister of Health has recognised some deficits in training and the output of our doctors and surgeons, let that be addressed on a case by case basis. There are some interns that come out and do their work very well. Otherwise, we need to improve the training and take the minister’s concerns seriously. 

The question of welfare and rotation should be handled. Training is training. Ministry of Education and Sports and the National Council for Higher Education should be given all the capacity to regulate training, even engineering; we have oil engineering, aeronautic engineering because of our planes. These are sensitive engineering courses and the training is like medicine. So, we should bring them back under the Ministry of Education and Sports. However, the welfare during those sensitive and long internships, which are part of the training, should come with some costs where services are rendered during training. Ministry of Health cannot run away completely; put something there. 

4.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has stated that the interns are paid whenever money is available in the ministry. I look at this statement as not very serious. Whenever the ministry is budgeting every year, they include the budget for the interns. Parliament passes the budget for the ministry every year including the interns’ budget. Therefore, the minister is not serious when she says they are paid whenever the money is available in the ministry yet those trainings are budgeted for. 

We need to understand why the interns have strikes every year. Can we find a lasting solution to this situation? Why is it that they must strike every year and then you come with a statement? We need to bring this to an end. The ministry should find a lasting solution to stop unnecessary strikes. Health is very important for the country. Thank you. 

4.23
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. While the minister was trying to describe an intern, she included even the nurses and clinical officers. However, when she was talking about welfare, she only concentrated on the intern doctors. 

The point I would like to bring to the attention of the minister is that we are suffering. Government hospitals are charging some of us who have health institutions a lot of money for students to carry out their internship. This includes clinical officers and nurses. Instead of accepting them – We are not asking that they should be given allowances but they charge us as much as Shs 200,000 or Shs 300,000 per student. 

My prayer is: Now that you have said that the Committee on Health is going to handle, could the minister also tell us why Government hospitals are cheating us when we are giving a service? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated, let the Committee on Health interrogate this statement and invite the interns and other witnesses if necessary, and give us a report. This was just an answer to a petition; they can come back to us. 

However, minister, when you say you have been here three times, I have checked and at every session, there was a problem. So you must deal with it. If there were no problems, they would not be coming here. They came in the second session, in the third session and now they have come in the fourth session. So, there is a problem which you need to deal with. 

Honourable members, allow me to welcome teachers and pupils of Modernity Day and Boarding Nursery and Primary School from Busiki. You are welcome. (Applause) You can see they are smart. They are represented by hon. Akamba and hon. Mariam Naigaga. 

We have another group of children from Good Hope Foundation Muhoro in Kagadi. They are quite smart. They are represented by hon. Tinkasimire and hon. Kyomuhendo. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE REPORT OF THE VERIFICATION TEAM TO LONDON, UNITED KINGDOM, TO RESOLVE THE BOUNDARY DISPUTE BETWEEN TORORO COUNTY AND WEST BUDAMA COUNTY

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Madam Speaker, as you directed yesterday, I went and shared with the senior minister, who has travelled out on state duty. She told me to inform the House that His Excellency the President, who has been chairing meetings with Members of Parliament from Tororo District, said the report is going to be perused by Cabinet so that they can have their input. After that, it will be presented to the whole House. 

MS ANNET NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand painfully, after listening to the statement made by the minister, hon. Persis Namuganza, the princess. 

This issue of Tororo has been a persistent issue for a very long time. If I can recall, it is over 30 years now –(Interjections)- My predecessor was here for almost 15 years, and then hon. Etiang was here for almost 10 years and that is when this issue started. So, if I put that together, it comes to almost 30 years. 

Is it procedurally correct for the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to intentionally continue dodging us and to continue citing the name of the President each time the issue of the boundary and the production of the London maps is brought up? Is it procedurally correct for them to do this? Is it that there are no longer ministers in this country that can do their work and guide the President or is it a sign of incompetence? What is it? 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. I would like to bring to the attention of this House the issue that has been raised here more than five times and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has, time and again, promised to bring a report on it.

Madam Speaker, on 22 August, we had a debate about this issue on the Floor. That debate took 42 minutes, with many colleagues responding. The minister requested for a fortnight to report back. The fortnight elapsed on 5 September. However, it is unfortunate that the minister is not around today, either by choice or by design. It is hon. Betty Amongi that led our delegation to London but in the House there are ministers in charge of lands, including hon. Musumba. 

I would like to lay on the Table a photograph of the Members, including hon. Musumba, who were with us in London. He should be in position to come and tell us what happened. I would also like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the map that we got in London, for your perusal and verification. I request that the minister, if she so chooses to come and present a map here, disputes the map I have laid on the Table today.

Madam Speaker, as hon. Nyakecho has said, this issue is a very big problem to us in Tororo. As you may recall, we lost over Shs 4 billion that was returned to the central Government because it was not absorbed in Tororo District and Tororo County in particular. Time and again, you watch on TV that Tororo District Council cannot sit. If the council is to sit, they sit with a few members from West Budama and the place is heavily guarded to deter members from Tororo County from coming to participate in those meetings.

Madam Speaker, it may not be the minister to solve this issue but she and hon. Musumba, who is here, should come and tell us what they saw in this map. They should tell us whether Tororo Municipality is in West Budama or in Tororo County. The decision that was taken when we sat in State House, after a similar map was presented to us by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, was that Tororo District would be divided into two, based on the colonial county boundaries. 

However, today we are here after a request was made by none other than my colleague, hon. Oboth, who said, “Your Excellency, the Commissioner in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who has presented that map is an Itesot and the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is an Itesot. One of them facilitated the other to go downtown and generate this map.” His request was very clear; they agreed to present a business class ticket sponsored by West Budama to a Government official to go to the United Kingdom (UK) and crosscheck whether the map presented by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development was the same map that our colonial masters took back to the UK. 

Fortunately, today I can say that what was presented by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is the same map we got in the UK. However, I do not know why the ministry is not coming out to tell this country and the world that Tororo Municipality is in West Budama. We are ready to agree. If it is in West Budama, we shall surrender but if it is in Tororo County, let us resolve this issue once and for all.

A committee of Parliament, with a report that we have, already handled this matter and a resolution was made that the municipality is in Tororo County –(Interjection)- The information I wanted to give has taken long but that is what I thought you should build on to conclude the presentation you are making.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, hon. Angura, for that information. I would like to say that I expected one of the ministers present here to at least lay that map on the Table for further perusal of this House. Hon. Musumba is looking at me. You went there, what did you see? Tell us what you saw. At least, put it on the record. 

We have shed tears, Madam Speaker. We have eaten rats that there are no more rats in the bushes of Tororo. We might be forced to eat other things - maybe crocodiles, but there are no rivers in Tororo for us to eat crocodiles. Hon. Namuganza, please stand up and be the minister that you are. Use your powers, produce that map and lay it on the Table here.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask Minister Musumba, who was in London, to tell us what happened?

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, it is true that I was in London and I was in that office where they archived all the maps of the former British colonies. However, the matter we are discussing now is at the highest level, both in the ministry and Government – (Interjection) - I was in that office where research was being carried out but I was not part of that delegation. I had gone to do something different. 

I was the head of a delegation that was carrying out research on a different complaint. However, we were in the same environment and so, I went and said hello to my colleagues. (Laughter) I was not part of that delegation and that is a fact. (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure, now that hon. Fredrick Angura has submitted a map and it appears the debate is ensuing. 

Madam Speaker, for the truth to be known - Hon. Angura mentioned my name and he was also part of that delegation. I would like to thank hon. Isaac Musumba for being a candid lawyer. I was waiting to fault him but he has been very honest. He was in London but not part of the delegation.

Madam Speaker, the next time this matter comes up, Members of Parliament who come from Tororo will need time to give their side of the story. Give us sufficient time - about 20 minutes. This is because all of you will have to support or not support on the basis of the facts.

Hon. Angura has made serious allegations about what I said, even when I previously denied; I did not say it was from - Actually, the debate before the President was not where the municipality lies. Anyone who comes from Tororo would not say that. They would say that the current Tororo was called Budama.

Madam Speaker, they are talking about one map but we did not only get one map from London. We got several maps, from the 1920’s up to 1959. We cannot, therefore, conveniently choose to escalate a matter that we can find a solution for.

In the Ninth Parliament, the issue of Tororo County was resolved. I would like to state on the record that as we speak, Tororo County was divided into two counties in 2015. Similarly, in 2006, the issue of mapping resolved where the municipality is located now. I even stated that there was a letter from hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere. There is also Commissioner Bwogi from surveys who gave a letter to hon. Ekanya. I stated all those. What was in our contention before the President was the size of Tororo - whether it has grown, in terms of size, from 1927 when it was a township to now when it is a municipality. 

Madam Speaker, the person who was presenting said that the same Tororo which was there has never grown into West Budama or Tororo County. Truth be said, I raised a procedural point and I said if the person is saying that, then he or she does not have the map of Tororo. The President said if he can get evidence that Tororo has grown - It became a municipality in 1984 and it was effected in 1985.

Madam Speaker, we need time to debate this matter and whether Tororo Municipality has never grown. Those who are choosing that side where Tororo Municipality is, what we used to call Tororo County was East Budaka -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want to interrupt you but there is no motion on this Floor about that. What we want is Government to tell us the findings so that the matter is put to rest. That is all. We want the findings. Otherwise, there is no motion for debate on any district or county. We only need information. What did you find? That is all we want.

Honourable members, it has been two years; the people did not conduct elections at LCI and soon, we are going for general elections. I think the Government is happy to leave us with uncertainty.  

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, next week, we are celebrating the 57th Independence of this country. This case is a testimony of failure of national integration -

THE SPEAKER: We are not debating anything. 

MR MUKITALE: Yes, we are not debating. 

THE SPEAKER: We want information. 

MR MUKITALE:  Madam Speaker, this is a procedural matter. On the Order Paper, one of the items under business to follow is the report from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on our earlier motion on regional governments. I remember that Tororo is the headquarters of Bukedi –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are escalating the injury. Where has the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development gone? I do not know whether Cabinet is going to alter what was found there. Is Cabinet going to say this is not the right map? What will the Cabinet discuss? A map is a map. I am giving Cabinet up to 28 October 2019; when we resume from recess, we want information. If you do not bring it, we shall not handle the business of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORT ON ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON RESOLUTIONS OF THE TENTH PARLIAMENT FROM JUNE 2016 TO MARCH 2019

4.46
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the aim of this report is to update Parliament on actions taken by Government in regard to parliamentary resolutions. It is in line with rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure.

The report outlines the actions taken by different Government ministries in regard to resolutions and recommendations passed by Parliament from June 2016 to March 2019. During this period, Parliament considered and adopted 107 resolutions that required Government’s action. Out of which, Government has implemented 87 of these resolutions, translating to 81.3 per cent implementation rate. Twenty resolutions are still pending Government’s action, which relates to 18.7 per cent. Some of the pending resolutions require legislation and policy formulation. Government is, therefore, in the process of– Madam Speaker, there is a lot of interruption here -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister is addressing the House. Please, do not conduct other meetings.

Gen. (RTD) MOSES ali: Some of the pending resolutions require legislation and policy formulation. The Government is in the process of initiating the necessary legislation and policies.

I wish to inform Parliament that Government actions on resolutions relating to accountability will be addressed in the Treasury Memorandum, which is presented to this august House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

As a way forward, action-taken reports on resolutions of Parliament will also be presented to Parliament annually. Resolutions of Parliament, which are pending Government action, will be handled in the subsequent reports. Government success in implementing resolutions of Parliament is so far commendable and it is attributed to Government’s timely response to Parliamentary directives. 

It is, therefore, my pleasure to present this report before this august House and to reiterate Government’s commitment to deliver timely responses to Parliament as we work together in building this great nation.

I would like to lay the report on the Table. The title of the report is, “Report on Action Taken by Government on Resolutions Of the 10th Parliament from June 2016 to March 2019.” I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. This is a new chapter in the relationship between Parliament and the Executive. I think it is very commendable. Please, keep it up. The reports will be distributed to all the committees so that they can study the responses by the Government.  Thank you.
 
PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

4.52
The minister of state for finance, planning and economic development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Public Service Commission Annual Report for financial year 2018/2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils of Kigezi High School, represented by hon. Aja Baryayanga and hon. Catherine Ndamira. They look smart. You are welcome. (Applause)
 
Petition by the Uganda association of artisanal and small-scale miners, the ecological Christian association, transparency international and Africa centre for energy policy over unlawful eviction, exploitation, abuse, neglect and mistreatment

4.53
Mr Francis mwijukye (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

This is a humble petition of the Uganda Association of Artisanal and Small-scale Miners, the Ecological Christian Association, Transparency International, and the Africa Centre for Energy Policy over unlawful eviction, exploitation, abuse, neglect and mistreatment.

Your humble petitioners comprise of landlords, tenants, artisanal and small-scale gold miners and traders under their umbrella body, the Uganda Association of Artisanal and Small-Scale Miners. The petition is supported by civil societies.

Your humble petitioners contend that Government has refused or ignored or neglected to regulate the small-scale miners and artisans exposing them to abuse, exploitation and displacement from practising their business and profession, which is guaranteed under Article 40(2) of the Constitution.

Your humble petitioners further aver that their right –

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into the merits but just say the prayers.

Mr mwijukye: Madam Speaker, before I go to the prayers, it is important to mention what is stated here by your humble petitioners.

In August 2017, over 60,000 small scale and artisanal miners including women and children were forcefully evicted in Mubende.

Secondly, recently, the mining of iron ore was arbitrary stopped in Kigezi Region, which affected over 3,000 households. 

Just a month ago, over 20,000 small-scale miner residents and artisans in Buwheju were evicted, their equipment confiscated and they have nowhere to go. Parliament pronounced itself some time back on the plight of small scale and artisanal miners but nothing has been done.

Your humble petitioners pray that:

1. 	Parliament intervenes and urges the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to carry out a study so as to rationalise and formalise the operations of artisanal and small-scale miners in Uganda.

2. 	Government recognises that artisanal and small-scale mining and construction material mining in Uganda is not a crime but a livelihood of over 400,000 people, including the youth, women and men, and indirectly sustains over two million Ugandans through its various supply chains.

3. 	Government undertakes the registration exercise of all artisanal miners with a view of having a proper regulatory mechanism, reviews the Mining Act 2003, and expedites the enactment of an amendment to the Mining Act, 2003 to provide for the operations of artisanal miners.

4. 	Government implements and enforces all contemporary and international best practices in regard to small-scale and artisanal miners.

5. 	Government reviews the decision to evict small-scale miners and investigates the operations of mineral investors for violation of the Mining Act, but in the meantime, the artisanal miners can be regulated by their local governments and their association.

6. 	The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development revises the licence they grant to mining investors with a view of bringing it to conformity with the Mining Act, 2003.

7. 	In the alternative and without prejudice to the above, Parliament directs the Committee on Natural Resources to investigate the actions and allegations of gross human rights violations, extortion, illegal mining, forced labour, employment of children and exploitation of small-scale and artisanal miners by the mineral police in Uganda.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, this is not a very happy day for Parliament because this is now the third petition relating to the mining sector. 

It seems that the space for the ordinary people of Uganda is shrinking. First, they were chased out of the waters and now it is the military fishing; now they are being chased out of the mines and it is the police who are mining. 

I am surprised that there are mineral police. I knew about environment police but I am told that the mineral police are now there. They are the ones evicting people and they have started carrying out the mining themselves. They are mining in people’s land because the gold is in people’s land; so they are chasing them away and taking it over. 

In the meantime, the Committee on Natural Resources was assigned work on the Mubende petition but they have not yet reported. The minister also came here and gave a very unsatisfactory answer relating to that issue. They even said that they were going to give 30 per cent of the land to the miners. That was one year ago. We have come to one full year.

Next, they are going to Karamoja. After that, they will go to Busoga to continue chasing people from land. They have even failed to bring an amendment to the mining law. Where do you want the people of Uganda to go? Where will the ordinary people of Uganda get their living from? 

I would like to send the matter to the Committee on Natural Resources, in addition to the one of Mubende. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for the petition and I thank you for your wise guidance. 

Sometime back, an aerial survey was done to locate the minerals in this country. To date, this minister seated here has not yet presented that report informing Parliament where these minerals are located. However, the other day I heard him lamenting that there were people who acquired mining licences and have not utilised them. What we learnt was that the people who obtained the licences have information about the location of the minerals and are vending them to people who have capacity to mine these minerals. That is why you now see cases of Buhweju and Mubende. 

It is important that information is availed to this Parliament through the committee so that the country gets to know which minerals exist, in what quantities and in which part of the country. If the minerals are there, then the whole country should stand to benefit from them.

I propose that while the committee peruses through these petitions, they should also task the ministry to avail that map with the information, so that they can report to this august House and the country gets to know. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The other information for the minister is that these citizens told me that the thieves are using exploration licences and prospecting licences to do mining. They no longer come to you for mining licences.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While hon. Mwijukye was presenting his petition, he commented on the violation of human rights and indeed, when they are evicting these people, some are raped while others are beaten. Now that you are directing the report to the Committee on Natural Resources, is it the same committee that is going to try to dig deep into how human rights were violated, because that was very common?

Lastly, there are the mafia in our Government. In Mubende, for example, when these people were evicted – hon. Lokeris will tell us - we found them disguising that they were giving licences but the 30 per cent was given to the husband of hon. Benny Bugembe. It is a fact. He knows this because we sat in the meeting.

You will find that even in Buhweju, if you were to dig further, the ministers, the mafia hon. Anite talked about, are already involved. So, we need to dig deeper. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In examining this petition, the committee will also examine the issue of human rights. They will have to go there to interview the petitioners and bring us the information.

MR ABBAS AGABA: Madam Speaker, you remember that I stood on this Floor three months ago and reported on what was happening to the people in my constituency who depend on River Buhindagyi, which flows all the way from Buhweju through Ibanda, down through my constituency into Lake George. Those same miners deposit silt and waste in the river, which is also used by the animals in Queen Elizabeth National Park but most importantly, our people use that water for a livelihood.

You tasked the minister to come with a statement but up to date, it has not come. I have been meeting him regularly whenever I enter the House and I ask him what is happening. He just says, “My son, let us talk in the corridor first; let us not raise it again.” I think today I have to let the cat out of the bag. Up to date, our people are taking dirty water and their livelihood is threatened. When I met him in the office, I informed him to at least stop these people from depositing silt into the river because the river is used by the people and animals.

In the event that this is taking time, can we find alternative safe and clean water for people to use? Very soon, I will be evicted from my own constituency just because I cannot defend the rights of my people to have clean water for use.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The petition has been sent to the Committee on Natural Resources. Let us hear from the senior minister first, then hon. Lokeris.

5.06
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I come from Ibanda and my constituency borders his. That gold stretch covers the Ibanda-Buhweju ridges. I also come from a small “country” called Karamoja, which is full of gold - (Interjections) – Yes, there is a lot of gold in Karamoja and everybody knows that. In Ibanda –(Interjections)– Why are they poor in Mubende, yet there is also gold there? 

In Ibanda, we have artisanal miners and they are everywhere - in Nyarukiika, Kicuzi, where River Buhindagyi passes, etc. I would like to comment on what hon. Mbwatekamwa talked about. Some of those who we call “mafia” may not be mafia but there are some people using that tactic, saying that these are mafia, yet they are hiding down stealing gold. I will give an example. 

Together with hon. Abbas Agaba, we have been fighting for the rights of the people to have their gold because that gold is theirs; they found it there. Yes, we do not have the capacity to go deeper and get reef gold but we have the capacity as people to get alluvial gold but –(Interruption)– let me conclude my point and then I give you an opportunity.

Those who are stealing gold have been dragging in the names of other people to cover up –(Interjections) – Yes, I agree with you that it is a cover up. I know somebody with a licence but he keeps saying that it is hon. Byabagambi mining gold. I had to go down on the ground to find out who is doing it in Ibanda. However, when I got there, that man disappeared; he had to take off -(Interjections)– No, I did not have a gun as such, because I wanted to mobilise people to beat him up. 

Therefore, although I am in Government, this matter does not only concern people within the Government. Even outside there, people are actually busy using prospecting licences.  You are supposed to get a prospecting licence first and then after that, you get an exploration licence. After getting an exploration licence, someone can now get a mining licence. However, people use prospecting licences to steal gold. 

Even if I am in the Government, I am not going to sit and keep quiet when people are looting our gold in Ibanda –(Interjections)- I cannot stop that. Sometimes, we need to get out of this box even if it means losing whatever; we have to protect our people. We want investors, yes, but they must work with the locals. At least, let the locals get alluvial gold on the top and the investors get what is underground, which we cannot reach.  

Maybe we should get locational licences. I have asked the commissioner several times why he cannot give people locational licences within the licence itself. They can do it. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Olive Katwesigye and then the minister, hon. Lokeris.

MS KATWESIGYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. The information I would like to give is that after these people – the honourable minister does not want us to call them mafias – chased the locals from their gold mines, they took over them. We have a forest reserve; if you go there today, you will find all the machines in this world mining as if there is no tomorrow. So, who are these people?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lokeris, please respond.

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, the artisanal industry is spread across the country because these small-scale miners go and scavenge everywhere. When they get gold, they do not ask for any licence. You can go to Karamoja, which hon. Byabagambi was talking about, and you can go to my place, Nakapiripirit; they are also there. 

When you ask them, “Why don’t you wait until we give you a licence?” They say, “This is God-given.” After they have done that, they simply walk away and leave gaping holes. It is the same in Mubende and everywhere.

What we are doing is what you said. The drafting team has already finished the law, which you asked us to bring. They have now gone with it for consultations in every region so that they include their views and also look at those that are genuine. In this way, we shall bring a good law to control the artisanal mining industry and also control those who have licences.

Those who use exploration licences for mining are criminals. It is not supposed to be so.

THE SPEAKER: When will you take them to court if they are criminals, honourable minister? What are you doing about those who are using exploration licences to mine? When will you take them to court?

MR LOKERIS: Once those are got, they are supposed to be arrested; that is why we talked about the mining police. The mining police are not supposed to mine; they are supposed to control and arrest them and bring them to book.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have said the matter is going to the Committee on Natural Resources. Use the recess to address this issue and report on 28 October on both Mubende and Buhweju. Honourable minister, please work on the amendments to the law.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have worked on the law. We are only doing consultations and then we shall make a final draft and it comes here.

THE SPEAKER: We would also be happy to hear that you have arrested those people who are using exploration licences to mine and taken them to court. Let us hear that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has taken people to court for violating licences. (Applause)

MR LOKERIS: We shall follow up that matter, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation of ladies from Bukango Women’s Group in Bukomansimbi District. They are represented by hon. Ruth Katushabe and hon. Nanyondo. You are welcome. They look very smart. (Applause)

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. MACHO GEOFFREY ON MEDIA REPORTS ON THE INTENTION OF UGANDA NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS BOARD (UNEB) TO WITHHOLD EXAM MATERIALS OF SCHOOLS THAT DELAYED TO PAY THE SECONDARY SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS TEACHERS’ PROGRAMME (SESEMAT) FEES LEVIED BY MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

5.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, I beg to respond to the issues raised in regard to the relationship between Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) and the Science and Mathematics Teachers’ Programme (SESEMAT), as raised by hon. Macho Geoffrey, MP Busia Municipality. 

For members’ information, SESEMAT is a programme that was established to enhance the quality of teaching and learning of science and mathematics in secondary schools. It was initiated and approved by this august House in 2005. The programme was sponsored by the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), whose support expired in 20l6.

Madam Speaker, in order not to lose the purpose for which SESEMAT was initiated, after the expiry of JICA’s sponsorship, a sustainability strategy was jointly agreed on, that students should contribute for the continuity of this important programme. This meant that students had to make a contribution. As we speak, the students contribute Shs 1,000 per term. Whether they are in Government or private schools, they all contribute. Head teachers and proprietors of private schools are the ones who remit this money to the regional management committees that are mandated to make the collection. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear to this House that this money is not remitted to the Ministry of Education and Sports. It is remitted to the regional SESEMAT management committees, which are mandated to make this collection. The requirement to present the certificate to UNEB is, therefore, a strategy to ensure that schools comply and do not cheat our learners who pay. 

It was discovered that after students make this payment, the school proprietors or some head teachers would use this money; they would not remit it. Therefore, a strategy was laid that they must provide or present a certificate.

For that matter, I wish to clarify that it is not true that UNEB collects the SESEMAT fees from schools. It should further be clear that the Ministry of Education and Sports can use its organs to enforce the implementation of its policies and achieve its objectives including SESEMAT, which is part of our strategy to improve the delivery of science education.

Schools are supposed to remit payment to SESEMAT’s regional committees, which comprise head teachers elected from the different regions. After the payment is done, schools are issued with remittance certificates, which they present to the SESEMAT officers who sit at UNEB, to confirm payment and authenticity of the certificates. This is because it was once discovered that some head teachers were presenting forged certificates. After the schools submit these certificates, they are issued with examination materials. 

Madam Speaker, on the matter of involvement of private school owners in the programme, I would like to clarify that they are already involved because –

    1. All schools participate in the election of their regional management committees; 
    2. Refresher courses for teachers benefit private and Government schools;
    3. Some head teachers of private schools are members of the regional SESEMAT management committees.

Madam Speaker, I would like to give you the current status. As of yesterday, of the 3,596 secondary schools, which registered for the Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) examinations, 2,136 have already collected their examination materials. Out of the remaining 1,460 schools, 469 schools have not or are still clearing UNEB examination fees while 991 schools, for several unknown reasons, have not yet picked up their examination materials.

In conclusion, since the regional management committees comprise head teachers, we advise the affected schools to urgently liaise with their regional SESEMAT committees to discuss the modalities of settling this important issue. 

Secondly, as a ministry and regulator, we encourage all schools to continue making these payments. However, we have also organised a meeting of all stakeholders, including UNEB and the national SESEMAT team, to address this challenge. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It was hon. Macho’s question and he is not here. You have been given advice on what to do. Let your schools go to the regional management centres and check from there. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISMAL COVERAGE AND NEED FOR SUPPORT TO GOVERNMENT AIDED SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN BUYAGA WEST COUNTY, KAGADI DISTRICT

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that the Government came up with a policy where every subcounty must have a Universal Secondary Education (USE) school. However, in 2015, a national mapping exercise was carried out to establish subcounties without a public secondary school. We discovered that 533 subcounties did not have secondary schools. I have a list, which I am going to lay on the Table. 

Since then, Government has made the following interventions to address this matter: We have grant aided schools. In 2016/2017 financial year, we managed to grant aid 20 schools. In 2017/2018 financial year, we grant aided 102 schools. In 2019/2020 financial year, we grant aided 62 schools. I am going to lay on the Table the list of all the coded schools.

New construction is also going on. I would like to assure this House that a number of schools have been constructed and the existing ones renovated under the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer (UGIFT) Programme. 

In 2018/2019 financial year, we planned to construct 117 schools. I would like to report that this work is in progress. This includes 89 new subcounties and 28 for expansion and new facilities in the existing schools.

In the financial year 2019/2020, 115 schools are going to be constructed. Preparations for procurements are in progress and this includes 83 new subcounties and 32 for expansion and new facilities in the existing schools. 

As Government continues to implement this policy, the following issues should be noted: We have a challenge that as we try to reduce on the number of subcounties, new districts and subcounties are created. That again pushes us to the long list. New subcounties and town councils have also been created and all these are being planned for nevertheless. 

As Government continues to look for resources, we assure this House that in a few years to come, we believe we shall have completed all the subcounties that lack secondary schools. 

At this moment, allow me to lay on the Table the list of new schools under the UGIFT Programme phase 1, in subcounties without a Government USE school. I lay it on the Table. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the list of grant aided secondary schools in the financial year 2018/2019. I beg to lay. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the list of grant aided secondary schools in the financial year 2016/2017. 

THE SPEAKER: What about the financial year 2019/2020?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, let me first lay on the Table what I have. I beg to lay on the Table the list of new schools under UGIFT Programme, phase 2, in subcounties without a Government USE school. 

Dear colleagues, these lists indicate the regions, districts and also subcounties where the schools are going to be constructed or where they have been constructed. 

I beg to lay on the Table another list of subcounties where the schools are under construction. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the list of grant aided schools in the financial year 2019/2020. It also shows the districts, subcounties and even the names of the schools that are grant aided. 

Finally, allow me to also lay on the Table a full list of subcounties without secondary schools. 

THE SPEAKER: Despite what you have laid, are there going to be subcounties without schools? 

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, like I said, I have pointed out the schools that we are already constructing under the UGIFT Programme phase 1. I have also indicated the schools that we are going to construct under the UGIFT Programme phase 2. I have also pointed out that because we are creating more subcounties, you will realise that as we are nearing completion of all the districts, more subcounties are created and they require secondary schools as well.

We would like to assure this House that because it is our mandate to ensure that we have a secondary school per subcounty, we are planning that – assuming we stop splitting districts – in the next two to three years, we shall have completed all the subcounties. Our emphasis now is to make sure that we complete all the subcounties.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I would like to invite Members to study those lists. If there are discrepancies, come back to us. We really would like to thank the minister for that comprehensive information. (Applause)

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on whether I should first complete the next item on the Order Paper or give clarification on the issue of teachers’ SACCO money. 

THE SPEAKER: They are all urgent. Answer the issue of the teachers’ SACCO money and then we can go to the next item. I hope you came with a flash to upload the information for the Members.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I thought we had already uploaded it. Okay, I would like to pledge because I have already signed those statements. I am going to ensure that it is uploaded.

THE SPEAKER: Wonderful. Thank you, honourable minister. How about the SACCO money?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, you remember that His Excellency the President pledged Shs 25 billion to the Teachers’ SACCO. I would like to thank Government because as we speak, the Government has done its best to ensure that the teachers get this money.

Madam Speaker, allow me to give information to this House that in the financial years 2013/2014 and 2014/2015, Shs 4.317 billion and Shs 4.099 respectively was - I will use the word “erroneously” transferred for the teachers’ SACCO to the Microfinance Support Centre. It was supposed to be transferred to Walimu SACCO but unfortunately, it was transferred to the Microfinance Support Centre.

I am glad the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here; maybe he will throw some light on the money that went to the Microfinance Support Centre. However, in the Financial Year 2015/2016, the Walimu SACCO received Shs 5 billion. In the Financial Year 2016/2017, they received Shs 3.25 billion. In the Financial Year 2017/2018, they received Shs 4.3 billion and in the Financial Year 2018/2019, they received Shs 4.475 billion. In the Financial Year 2019/2020, they received Shs 100 million.

Madam Speaker, according to our calculation, if we include the money that went to the Microfinance Support Centre, the total amount of money the teachers would have received by now should be Shs 26.502 billion; exceeding even what was pledged. However, because the other money that went to the Microfinance Support Centre did not come to the Teachers’ SACCO, they still demand about Shs 7.815 billion.

Therefore, the Ministry of Education and Sports together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had a discussion with the Solicitor-General who gave legal advice that this money has to be sent back to the Teachers’ SACCO from the Microfinance Support Centre.

Well, on the issue of how the money was spent from the Microfinance Support Centre, that is not our responsibility. Maybe it should now be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to guide. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister for the response. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, when is the money from the Microfinance Support Centre going back to the teachers?

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the resources which were meant in the first place for the Teachers’ SACCO went to the Microfinance Support Centre on the account that we thought at the time, this money would be administered properly through the Microfinance Support Centre, which had structures in place. Since then, we have created structures that are capable of handling this money for the teachers and the money is going to the teachers since that time.

Part of this money had already been spent by onward lending to other institutions. Therefore, we are in the process of transferring the money, which was meant for the teachers to go to their SACCO and we believe that that can be done at the beginning of next the financial year -(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I feel very uncomfortable that I have to call the honourable Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to order. How can he tell Parliament that an institution that got money erroneously spent it? 

The procedure as laid down in the Public Finance and Management Act is very clear that before you spend any Government funds, they must be properly budgeted for. We must know how you have worked out your programme of action, budgeted for and financed.

Now, how could they have spent public funds without following all these procedures? Moreover this statement coming from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, makes me feel nervous as to how much they have already spent in that same manner. 

Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to tell us that the money, which erroneously went to the account, was spent? Is he in order to say that public money was spent erroneously?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable minister can tell us whether he violated the Public Finance Management Act. I do not know when the money went and how.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this money was for lending and not for spending per se - (Interjection) - for teachers. Therefore, we - I need to come to the House again and tell the House when the money, which was supposed to be sent to the Teachers’ SACCO and was sent to the Microfinance Support Centre will be transferred back to the teachers and whether it is still available for the teachers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if my Budget says I have Shs 300 million to lend and I see Shs 500 million; do I just move to spending the additional money without inquiring whether it is really mine? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it was not erroneous but a deliberate policy that the money, which was to go to the Teachers’ SACCO, be sent to the Microfinance Support Centre and be administered there. By that time, it was the Microfinance Support Centre which had capacity for such funds. 

Therefore, it was supposed to be lent to the teachers. What we need to understand now, on which we shall crosscheck and come back is how much of the money, which was put under the Microfinance Support Centre, was lent to the teachers and how much is available to be transferred back to the teachers. Therefore, at the beginning of the next sitting, we will give this information on 28 October 2019.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let them bring the information as soon as we return. 

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister raised something here which we have sidestepped. However, it is important. The minister said that when you add the money that the teachers have so far received to the money which was given to the Microfinance Support Centre, it exceeds the pledge.

We are here looking for money to do things that were put in the Budget and they are saying there is no money yet money exceeding what was appropriated for a certain item is being sent to the various sectors. Can they also clarify on that as the minister comes?

THE SPEAKER: You said that it was sent there for the Microfinance Support Centre to administer to the teachers. I know it is what the Minister of Education and Sports said but -

MR BAHATI: The teachers asked for support and at the beginning it was Shs 25 billion. Therefore, when we include what was sent to the Microfinance Support Centre, it comes to Shs 26 billion. All this supports our teachers. Therefore, an extra billion to the teachers is not a big deal. What is important is that this money –(Interjection) - what we need to understand is that this money is appropriated by Parliament.

Therefore, there is nothing like we are sending money to the teachers’ SACCO erroneously. Whatever money goes to the teachers’ SACCO is appropriated by Parliament. At the beginning, it was a pledge of Shs 25 billion but because of the dynamics that have been happening, we have exceeded the pledge of Shs 25 billion, which I think is okay as long as it is appropriated by Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: okay, come back with the details of how you are going to make good on 28th - and tell us whether it was the teachers who received that money or other Ugandans. 

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JOSEPH SSEWUNGU ON THE FAILURE OF THE HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENTS FINANCING BOARD TO ABSORB OVER 4,000 APPLICANTS FOR THE STUDENTS’ LOAN SCHEME WHO HAD BEEN DULY ADMITTED IN VARIOUS PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, on 1 October 2019, the matter on financing of the students’ loan scheme for the academic year 2019/2020 came up on the Floor of Parliament. The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development was instructed to make a statement on this matter on the Floor. 

Yesterday, we held a meeting with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and found that from the inception of the scheme in the Financial Year 2014/2015, Government has not been able to finance all the students that apply for the loans under the scheme. This is due to budgetary constraints. 

Madam Speaker, some applicants sadly remain unfunded all the years. This gap has increased from 924 in the academic year 2014/2015 to the current level of 5474 in the academic year 2019/2020. The increase in the gap is largely attributed to the increased dissemination of information on the loan scheme to the population, which has attracted more applicants. We do appreciate that. 

Madam Speaker, Government is committed to providing financing for the students’ loan scheme but accordingly, the financing has steadily increased from Shs 6 billion in the Financial Year 2014/2015 to the current level of Shs 31.8 billion in the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

The number of students supported has also increased from 1,201 in academic year 2014/2015 to the current level of 1,873 in the academic year 2019/2020; cumulatively, the number of students that have accessed loans from the loan scheme currently stands at 10,024. However, as alluded to earlier, the funding available cannot meet the requirement as evidenced from the number that qualified but cannot access funding due to inadequacy. 

In light of the inability to receive additional funding for the loan scheme in the Financial Year 2019/2020, my ministry could not support the increased number of applicants. Going forward, my ministry will come up with a sustainable strategy to address the increased demand for the loan scheme, as we plan for the Financial Year 2020/2021. This strategy will also take into consideration the continuing street students (cohorts) who currently are not considered under the criteria for accessing loans under the scheme. 

Madam Speaker, probably to throw a little more light on this, for example, if there are some students who joined the university or other tertiary institutions and reach second year but cannot be able to fund their fees, this is what Government would probably think of doing, if we get more resources. This is the kind of criteria that we are talking about, which we would look at in the future. 

Once finalised, the strategy will be tabled and considered by Parliament as part of the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

Madam Speaker, my ministry and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have further agreed that the board of directors for the higher education students’ loans scheme should come up with a clear financing framework over the medium term, clearly taking into consideration the recovery from those who earlier accessed the loan. This will enable Government to better plan how to address the situation that is currently being experienced. 

As I conclude, probably this is a request. Dear colleagues, you know that every time the Budget Call Circular is presented, in most cases, it advises sectors to budget within. For example, in what you got last financial year, you were expected to budget for the next financial year within the ceiling. 

However, I now think that time should come – and I know that I am part of Government and this is something that we need to look at – there are certain sectors like health and education where populations are increasing every year. For example, students who apply for the loan scheme increase every year but if we are asked to budget within the limit, then that means we shall be limited from taking on new numbers. 

It is my humble appeal, probably next time, that we need to see how the ministry of finance can help as far as the Budget Call Circular is concerned so that at least such sectors and budget items are given some special consideration. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know sometimes I do not know how we do our things because the SDGs require us to do certain things. This is part of the human capacity building. However, we now borrow money, pay for unplanned things and spend money on things which we have not planned. For instance, when the Pope came here, how much did we spend? We spent a lot of money. It is a good thing he came but it was not planned but we found money for that. Can’t we find Shs 5 billion to support the children of Uganda, really?

5.45
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I serve on the Makerere University Council and I can tell you this is a painful thing. 

We are spending a lot of money on Government sponsorship, which benefits, we, the rich. When you look at the Government sponsorship, you will notice that it is students who come from schools such as Gayaza, Namagunga, Kisubi and Kitende benefiting from it. Those are the schools that even charge Shs 3 million in terms of fees now at secondary level. When those students come, they strike and refuse to pay even less than a million at university level. 

If we could convert all that money so that some of it goes to the student loan scheme and the other goes to district quota systems – because when you convert that money to the district quota, for example, you will find that each district will benefit from it. 

Madam Speaker, I think it is very important for us to support this student loan scheme and we scrap off this business of Government sponsorship so that children of the poor benefit. As Tayebwa, I can afford to pay for my child. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Although, of course, sometimes, there are children who are brilliant from poor schools and they also get the Government sponsorship. There is also that. 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am giving information in line with what hon. Tayebwa has said. If you read the Higher Education Financing Act, it clearly says that we shall progressively move away from Government scholarships to the loan scheme. However, the Ministry of Education and Sports has resisted that proposal and I wonder why. 

I am even surprised that the honourable minister is lamenting. I do not want to refer to the letter you received. These are part of the areas where we put money. The Budget committee gave us money to add onto – when you talk of 1800, it is part of the money the budget committee gave us outside what the ministry had. The only thing we have to do is for us to implement the Higher Education Financing Act the way it is and we will get rid of these advantaged people, who benefit at the expense of the disadvantaged. 

It is not true that it is just the level of awareness but it is the level of poverty; people are not able to pay. What they run to is a loan scheme, which locks them out. That is the information I would like to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Then you find that people are not getting much from agriculture; they are not able to sell their sugarcane and they cannot fish and mine. Where is the school fees?

5.48
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a humble plea to the minister or to whoever is concerned. For purposes of accountability to this House, we need a comprehensive list of the students benefiting from the Students Loan Scheme. There are several science students from upcountry who qualify and have above 10 points in A’ level but are not able to access this loan. 

First, where are the application forms got? They have no information, like the minister has stated. Madam Speaker, I would like to request this House, under your wise guidance, to ask the minister to come and give us a list of beneficiaries from the time we started this Students Loan Scheme. How many students have benefited from each district in this country? I think the students who are benefiting are skewed towards a certain group of people against others, especially those who are –(Interruption)   

MR KANGWAGYE: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to this House. Last year, we had students from our district who passed highly but they were from poor families. They came to our offices here in Kampala - as their members of Parliament from Isingiro District. They wanted to know the procedure of how they could benefit from the Students Loan Scheme. 

It was quite hectic to get there. As long as you come from this area – down there in Isingiro at the border of Uganda and Tanzania – and you access the application form, going through the procedure and then going to Makerere - it was very dangerous.

To-date, they have not received the Students Loan Scheme. It was the members of Parliament from Isingiro District who said; “No, these people should not go back; they should really benefit from this.” We had to contribute school fees for them and they are now in Makerere University but with our support. 

Therefore, may I get the clear procedure, information, structure and the real plan and guidance? Can you tell us on how our people can also benefit like the others who we heard have benefitted? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, you can see the gravity of the problem. We want a balanced distribution of these benefits the way the district quota is done. If it is 10 students per year per district, let it be 10 students per year and per district. If it is 20 students per year, let it be so; so that if a district has met their limit, they cannot leave out the others who have not met the number. That is my plea.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much, for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: We are not supposed to have a long debate on this issue. Can the minister tell us why they are not following the Act? There are things we agreed upon in that Act; progressively you should move to support more children without sticking on Government sponsorship. Why are you not applying the Act?

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (MS Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear that when the loan scheme board is selecting the beneficiaries, they follow the criteria. The criteria gives regional consideration - (Interjection) – Please, give me a chance.

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS SENINDE: Bear with me and I will give you the information that you have requested for. I would like to promise this House that when Parliament opens on 28 October 2019, we are going to lay on the Table the list of all the beneficiaries from academic year 2014/2015 to-date per district. We are going to categorise it by district. All this information is available.

On the issue of why more students are not given this opportunity; it is the very reason we are now discussing this. It is the issue of resources. Colleagues, we gave you an example that over 7,300 students applied. Out of the 7,300 students who applied, 4,000 were eligible. However, the challenge is that we could not take all of them because of the resources. The fact that the programme has – I would not say that it has been there for long but we are moving progressively; every year, we add numbers – (Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Honourable minister, you mentioned here that in academic year 2014/2015 when we started the programme, we had only Shs 6 billion. This Financial Year 2019/2020, we have Shs 31 billion. If you look at the number of students that we supported with Shs 6 billion, they were 1,201. When we have Shs 31 billion, it is 1,831. An extra Shs 24 billion has only added about 600 students. How do you explain that?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to beg my brother – when I was presenting, I made it clear that it is cumulative. When we started, the law –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: The cumulative figure is Shs 10,024. However, the figure for this year –

MS SENINDE: Let me speak a language that can be understood - I think I should become a mathematics teacher. Honourable colleagues, I have made it clear that when we started the loan scheme, we only had Shs 6 billion, which took on the first cohort. Remember, these students were joining year one; they had to continue to year two and year three as we took on the second cohort. As we took on the third cohort – remember, these ones are progressing and are still in the system as we take on new ones. 

It is obvious that definitely the amount of money we would have to help pay for the continuing students as well as the new cohorts is what totals to that, my brother. Therefore, I do not know what kind of language I should use to clarify this.

Madam Speaker, for the Financial Year 2019/2020, we would have loved to sponsor at least 3,000 new cohorts. The money we had budgeted for the new cohorts is Shs 7.5 billion. Out of the Shs 7.5 billion, we were availed only Shs 2.3 billion. This implied that we could not take on the 3,000 that we wanted because the Shs 2.3 billion would only cater for the 1,000 that we are talking about. I think I have made my point clear. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you have. That is why we are asking: can’t the Republic of Uganda find that Shs 5 billion so that we can take on those children? That is what we are asking.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I am glad you have raised that question. The person to answer it is the minister for finance. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ALUM SANTA OGWANG ON THE INCURSION OF ELEPHANTS INTO OYAM DISTRICT AND THE SUBSEQUENT DISRUPTION OF LIVELIHOODS, DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY AND LOSS OF LIVES

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is absent. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. JAMES KABERUKA ON THE THREAT POSED BY STRAY ELEPHANTS IN KANUNGU DISTRICT AND THE NEED FOR COMPENSATION OF VICTIMS OF WILDLIFE ATTACKS AS STIPULATED IN THE WILDLIFE ACT, 2019

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. It seems there are some ministries that take this Parliament for granted. 

We, the districts, which border the national parks, have a lot of problems as far as destruction of property, loss of life and many other destructions are concerned. We have raised a number of complaints concerning this matter on the Floor of this Parliament. 

It is very unfortunate that most times when these issues are raised, the ministers who are in charge of this docket do not want to respond.

Now that today we have the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, maybe he can tell us whether we need to have a third minister in this docket so that our problems and issues are answered. This has been going on and on for a very long time. We are going for recess yet people are dying. What are we going to tell our people? 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it seems the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife and his assistants have got better business to do than coming here because this matter has been on the Order Paper for over a month. Yesterday, the minister beeped here a little and then took off. Are you going to take sanctions against him? How can ministers ignore Parliament for a month? They know they have items on the Order Paper for them to respond to? 

6.02
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have already said in this House before, it may be difficult for me to stand in for ministers – like now, the two ministers are absent. If you ask me why, it may be a very difficult question for me to answer because I really do not know. In this House, we should tell the truth. Therefore, I really don’t know - they said he was here yesterday and I think the question was not on the Order Paper. (Interjections) 

Therefore, the only thing you can ask me to do, Madam Speaker, is to ask the ministers to come as soon as this House resumes and answer for themselves why they are ignoring this House. That is a question that can only be answered by them. Now because I am a Prime Minister – who is a human being like everybody else – it is very difficult to answer that question. I must apologise. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime minister, we were not expecting you to answer for them. We expect you to issue sanctions against your ministers who are not attending to Parliament. Why don’t they come here? It has been over two months and they are not in this House. 

GEN. (Rtd) MOSES ALI: I will raise this on Monday in the Cabinet meeting so that we get a reply. The Monday meeting will be chaired by the appointing authority. I will raise this critical question of people who are permanently not coming to the House and not responding to issues raised in Parliament. I promise I will ask this question. 

6.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Madam speaker, the worst bit is that even when they see that they have issues on the Order Paper, they still do not come. All these state ministers should be demoted to directors except the Minister of State for Primary Education and hon. Bahati who try their best to even work for the others. Thank you. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, there is something that has come up recently; they call it ministerial swag. A minister is supposed to carry himself or herself as being too busy or too important to sit in Parliament. 

You have observed it even this afternoon; a minister will perform what she is supposed to perform and disappear. Another one comes, does the same and disappears. They are too busy to handle the parliamentary function. 

Madam speaker, I think it is not about pleading with the Prime Minister. I must thank the Prime Minister, through you, for being frank that he is aware of this and that he has not covered anything; he is not trying to please Parliament or the ministers. 

This House must take a position on this matter. It is no longer a small matter. We are failing because the Cabinet is failing us. There are some of these issues, which have been on the Order Paper for months. What do we do if the ministers are not there? What are we supposed to do? 

I think we should come up with a position as a matter of procedure that when a minister does not come, he is called two or three times and if they don’t show up, Parliament can take a decision on the issue. We can, maybe, throw them out or curtail their budgets or whatever. Parliament must take a position on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we also have Article 118 in the Constitution. I think we have been asleep on that; we should apply it although someone has to move a motion on the same. 

6.08
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have stood here to resurrect the issue of the loans scheme because it is intentionally being dodged by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

On 29 July, the Clerk to Parliament wrote to the minister of finance, following a directive by this Parliament, requesting them to bring a supplementary request of Shs 5 billion. Through analysis on the Floor of this Parliament, we observed that in the East African region, Kenya is supporting 260,000 students per year; Tanzania 150,000 per year; Rwanda 160,000 and Uganda 1,000 yet we are competing in the East African region.

The minister promised to bring a supplementary request, which he has continued to dodge. It seems the minister considers issues where he has direct interest because when it came to payment of the Ugandan businessmen in South Sudan, he was very vigorous in convincing this Parliament to make sure the money was found.

We need to assert ourselves to help poor Ugandans by having the minister bring the supplementary request. Otherwise, they should vow today that they will never bring any supplementary request if they cannot support the poor people. 

This is for the cause of the people of Uganda who are wallowing in poverty. Really, this is an abuse to the people we represent. As hon. Seninde has put it, cumulatively since this scheme started, we have just reached Shs 31 billion. The increment in number of the students has also been stifled. They reached a level of warning the Board members that if they continued, they were going to be sacked. Shall we continue watching this? 

I respect that the minister is a Christian but let him also look at the plight of Ugandans who are suffering in poverty. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we discussed the issue of the supplementary. You bring supplementary requests for very many things and that is why I have been asking; does the Government of Uganda have an interest in developing the human resource of this country or is it laissez-faire? Are you unwilling or unable to bring a supplementary request to support the children of Uganda? Only Shs 5 billion -

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I hear the voices of the people’s representatives. The problem has been unavailability of resources. We are willing but we do not have the capacity to raise Shs 5 billion, at the moment, through a supplementary request. It is something that probably, we are going to discuss in Cabinet and see whether there is any way we can cut something from somewhere. We have to cut some areas because we do not have extra revenue. If we are to make a decision then the Government has to cut different areas so that we can raise the Shs 5 billion. 

However, I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that it should not be on record that I am selective when pursuing issues here. All issues are very important. I know how school fees can be a problem. I grew up as an orphan and I looked for my own school fees. I know how difficult it is. If there is anything that I can do to help the children of Uganda, I will be very willing. Therefore, it is extremely unfair for hon. Kaberuka to put me in that category. I am extremely above that category of being selective on certain issues.

Since the Prime Minister is here, we are going to raise it on Monday and see whether we can cut from some programmes so that we can raise the Shs 5 billion and help the children of Uganda. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Therefore, the Cabinet has two issues on Monday; the Kampala-Jinja Expressway and the Shs 5 billion. They must be on the Cabinet paper.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO ISSUE RAISED BY HON. DAVID ABALA ON THE DESTRUCTION OF OVER 40 GRASS-THATCHED HUTS AND BUILDINGS AT ORISAI PRIMARY SCHOOL IN NGORA COUNTY BY HAILSTORMS

THE SPEAKER: The minister is not here. Next item.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO ISSUE RAISED BY HON. SARAH NAJJUMA ON THE ESCALATING FATALITIES DUE TO FALLEN ELECTRIC POLES AND SAGGING ELECTRIC WIRES AND THE UNRELIABLE EMERGENCY RESPONSE BY UMEME LTD

6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, at the 41st Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Wednesday, 2 October 2019, hon. Guma Gumisiriza of Ibanda North was concerned about the inadequate power connectivity in some sub-counties in the country.

The Government of Uganda entered into a loan agreement with the EXIM Bank of China to fund the implementation of the sub-county electrification programme. The loan amount is US$ 223 million -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your ministry has got three questions but what we wanted you to answer was the question from hon. Najjuma on escalating fatalities due to fallen electric poles, sagging electric wires and the unreliable emergency response by Umeme Ltd. 

MR LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, yesterday when I was standing here, this is the question you requested me to go –

THE SPEAKER: It is on the Order Paper.

MR LOKERIS: I have not the seen the other one. I will go and find out. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are supposed to be here. I am not supposed to be sending you the questions. Anyway, answer that of hon. Guma first but also send for the other answer.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, for your kindness. The key objective of this loan is to accelerate access to clean and modern electricity while spurring growth in demand through electrification of all un-served sub-counties and other load centres.

Construction of 3,000 kilometres of medium voltage network, 6,000 kilometres of low voltage network, installation of 3,401 distribution transformers and implementation of 168,335 single-phase and 4,254 three-phase connections. The project will electrify 550 un-served sub-counties countrywide. The commercial contract was signed on 31 October 2017 with TBEA.

The parliamentary clearance was granted on 12 May 2018 and clearance of the financial agreement by the bank was achieved in September 2018. In this grant, the loan agreement framework was signed in October 2018. Procurement of the supervising consultant was completed and the contract was signed in February this year. Project implementation is on-going and the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) has, to date approved 33 local sub-contractors procured by TBEA to do the works.

The design and the implementation schedules are under review by REA. The Rural Electrification Agency was making preparations for the official launch but they have been advised by the ministry to commence the work immediately before the launch. This will go to different parts of the country and it will run over 550 subcounties. To those who have not seen, the work is on schedule and it will come.

Madam Speaker, we already finalised with the signing and they have begun preparations for the launch. If you went upcountry, you would see people moving up and down. We have listed all areas that we completed and we shall take on the rest.

Madam Speaker, I wish to appreciate the support of this House for the loans granted to electrify the nation. Thank you.

6.19
MR DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and hon. Peter Lokeris for the statement.

First of all, it should be of interest to all of us that these pronouncements by the Government should be expedited. Honourable minister, I am aware and I have accurate information; I have heard you talk of 550 subcounties that are not connected but I wish to state that there are 615 subcounties that need connection. 

I also have information that REA is having difficulties with TBEA, a Chinese company, regarding sourcing of local contractors. They are looking for contractors they can underpay especially those that have limited capacity in terms of execution and professionalism.

Madam Speaker, I do not want to take long but I would like to seek your indulgence to direct the Committee on National Economy to invite the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, together with officials from REA to carry out surgery and come here with a detailed report so that we know exactly what is obtained.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, hon. Guma. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that the Committee on Natural Resources has already invited the minister, REA and everyone responsible to discuss that same matter on Tuesday, at 9 a.m.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We shall wait for the report from the Committee on Natural Resources. 

MR GUMA: Much obliged. Those of us who have interest will converge with the Committee on Natural Resources on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Go to the committee. You can speak but not vote. Go and share your views there. Thank you. Next item.

RESPONSE TO AN ISSUE RAISED ON THE ALLEGED ASSAULT OF A WOMAN BY THE DEPUTY RESIDENT DISTRICT COMMISSIONER-HOIMA, MR RICHARD TABARO DURING THE BY-ELECTION FOR THE HOIMA DISTRICT WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs. Next item. 

RESPONSE TO AN ISSUE RAISED ON THE THREATS TO THE LIFE OF HON. HASSAN FUNGAROO BY UNKNOWN PERSONS AND THE PROCRASTINATION IN RESPONSE BY RELEVANT SECURITY AGENCIES.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is still not here. The next question has been answered. Item eight.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lokeris, please come back. Honourable ministers, come back. All these works belong to the Government. Honourable ministers, it is important to support your colleagues because this work is for the Government. Where were we?

6.26
MR GEORGE WILSON KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): We were on clause 7 of the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Karungi, what is the problem?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I remember in the last discussion we had on this Bill, we suggested that when we come back, it would be prudent to go ahead when we have the Attorney-General, whom I do not see here. I do not know whether we are going to proceed well.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us move. If we get stuck, we shall see what to do. We had stood over clause 7. 

Clause 7

MR KUMAMA: Madam Chairperson, clause 7 was dealing with the secretariat of the board. It says the board shall have a secretariat, which shall be headed by the executive director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you reverting to the old position? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

THE CHAIRPERSON: We also stood over clause 8. 

MR KUMAMA: Clause 8 is amended in the proposed section 7 -
    (a) by substituting for subsection (2), with the following:
    (b) 
(2) The executive director shall be appointed by the board on terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment.

(b) by substituting for subsection (6)(d), the following:
(d) he or she is removed from office by the Board for -
i. 	inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising from infirmity of body or mind
ii. 	abuse of office
iii. 	misbehaviour or misconduct
iv. 	incompetence

The justification is to require the Board to appoint and remove the executive director instead of the minister for ease of supervision.

Mr nzoghu: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. You recall that there are two reports; the major report and the minority report. The principle in the minority report is that we contest the provision for the position of Secretariat and the Executive Director (ED).

You also recall that the Prime Minister did make a statement on the Floor of this Parliament. I think it would be pertinent for us to look at it very well because the Secretariat is going to impose a cost on the Consolidated Fund account. My opinion, together with hon. Waluswaka and hon. Okupa is that the department of physical planning should be strengthened instead of introducing a new agency.

The chairperson: Honourable members, I think you have heard the debate on the Floor of this House. The Government itself is confused on the issue of agencies; so, let us not speculate. Let us do what is available now.

Government does not know whether to merge or not to. Let us leave Government please; they are too confused. Let us move on.

Mr sabiiti: Madam Chairperson, there is something I would like to point out on that issue. As the honourable member has said, you are trying to strengthen the top and leaving all the urban areas; the districts, with the same structure, which has crippled the operation of the physical planning development plans.

I think we are not doing much by only strengthening the top and leaving out the municipalities, districts and sub-counties with the same structures, which are going to cripple this organisation.

The chairperson: Have you read clause 15? 

Mr sabiiti: Madam Chairperson, I have read all the proposed amendments –

The chairperson: Have you looked at clause (15) of the Bill? What you are asking for is there.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause (8) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

Mr kumama: Substitution of section (8) of the principle Act. Clause 9 is amended in the proposed section (8)(2) as follows:

    (a) By substituting for the whole of paragraph (b) to read;
“Be responsible for the control of the staff of the Board”-

The chairperson: Do you propose to delete the present paragraph (b)?

Mr kumama: Yes. Let it run as such.

    (b) Paragraph (c), by inserting the words; “And any other records of the Board” immediately after the word, “meetings” appearing in line (3) of section (c).

The justification is that –

The chairperson: Read the whole sentence that you have amended - when you talk of records, which are not minutes; what do you have in mind?

Mr Kumama: Minutes can also be records. Immediately after the word, “meetings”, we indicate, “and any other records of the Board”.

The chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Mr kumama: Madam Chairperson, there is an insertion after clause 10. 

Amendments of Section (10) of the principle Act

The Principle Act is amended in section 10 by substituting for paragraph (a) the following:
    (a) “To prepare district physical development plans through its officers, agents or any qualified physical planners.”
    (b) By inserting immediately after paragraph (h) the following;
	“To recommend to the district council physical development plans for approval by the Board.”

In paragraph (j), to recommend to the district Council the approval of subcounty physical development plans.

The justification is:

    (i) To clearly define the functions of the district physical planning committee in relation to preparation of the district physical development plans.

    (ii) To harmonise the provision with section 25 of the principle Act. The responsibility of causing the preparation of the local physical development plans lies with the sub-county council and not the district physical planning committee. 

The chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11

Mr kumama: Amendment of the section 11 of the principle Act.

Substitute for clause 11 the following:

The principal Act is amended in section 11 by substituting for paragraph (d) the following:
    (a) “The City municipal or town environmental officer”.
    (b) By substituting for paragraph (g) the following: 
 	“(g) the officer responsible for public health.” 

The justification is for clarity and specificity since an urban authority includes a city, municipal division or town council. 

The expertise and competence of architects is very critical in matters relating to the preparation and implementation of the physical development plans. Hence, an architect should be maintained on the urban physical planning committee.
 
Clause 11; there is also an insertion after clause 11. Can I read it? “Insert a new clause immediately after clause 11 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, let us deal with one at a time. 

MR KUMAMA: Okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

MR KUMAMA: After clause 11 there is an insertion of a new clause as follows; “Amendment of section 12 of the principal Act.” 

The principle Act is amended in section 12 by substituting for paragraph (a) the following:

(a)	 “To prepare urban physical development plans and detailed plans.” 

(b) 	By inserting immediately after paragraph (e) the following; 
	(f) “To recommend to the appropriate urban authority urban physical development plans for approval by the board.” 

The justification is to streamline the mandate of the urban physical development committee in relation to preparation of urban physical development plans and local physical development plans to avoid inconsistencies with section 14(a) and the amendments proposed under clause 15(b) of the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced – 

MR AOGON: I want to find out whether we cannot be absolute by specifying which authority. Should we leave it hanging and open to say “appropriate authority” without naming? I do not know whether the chairperson can assist. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that? 

MR AOGON: He has just been reading out that the committee should be reporting to a relevant or appropriate authority. Can’t you specify? 

MR KUMAMA: It is specified that to recommend to the “appropriate urban authority, town council, municipal council.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, introduced.

Clause 12

MR KUMAMA: Amendment of section 13 of the principle Act. 

Amend clause 12 in the proposed section 13 by:
(a) 	substituting for the head note the following: 
	“(13) establishment of subcounty physical planning committees.”

(b) 	By substituting for the words “local physical planning committee” the words “sub-county physical planning committee” wherever they appear.

(c) 	In paragraph (d) by inserting the word “public” immediately before the word “health” such that it becomes “public health.”

(d) 	By inserting immediately after paragraph (e) the following; “(f) the District Natural Resources Officer or his or her representative.”

The justification is to be specific since local physical planning committees are constituted by the sub-county council for the sub-county administrative unit; to avoid ambiguity in the use of the phrase “local physical planning committee.”

(ii) 	The phrase “public health” is more specific as compared to “health” and addresses broad issues that affect the health and wellbeing of the people.

(iii) 	To ensure that the natural resources issues are integrated into physical development plans at sub-county level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question-  

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, there is an issue to be addressed there. Just like at the sub-county level in civil service structure, we have the agricultural officers and veterinary officers to oversee those activities right at the sub-county level. Here, we are talking about physical planning and aware that it is supposed to start from the bottom to the top.

We feel that it would be fair to introduce a physical planner at the subcounty level because this one will give technical guidance to the subcounty team and down to the parish so that whichever physical plans emanate from the subcounty level are a reflection of the standards which the national board will have set.

Therefore, I wish to propose that we introduce a physical planning function and having a physical planner at the sub-county level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether that falls within the certificate of financial implications issued by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on this Law.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, town councils have physical planners. Why don’t we also extend it to the subcounties because physical planning does not only take place in the town councils?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, as you advised, the matter being proposed by the honourable Shadow Minister responsible for infrastructure is something that would be brought by the Government because it involves a huge cost in implementing a proposal like that and we are not in position to bring that king of amendment at this point.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like the minister to guide us on how planning at the lower level is going to be dealt with, aware that what we are doing is to regulate the unplanned activities that go on. 

We have so many structures coming up illegally because most of the people do not own titles. How are you regulating the construction and infrastructure at that lower level when you do not put planning units at lower levels?

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to believe that the cost of compensation for buildings that people put up after failed planning is more than what the Government is trying to avoid.

I would like to buy the position given by hon. Nzoghu here. We need these planning bodies right at the sub-counties and divisions in municipalities. If you come to the currently created municipalities, there is no panning at all. 

People are beginning to construct along roads without planning and tomorrow we shall want to compensate in order to open way for roads and other infrastructure, which is not acceptable. Let us all support this –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For purposes of fearing the financial implications, Government can introduce short courses. For example, when recruiting the subcounty Community Development Officers (CDOs), we can design a short course on ideas of physical planning.

It will be similar to what is happening currently where for a person to be recruited as a sub county chief, they possess a certificate in administrative law. So, we can also think of that. Let all the CDOs have an idea on physical planning. This will mean that all the subcounties shall recruit the CDOs with knowledge in physical planning. That would work well, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to members not to press too much the issue of appointing the physical planners in the subcounties. I would like you to read Article 93 (a) (ii) of the Constitution. 
“…the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction;”

Therefore, if you are going to say, “Appoint another 1,000 physical planners” – because there are 1,000 subcounties now – automatically from this law, you must find the money. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like the minister to explain this to this Parliament. I think the biggest challenge that we have with physical planning is that it is actually being treated in a post-mortem way.

We should have the physical plans first and then development follows the physical planning. Now, when you do not have physical planners at subcounty level, it means you will only be addressing yourselves to the challenges that are arising out of poor planning. So, since the municipalities have them, why have you introduced – for example – the secretariat, which is going to take a lot of money, yet we have also said that secretariat is not going to actually help even the lower level. It is a thin structure at national level but that structure of the secretariat is not going to help a lot at the lower level local governments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let the minister explain.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to draw the attention of Parliament to clause 12 of the Bill, which I believe we will be discussing. That clause seeks to put in place a local physical planning committee at every subcounty. The membership of that committee will include:

    i. The subcounty chief, who shall be the chairperson.
    ii. The district physical planner or his or her representative.
    iii. The community development officer and the officer responsible for health at the subcounty. And
    iv. The officer responsible for agriculture at that subcounty.  

These will constitute the subcounty physical planning committees. So, this is the best we could do in the circumstances. 
The technical person will still be the district physical planner, who will give the technical support to this committee. I propose that we advance and discuss this when we get there. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, you had rightly guided that there was need to consult the committee majority and the minority reports, and some of us who had pertinent issues to do with this. Unfortunately, your directive has not been implemented. No consultation was done by the committee members with those members who authored the minority report neither with us, us who had preliminary objections. 

Yesterday, in the Committee of ICT, the Chairperson and the Executive Director of National Planning Authority (NPA) confirmed that they have written to the committee, objecting to this arrangement and that they have not given clearance to what we are discussing and so, they were wondering how we are going to pass this; I have been just restraining myself. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What have they not given clearance for?

MR MUKITALE: The Chairperson, National Planning Authority, in the Committee of ICT at exactly noon yesterday, said whereas Government has delayed in taking a decision on mergers – as you rightly ruled earlier – they do not understand how Parliament can continue to legislate on what they objected to in writing.

Can I, therefore, request –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, NPA does not run the Government. I would like the Government to come here and tell us its position. We cannot get it from the streets; no way! Please, the Government has not come here to tell us whether they are merging or not merging though it is in the press and everywhere else.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 13

MR KUMAMA: Madam Chairperson, there is a new insertion after clause 12.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where?

MR KUMAMA: After clause 12, insert a new clause immediately to read as follows:

“Amendment of section 14 of the principal Act
The principal Act is amended in section 14 as follows:

    (a) By substituting paragraphs (a), with the following:
	“(a) The preparation of subcounty physical development plans;”
    (b) By substituting paragraph (b), with the following:
	“(b) Recommending subcounty physical development plans to the district physical development committee for consideration and approval by the district council.”
(c) 	By repealing paragraph (c).

The justification is to clearly provide for the mandate of local physical planning committees in relation to preparation of physical development plans, to ensure consistency with the amendments proposed under clause 15 and two, paragraph (c) is a repetition of paragraph (b), hence the proposal for its deletion.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like the minister - through you - to clarify to this House who they actually deem clearly to be the representative of the district physical planner on the subcounty physical planning committee. Who will be that representative? 

On the composition of the subcounty physical planning committee, the honourable minister said that the district physical planner can attend or have a representative there. So, can the honourable minister clarify to us who that representative of the district physical planner on the subcounty physical planning committee will be?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have been making legislations here. Sometimes, you say, “The Minister of Tourism or his or her representative.” You have done it; this is not unique.

MR AOGON: To reinforce the argument by my colleague here; I think his fear is: the person might come yet he or she is not technical enough to give that befitting guidance. So, how do you manage that fear in case of a representative? Is there any word we can add to make sure that the person who comes to represent the physical planner is technical enough?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, are we discussing clause 12? Because if we are, I thought we had pronounced ourselves on it already? In that clause, we said we are going to establish a local physical planning committee at every subcounty and we said the composition will be the subcounty chiefs and the district physical planner or his representative. 

A district physical planner can have a representative. For example, if the district physical planner of Kamuli is not able to attend two meetings that are at the same time in two subcounties, he or she can ask for assistance from the board because we have said somewhere that the board will have technical staff or can get an urban –(Interruption)– Can I finish?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is the district physical planner alone in the district or there is a structure? 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, there is a district planner in every district. We also have urban planners in the districts. (Interjections) Please, let me be listened to like I have listened to hon. Nzoghu. In a district, we have the district physical planner but we have other physical planners too. We have urban physical planners within the urban areas subsisting in a district. 

If they are not there, the positions are there and they are going to be filled. The establishment is there under the Physical Planning Act. Urban planners give support to the district planner. 

MR ATIKU: Madam Chairperson, this matter is very crucial and important because if you look at the old Act, which we are amending, it has that provision. The minister has only introduced the aspect of having the district physical planner to be part of the subcounty physical planning committee. For those of us who have been in the process – 

Currently, in my constituency, we are doing mass land registration in preparation for city status because the majority of my people had not registered their land. We are mobilising them to ensure that they have land titles before the city comes. We have mobilised all the subcounties to ensure that they do what is within the legal framework; the current Physical Planning Act. 

Madam Chairperson, the problem is that in all the districts, we have one district physical planner. This person will not be able to move to all the subcounties. If we are to talk about a representative with the technical skills or capacity matching that of the physical planner, they are very rare. 

What the old Act had provided for was that the subcounty chief would chair the meetings of the physical planning committee, which to me was – This is because they go to the field before the lease offer is given and because they have a history of the location, they can guide the district land board on what to do regarding that particular land or location.

Therefore, I find the subcounty chiefs adequate to handle this because that is the preliminary information. When it comes to the real planning process, it should be handled at the district level rather than having the district physical planner on that committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you not satisfied with the proposal that the subcounty chairperson is the chairperson of the committee?

MR ATIKU: Madam Chairperson, I am contented with the status quo as it is in the old Act because –

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the status quo there? 

MR ATIKU: The status quo there gives the mandate to the subcounty chiefs to chair the physical planning committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is what they are saying.

MR ATIKU: Here, they have introduced the district physical planner to be part of this committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, either you want the planner there or you do not. You are saying that you need planners. The law is saying we shall cause the district planner to sit with the subcounty. Now, you are saying you do not want them there and you only want the –

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, our argument is that the physical planner of a municipality is independent. He or she is not controlled by the district physical planner. Therefore, when you say a representative of the district physical planner will go to the subcounty, it means you are either going to hire the physical planner in the municipality or town council because they are independent; they are not controlled by the district physical planner. That is what we are saying.

MR KUMAMA: Madam Chairperson, I think we are arguing over something, which is catered for. When they say the district planner will be a technical guide of the subcounty planning exercise in the meetings or his representative, it means if the district planner is not there, he or she knows planners in the district that he or she can delegate to go in his or her place to a particular subcounty and guide to the satisfaction of the district physical planner. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: One member said that the physical planners are rare. Why are they rare? Are they few? If so, where will we get 1,000 of them?

Honourable members, we have already voted on clause 12. Let us go to clause 13. 

Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KUMAMA: There is another insertion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there two insertions? 

MR KUMAMA: There is another insertion immediately after clause 13. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you allow us to handle clause 13 first and then go to the new ones? 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I have an insertion between clause 12 and clause 13 and states, “One of the functions of the parish chief will be to ensure that each house is built in accordance with the site plan issued.” 

The justification is, when you are building a house, you get a plan approved by the council. However, at the time you are preparing the site for your house in the locality where you are going to build, there is no authority of Government that ensures that you site the house where it should be. Consequently, people have approved plans but they build their houses or site them in a restricted area. 

What we are seeking to do, by this amendment, is to ensure that you have your plans prepared by the architects and approved by the council. On the day you start laying pegs for the foundation, there must be a Government authority to guide on the metres from the road or your neighbour and to ensure that the wall alignment is consistent with the plan you have.

Therefore, the proposal here is that we have an amendment that gives the parish chief, who is always in the village, the mandate to ensure that the provisions of the physical plan are respected in accordance with the plan.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, what the honourable minister is trying to tell us is well-intended. We are trying to operationalise the country planning Act, 2010 which makes a planning area of the whole country.

I see three gaps therein. One is in the public service structures of our districts which does not provide for what you are envisaging. Secondly, the executor is the local government.  Therefore, the two mandates of the local government and the public service in as far as the Wage Bill for the people you are talking of is a problem for Buliisa to have gone through the three years of land acquisition for oil and gas.

However, most important, even land itself is pushing more of laws than - it is expected that we already have systematic demarcation of land in the whole country; that every location in a parish is picked.

Therefore, what the honourable minister is likely to be referring to is envisaging that in Buliisa, somewhere in that parish, the land is surveyed, known, demarcated and there is a land use plan. That is why we had brought the other debate of the special planning and the national physical development plan which takes care of all these other areas of land use. 

You have skipped housing areas and industrial parks and now we are in a debate anticipating operationalising planning areas, yet the other sector under your control as lands have not been budgeted for.  That is where the problem is.

Madam Speaker, as we move on this well-intended spirit of the minister, we must find time to address the national physical planning question we raised and the question of the district service structures to take care of the urban planners, parishes and reorienting and retooling our sub county chiefs, like we did with law as a requirement. However, physical planning is not a requirement yet we are saying that the whole country is a planning area. I find that a dilemma.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now do not know what your contribution was about. Are you talking of areas with no parish chiefs at all? Are there areas without parish chiefs in this country?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, I am only saying that like when we found that subcounty chiefs had a requirement of some elementary certificate in law; can we also in the same spirit of the 2010 Act, make sure that they have some orientation in as far as physical planning is concerned. That also has a budget-

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have to agree to the amendment that the chiefs will be responsible then you can train them. The question is, there is a proposal for that insertion -

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is so good. For instance, when you come to Kumi Municipality, I have one of the roads called Aterai; it needs to be planned for. The people got some compensation out of the money from Pallisa-Tirinyi-Kumi Road, they have now started building; but without guidance; that is because such a person is lacking. My only worry is that may be the parish chiefs are not in every parish. Then tomorrow, we may get tied down because somebody wants to have the services, but there is no parish chief. How do we deal with that?
However, in principle, I feel that the idea is good.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause inserted.

Clause 13 agreed to

Clause 14

MR KUMAMA:  Before clause 14, insert a new clause immediately after clause 13 as follows; the insertion of a new clause 17A in the Principal Act. The Principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 17 the following:

17A experts and consultants, “A district, urban or subcounty council may at the request of a district, urban or subcounty physical planning committee engage the services of experts and consultants in respect of the respective physical planning committee relating to preparation physical development plans.”

Justification: to cater for situations where a physical planning committee may not have the requisite expertise to prepare physical reward plans for its areas.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like the honourable minister to explain to us whether that one does not contradict with his statement that the introduction of physical planners at the subcounty level would culminate into an imposition of a cost on the Consolidated Fund; in the event that, for example, the subcounty does not have expertise and they are going to hire an expert, isn’t that another additional cost to the Consolidated Fund account?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Section 17A is on the committee.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, whatever amendments we have made as a Government, if they involve money, it is money that we can afford to put in the Budget. Therefore, we are ready to stand by the amendments as they are now.

MR AOGON: At the same time, I have always known that for instance, when you go to subcounties - when it comes to getting a consultant in terms of planning, they use local revenues generated from down there and not money from -

When we talk about consolidated - I do not know whether we have gone as far as picking money from subcounties to bring it to the centre for consolidation. Also the definition of the word “consolidation” matters a lot.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause introduced.

Clause 14

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 14, we have an amendment to section 18 -

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, one of the issues that curtailed the effective implementation of the Physical Planning Act, 2010 was finances. I am at a loss, therefore, to hear from the honourable minister that whichever amendments they are proposing here, have been looked at and that they are going to ably finance them.

Honourable minister, in your view and you know that the minister of local Government has put it clearly that most of the local governments do not have the capacity to raise local revenues; and at the national level, you have also failed to implement the town and country planning Act of 2010. Therefore, where is the convergence?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether I have understood you, in relation to section 17A, the new amendment.

MR NZOGHU: If a subcounty is to hire an expert, that means they will be responsible for that cost. However, do they have the capacity?

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, allow me make a contribution here. I feel it is just so pertinent that we provide for that so that we do not get locked up in a situation where the subcounty does not have a committee to help them. They should be able to hire because they have the money. Why should we lock ourselves into a room without keys to the padlocks? That will be terrible.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Also, honourable members, are you not aware that sometimes there are districts which have no service commission and they borrow support from another district to do their work?

Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Claus 14

MR MUSUMBA: Chairperson, we propose an amendment to add to section 18 of the principal Act a new subsection (4) to read as follows, “In as far as possible, physical development plans shall be linear.”

Madam Chairperson, if you visited places like Berlin, New York and Washington, you will notice that in terms of physical plans, they have created straight lines and blocks. 

The original plans of traditional towns of Uganda, such as Jinja, Soroti and Mbale, were linear. We would want to reintroduce this kind of physical planning because the areas that have been planned after that are in a state of confusion. It makes it difficult to even differentiate plot numbers and blocks. 

Madam Chairperson, the amendment seeks to ensure that whenever possible, they stick to the linear mode of physical planning. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put a question that a new clause be introduced as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15 

MR KUMAMA: We propose to insert three new clauses immediately after clause 14 as follows- 
Amend section 21 of principal Act.

The principal Act is amended in section 21 as follows:

(a) 	Subsection (1), by inserting the words “by Cabinet” immediately after the word "approval";
(b) 	By substituting for subsection (2) the following -
	“(2) Cabinet may approve a national or regional physical development plan without, or subject to any conditions or modifications as it may consider necessary."
(c) 	By substituting for subsection (3), the following-
	"(3) Where Cabinet refuses to approve a national or regional physical development plan, the minister shall require the board to prepare a new plan taking into account the modifications proposed by Cabinet."

Amendment of section 22 of principal Act

The principal Act is amended in section 22 by substituting for subsection (1), the following-
“(1) The board shall, within fourteen days, after Cabinet approves a national or regional physical development plan, publish in the Gazette, a notice notifying the public that the plan has been approved and that it may be inspected at a place and time specified in the notice."

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you taking away the minister’s power to approve and giving it to the Cabinet? 

MR KUMAMA: Yes.

Amendment of section 23 of principal Act
Section 23 of the principal Act is amended as follows -
(a) 	In subsection (3), by substituting for the words "his or her", the word "Cabinet";
(b) 	In subsection (5), by substituting for the words "The Minister", the word "Cabinet";
(c) 	By substituting for subsection (6), the following-
"(6) Where the proposed alteration or modification is approved by Cabinet, the approved national or regional physical development plan shall be published in accordance with section 22.” 

Justification 

To harmonise the sections 21, 22 and 23 of the principal Act with the proposed sections 6(1) (h) in the Bill which requires national and regional physical development plans to be approved by Cabinet. The principal Act requires national or regional physical development plans to be approved by the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale for taking away the power from the minister and giving it to six other people? 

MR KUMAMA: This is only for regional and national development plans.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are no other plans. It is either national or regional. There are no international plans. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, a good law should provide for checks and balances. I see that, first of all, they have proposed the board. They have also proposed the secretariat to support the board. 

In the wisdom of this Parliament, Madam Chairperson, it would be fair for Cabinet to leave the function of approval of those plans to the board, where the minister also sits. In that case, if there is anything wrong with the plans, Cabinet, then, has the moral authority to ask what went wrong. If there is anything wrong, will Cabinet condemn itself? 

Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with that proposal. I say we take it back to the board, where the minister sits, and then Cabinet can do the monitoring function. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think this is a unique thing where we are talking of Cabinet approval. In most cases, it is the head of the ministry who should be given these powers to approve. 

I would like to inform the colleagues that a proposal for the minister to approve - the minister should be there but not the Cabinet because it is too broad. Sometimes, for quick decisions, you need the minister. 

As hon. Nzoghu said, there must be checks. If the minister faulted, then the Cabinet can come in to reiterate but at this level, I think, most of the Acts that were passed here, it is the minister not the Cabinet. I would like to say that we should go back to the original thing that the minister be the one to approve. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is also bureaucracy in the Cabinet. It may seat on the programme for three years.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Unless there are recent developments that we do not understand, but when you talk about a minister, you are talking about Cabinet. What happens between a minister and the Cabinet is their internal arrangement. I am sure if there is a critical matter, Cabinet will always serve its inputs through the minister.

Unless the chairperson of the committee is trying to let us know whether the minister is in charge or it is the Cabinet, I think this takes us too far. For us, we get to know the position of Cabinet through the minister. Once we have the minister, that is how far we can go. 

For you to tie the physical planning to Cabinet is abstract. For us, we look at the responsible minister who comes on the Floor of Parliament and gives directions accordingly. We do not expect Cabinet to come here and guide the House. It should be a minister. I move that the chairperson withdraws those amendments, Madam Chairperson. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chairperson, a law such as, “with the approval of Cabinet” is actually an internal mechanism to a bit restrict the existing system. For example, “with the approval of Cabinet”, it means that the minister’s hands are a little bit tied. Cabinet’s fear is that if you leave a lot of freedom to the minister, sometimes, it may be too late even for the Cabinet to come and restrict it. It is not struggle for power or wanting power, no, it is a means of restricting. That is the secret behind it. It is not just trying to amass power; no, if something is going to happen in this area like this planning, it is a big area.

If it is left alone to the minister and he does his or her own plan, it becomes a problem. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, I think we have a problem because under clause 5(6)(h), it says the board shall recommend to the minister regional and national physical development plans for approval by Cabinet. It seems the –

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, on that issue, I would like to suggest like the Prime Minister has put it, the word “with” should be enshrined there so that it is the minister to initiate but “with” the approval of Cabinet. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, they do not become plans until Cabinet has approved.

MR AOGON: The fear of the Prime Minister is that the minister can easily do something, which is not acceptable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it at both regional and national levels? 

MR KUMAMA: Yes, it is at both regional and national. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, we have already adopted clause 5 in those terms. I, therefore, propose that we continue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that new clauses be introduced as proposed –

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, there is a provision that that very clause 5, can be recommitted.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: The owner of the Bill has conceded and the Prime Minister is insisting that this is the way it should be done.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, the Prime Minister has that ultimate to say yes but Parliament can also look at this and see whether it is fair or not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want us to approve the National Development Plan really? No, honourable members, I put the question that new clauses be introduced as proposed by the Chair.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clauses introduced.

Clause 15

MR KUMAMA: Amendment of section 25 of the Principal Act. Clause 15 is amended as follows:
(a) 	In paragraph (a), under the proposed subsection (1), by substituting for the word “prepare”, the words “cause to be prepared”; 
(b) 	In paragraph (b) under the proposed subsection (1)(a), by substituting for the words “cause to be prepared”, the word “prepare”; 
(c) 	By substituting for paragraph (c), the following.
	“(c) By repealing subsection (2)”; 
(d) 	By inserting two new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (c) as follows.
	“(d) By repealing subsection (4);”
(e) 	Subsection (5), by inserting immediately after the word “plan”, the words “adopted by the district council;
(f) 	By substituting for subsection (6), the following: 
	(6) An urban physical development plan adopted by the respective urban authority shall be submitted to the board for approval, upon payment of the prescribed fee.”

Justification

(i) 	The effect of the amendments made to paragraphs (a) and (b) is to align the function the respective local government councils and those of the respective physical planning committees to avoid contradiction.

(ii) 	The substitution of paragraph (c) is to prevent the board from having conflicting roles since it is mandated under clause 5, to approve district and urban physical development plans. It would, therefore, be absurd to allow the board prepare district and urban physical development plans and approve the same plans.

(iii) 	The amendments made to subsections (4), (5) and (6) of section 25 are for clarity by ensuring that the various processes of approvals of district, urban and local physical development plans are clear. That is the justification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your reason for substituting the words “cause to be prepared”? Is the district urban or subcounty committee itself going to prepare the plan or it is going to instruct? Why do you remove the words “cause to be prepared?” For example, the President is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but he calls somebody else to –

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, if we go by what he is proposing, who approves the subcounty physical plans? If we have an organ that approves the subcounty physical plans and the district physical planner should be the technical person who guides the district physical planning committee in the approval of the subcounty physical plans. 

However, you are also saying that the district physical planner or his or her representative will also sit at the subcounty physical planning meetings. I do not understand!

MR KUMAMA: To allay your fears because the subcounty council is in charge of their subcounties. Therefore, the district councils are also in charge of the entire district. Whatever comes from the subcounty goes to the district. Indeed, it is the district planner who has initiated all these and guided. When they get there, they will definitely guide district councils for approval.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I am aware that even when it comes to the approval of budgets, subcounties approve their own budgets just like the districts do. The physical planner will be sitting in the subcounty committee and you cannot refer this very matter to the district where the physical planner is part of it. It would be pertinent that we consider the council of the subcounty to be the one to approve the plans for the subcounties.

Secondly, I do not know whether you have put the definition for the word “subcounty” in the interpretation clause? You must remember the fact that there are also divisions. For instance, when you go to the municipality, the divisions are equivalent to the municipalities. Have you provided for that in the interpretation section, the definition of the word “subcounty”? Does it mean divisions as well? I think that it is very pertinent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, if you go further down, once the plan is prepared it has to come to the committee before it goes to the district council. It is not the committee that will prepare. 

Therefore, I would like you to restate the other word. They instruct a body or person to do it and then the person will come and report, and then they will discuss and take it. The committee does not prepare the plan but it is done for them, then they process it and take to the district council. You have removed the words “cause to be.” You are now making it the duty of the urban committee to prepare the development plans. That is what you are doing by this amendment. 

MR AOGON: I suggest that we stand over this so that we do not make mistakes. Let us move to the next one. 

MR MUSUMBA: No, let us conclude. It is just about the wording. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chair, by your amendment, you are asking the committee to prepare development plans but further down you say, “They shall now receive it.” Will they receive it from themselves and then discuss it themselves and take it to the district council? What I am saying is that there was no need to remove the words “cause to be prepared” because this committee will instruct somebody to prepare and then that somebody will report to the committee. The committee will then study it and forward it to the district council. The committee itself shall not prepare the plan. That is why I wanted you to maintain the words “cause to be prepared.” 

MR KUMAMA: Madam Chair, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you repealing the (2)(c)? 

MR KUMAMA: It is as it is. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR MUSUMBA: I made notes in my comments that I must disagree with the committee on this one because they seek to remove a proposal in the Bill to introduce rewards for the good implementation of a physical development plan and sanctions. I think that is contained in clause 17. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That relates to sections 47A and 47B of the Act? What are the issues? 

MR MUSUMBA: Clause 17 as it stands –

THE CHAIRPERSON: There are proposals for a new 47A on rewards for implementing a physical development plan and certificate of compliance with the physical development plan. Those are the new proposals under clause 17.

MR KUMAMA: Insertion of the new section 47A and 47B in the principal Act.
Clause 17 is amended by deleting the proposed section 47A and by deleting sub section (3) in the proposed section 47B.

The justification is that the provisions are not practical since most local governments are inadequately funded and therefore, may not be in position to develop and implement physical development plans at all times. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us start with the deletion of 47. Minister, are you okay with the deletion?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chair, I would like to stand by what is in the Bill. I have a different opinion from what the committee recommends.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you want the local governments, which comply, to be given rewards? 

MR KUMAMA: The committee considered this but there was fear that this reward system may be abused. There is, therefore, a certificate of compliance - sections 47A and 47B are likely to be abused. That is the fear of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you not trust the board? How will you motivate them? Recently, they were grading performance of hospitals in the country. Don’t you want a merit system where you reward the good and cane the bad? (Laughter)

MR KUMAMA: That is the fear of the committee but if you find it necessary, that is still fine.

MR AOGON: To me, that is sheer cowardice. It cannot work. It is like saying that you build a house without a plan and let people sleep in it and it collapses on them. What would you choose? 

Rewards are very beautiful. It is good to reward those who do well and sanction those who fail to do well; I concur with the minister on this. It has been happening with the districts. Every year, they assess the performance of districts and give rewards to those that may have done well and penalise those that may have failed to perform. Everybody is on tenterhooks. This is physical planning. We should not joke with it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: And when we check and we don’t find our home districts among those that have performed well, we go home a bit unhappy. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 17 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there are no changes to clause 2; the interpretation. 

MR KUMAMA: Madam Chair, I am sorry there was an amendment in clause 22.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it really substantive? Is it on offences?

MR KUMAMA: Yes, clause 22 is amended in the proposed section 57(1):

    a) By deleting paragraph (c) –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it under the offences?

MR KUMAMA: Yes, we are deleting paragraph (c). 

b) 	By substituting for the words “twenty four currency points -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are you?

MR KUMAMA: I am on clause 22.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 22 is about offences.

MR KUMAMA: Clause 22(c) -

THE CHAIRPERSON: … fails to paint his or her building…? 

MR KUMAMA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why do you want to delete it?

MR KUMAMA: By deleting (c).
b) 	By substituting the words, “twenty four currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year” with the words “forty eight currency points –“

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is not clause 22(c). I do not know whether what you are reading is what I am reading.

MR KUMAMA: I am on clause 22 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It deals with offences so, where are you?

MR KUMAMA: Substitution of section 57 of the principal Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to delete, “… fails to paint his or her building, place litter bins at his or her building, place a sign with the street name on his or her plot as prescribed by the local government or builds in a road reserve or environmentally sensitive …” I go and build in the reserve and you say it is okay? 

MR KUMAMA: That one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean if I build in the road reserve, you do not want me to be penalised or I can go and put something in the river and it is okay?

MR KUMAMA: That is what the committee considered.
b) By substituting for the words “twenty four currency points…” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are we reading the same Bill? Read the whole sentence.

MR KUMAMA: Clause 22 is amended in the proposed section 57(1)-

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Someone who fails with any order issued under this Act commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding twenty four currency points…” Do you have a problem with that?

MR KUMAMA: Yes, it should be “forty eight currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years.”

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, how do you match the currency points to the period? Is it just about mentioning the currency points or there should be a formula that maybe one currency point is equivalent to a month?

MR NZOGHU: Before the committee chairperson justifies his proposal, 48 currency points is equivalent to Shs 960,000. Really, there is no equity between 48 currency points and a two- year imprisonment. They do not match. My proposal would be that we put it at 100 currency points and the two years can remain as proposed by the committee chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How much is 100 currency points? Would that be Shs 2 million?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to invite the House to look at the nature of the offences we are considering. If you knowingly make a false statement or give false information in respect of an application or appeal under this Act, we really think that what is being proposed is okay. This is because if you give a false statement –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Honourable minister, do you know that if you give false information it will distort the whole planning process?

MR MUSUMBA: The gravity of the false statement you give will determine what the court will sentence you to. It can be a fine of so many currency points or imprisonment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about if you obstruct or resist an officer or a person authorised under the Act in the course of his or her duty? Do you pay Shs 960,000?

MR OKUPA: Yes, that is what I wanted to ask. If you falsely make an utterance or issue a document and you get Shs 960,000 - I think that is why hon. Nzoghu was proposing that as the minimum; 100 currency points would be about Shs 2 million. Compared to two years imprisonment, one would rather pay Shs 5 million. Therefore, we can have it at 100 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not exceeding 100 currency points? Okay.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I have an additional amendment to clause 22 (c) regarding littering in public places. As you drive to Jinja, after Namawojjolo where people stop to buy chicken or bogoya, you find them driving while eating and throwing litter out of the taxis -

MR AOGON: While processing the environment law in the Committee on Natural Resources, I remember that we asked that the minister brings regulations to deal with that. I think littering is not a planning matter but an environment and sanitation one. Therefore, I believe that there is already a law catering for that.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I do not think any proposal here is inconsistent with good practice. We have stated in this entire sub-section that if you have failed to paint your house or building, it is an offence. If you have failed to place litter bins at your building, it is an offence. This is because people are living in filth in the middle of our towns and villages.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Some roads are narrowing because they are competing with garbage.

MR NZOGHU: If the honourable minister could help this Parliament, we could broaden it and put it at the level of waste management. If you say “littering” and go for other details -

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, an offence must be specific. We cannot say we are creating an offence for someone who does not do waste management. The courts will ask how you are defining “waste management.” I would like to therefore propose that we accept this innocuous amendment and we proceed.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I thought littering would be under the definition of waste management. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But if I cannot catch you in the morning, can’t I catch you in the evening? What is the harm? You have escaped National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) in the morning and then I catch you in the evening for littering under the Physical Planning Act.

MR AOGON: The problem we are having is that when it comes to penalties, are we combining it with the earlier penalty or is it a separate provision? Otherwise, I think that is very critical. We should not combine it because the gravity is not the same. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What we have said is not exceeding.

MR AOGON: Not exceeding.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: You can do two or five currency points, depending on the gravity but the highest is 100 currency points.

MR AOGON: The court will have the jurisdiction. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The court will decide depending on how much garbage you have brought. Honourable members, I put the question that - Honourable chair, do you have something on this? What reason do you have for deletion? I think the chair has conceded. Chair, are you still insisting that (c) should be deleted?

 MR KUMAMA: Since members are debating that way, we concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a slight amendment at the end of paragraph (c). I put the question that, that amendment be effected.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment of the currency points. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Insertion of a new clause

MR KUMAMA: Insert a new clause immediately after clause 23 as follows:

Consequential amendment to principal Act. The principal Act is amended-
    a. by substituting for the words “local physical development plan” the words “subcounty physical development plan” wherever they appear;
    b.  by substituting for the words “local physical planning committee” with the words “sub county physical planning committee, wherever they appear.

The justifications are –

    i. To ensure clarity and consistency in the usage of the phrase “subcounty"” as used in the local government administrative structures.
    ii. It is a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that that amendment be accepted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KUMAMA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to recommit clause 15. There was an amendment in clause 15.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We first need to report. Why do you all want to recommit?

MR KUMAMA: I concede.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT)	(Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

8.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that Bill entitled, “The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read a third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2019”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. Let us congratulate the minister, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, the Leader of the Opposition who is seated very near me and all the members who are here. (Applause)  I would like to also thank the Prime Minister for staying throughout this time.

Honourable members, as I indicated, we are going on recess. This is our last sitting of the first meeting. We shall reconvene on 28th October for the second meeting of the Tenth Parliament. In the meantime, you are invited to go to Sironko for the Independence Day Celebrations on 9 October 2019. It will be in the town. I hope it will not be near the landslide [Honourable members: what of the weather forecast]– let me check with the “rain maker” –(Laughter)- honourable members, let me go and consult the “rain maker” and then inform you through our usual channels. Thank you very much. House adjourned until the 28th October. 

(The House rose at 8.03 p.m. and was adjourned until Monday, 28 October 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

