

Wednesday, 21 October 2020

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I thank you for coming so that we can complete some urgent issues. 

I would like to begin by amending the Order Paper to create room for a report relating to the Anti-Money Laundering Bill so that we can also get it out of the way. There are also a few matters of national concern. Can I invite hon. Winnie Kiiza. If she is not here, let us have hon. Fungaroo.  

3.03
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I salute all of you. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding my security and that of the members of the Opposition in my constituency. 

As I was heading for my nominations for the Obongi constituency seat for 2021-2026, I survived being kidnaped from the Laropi Ferry. The people involved in this were police officers. I traced the cause to the matter of national importance I raised here about the behaviour and brutality of the police in my area and their involvement in harassment of the Opposition, for which they took offence. 

How are we going to conduct our elections if this matter of security is not addressed? What is the role of the security forces in political matters like elections? Should they take sides and be partisan or should they do their professional work as members of security institutions like the police, Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) and intelligence services, serving people of all colours and parties? I need help on this, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, the police is not doing the work that we expected of them. There are cases of theft of drugs and medical equipment from Moyo Regional Referral Hospital. As I speak right now, there are people who have reportedly stolen some things. This was also done in 2008 but the case never proceeded far. It was brought before hon. Moses Apiliga, hon. Anna Auru and I at that time. We tried to handle this –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, our prayers are as follows: 

1. 	We need security for all people. The police should not be partisan. 

2. 	We need the security forces to be restrained from being brutal. 

3. 	Cases referred to the police should be concluded properly, particularly those of theft. Computers and laboratory equipment were stolen from Obongi S. S. but the suspects are now being treated as National Resistance Movement (NRM) leaders. The chairperson of the NRM in Obongi District is cited as one of the suspects but the case has not been concluded. 

Should we allow things that belong to the country to be stolen and not talked about? When we talk about corruption, abuse of public resources and theft like this, we are viewed as enemies. Who should protect the people and the instruments of the state, the service delivery systems in Obongi, Moyo and West Nile as a whole, if not Fungaroo? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to take an interest in the security complaints made by hon. Fungaroo and update us when we return from recess.   

3.07
MR PADDY KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Masindi District has one old ambulance that was given to the district six years ago. I know that the Government policy is that Government vehicles are supposed to be disposed of after five years. During this COVID-19 pandemic, we have only one old ambulance that is supposed to evacuate all the COVID-19 patients and the ordinary referrals. Therefore, the district is constrained and there is a need to have an ambulance. 

The district has also communicated on several occasions to the Ministry of Health about the same but to no avail, yet the number of COVID-19 patients is increasing in the district. 

It is my humble prayer, therefore, that the Government provides an ambulance for the entire district. The whole district has over eight health centres IV, which also do not have ambulances. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I believe that the Government had plans to support districts like Masindi, which border other countries. We hope that the Minister of Health will come and give us a response and tell us when she is going to support the people of Masindi. We require a response when we resume after the recess. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2020

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020,” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded; we can receive the report, chairperson. 

3.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020” and made the following observations:

1. 	The Bill seeks to exempt items used by medical workers in the treatment of COVID-19. This will reduce the cost of the items and help Government effort to protect health workers and the public against the pandemic. The Bill also proposes to exempt material and inputs used in the manufacture of equipment necessary in the prevention, protection and treatment of COVID-19 patients. 

	However, some crucial items like reusable facemasks made of fabric, face shields, and the KN95 masks were left out. These should be added on the list of exemptions as well as materials used in making them.

2. 	The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the tourism sector largely, yet it is one of the biggest foreign exchange earners for the country. There is need to grant temporary relief to hotel owners, especially those inside a radius of 50 kilometres from the boundaries of Kampala. Hotels outside Kampala already have such incentives provided for under the Act. 

3. 	The effect of the coronavirus pandemic has left many sectors affected, and agriculture and industry have not been spared. Most of the farmers supply schools, restaurants and hotels, which have been closed for some time. This has affected the earnings of most of the people in Uganda, a bulk of whom depend on subsistence agriculture. 

There is need to exempt VAT for persons involved in the manufacture of chemicals for agricultural and industrial use, textiles, glassware, leather products, industrial machinery and electrical equipment, sanitary pads and diapers. This will help stimulate the economy.

Madam Speaker, with these observations, the committee recommends that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. I would like to seek clarification about the incentives for hotels outside Kampala. You have said that there are already incentives; I would like to know the incentives. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the minister to come and help me clarify on the incentives available for hotels outside Kampala.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, there are a number of incentives we have. We are adding Kampala specifically because we already exempted Value Added Tax (VAT) on the supply of accommodation in tourist hotels and lodges located upcountry. That is already law. In this case, we are including Kampala, which was not exempted.

The reasons why we exempted tax for those outside Kampala was to attract investments upcountry. However, due to the effects of COVID-19 on the hotels, we think that they should be included. Therefore, with this amendment, all accommodation in tourism hotels and lodges in the whole country will be exempted on VAT. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish the minister could come back.  When we gave that exemption for the upcountry hotels and lodges, the situation was normal. However, in this situation, the effect of COVID-19 has doubled the issues for the people who are outside Kampala and Wakiso. I think they need additional benefits because this has affected them on top of what they had suffered. I think they would appreciate if the minister looked into that so that we adjust also for those upcountry. 

3.17
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okupa has raised one of the issues I wanted to raise, that even before, there were special circumstances that hotels upcountry were facing. We, therefore, made those exemptions that time based on those circumstance. Now, COVID-19 has affected hotels both in Kampala and outside. Therefore, to come and propose that we only cater for hotels in Kampala would not be fair.

Secondly, the guidelines that the Ministry of Health issued for mild cases and asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 require that patients be monitored. In addition to the list of items that are listed in this Bill, there are two items that are missing. One is the Oximeter, which monitors the level of circulation of oxygen in the blood. The second is the machine for measuring blood pressure. I do not see both items on the list. It is, therefore, my proposal that those two items should be added to the list because they are very important for managing and preventing COVID-19.  Thank you.

MR BAHATI: What hon. Odur is asking about is already catered for because it is under medical supplies.

3.19
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also disturbed by the incentives that are being given to hotels in Kampala and not those outside Kampala. It is evident that businesses in Kampala can be boosted more than those upcountry, especially the hotels. The hotels upcountry can only be supported if they are exempted from tax because the hotels in Kampala have customers unlike those upcountry, which have very few.  

Madam Speaker, if the hotels upcountry are being discriminated and being left out, it will cause the hotel business in these areas to collapse. Even those who are thinking of beginning the hotel business will think twice; given the fact that taxes are high and the business is not exempted from tax, they will opt out. If they do so, the hotel business will not grow in those areas. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, to respond to hon. Nakayenze’s question, I would like to say that what we did in the law, which we passed, was to exempt hotels upcountry and not those in Kampala. Therefore, what we are doing in this particular amendment is to exempt hotels in Kampala, in addition to the hotels upcountry. 

Also, the hotels upcountry – if we perfect our systems – would benefit from other facilities; for example, the resources that we put in Uganda Development Bank. If you want to put up a hotel upcountry - I know there are some issues of efficiency but we are working on them – you will be able to access money at a lower interest rate compared to somebody who is putting up a hotel here in Kampala. 

We are trying as much as possible to give incentives to people who want to invest in accommodation for tourism upcountry. However, the question she was asking is already catered for; there is already a law, which exempted VAT for hotels upcountry. However, due to COVID-19, hotels in Kampala were also affected and we are rectifying that, so that they are also given relief. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I hope that these funds you people keep talking about are really accessible. I remember I tried accessing the agricultural funds from many banks and I failed. Therefore, this should not just remain on paper; let the funds be accessible to the citizens. It is very hard to access those funds.

MR BAHATI: We have taken note of that.

3.22
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson for the report. 

I would like to seek for a brief clarification arising from the statement of the chair of the committee. He said there was need to have a temporary exemption of this tax for Kampala hotels within a certain range. What is “temporary”? 

I know that the moment this exemption is granted indefinitely, without mentioning the implementation period, it will be extremely difficult to bring it back, yet it is a major source of revenue. Therefore, if it is temporary as an intervention, why don’t we state the period for which it is going to be valid, so that if such circumstances subsist, then we can probably extend it? Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, what the honourable member is asking shall be dealt with when we go to committee stage. We are proposing to grant this exemption up to 30 June 2021.

3.24
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on VAT. First, I would like to thank the colleagues who have put up a case. What has been raised is that exemptions already exist in upcountry hotels. However, we would like the following to be made clear:

One, all hotels are exempted from tax on capital investments. If they import equipment, they do not pay taxes when they are registered. Currently, hotels –(Interjection)– Yes, those are the exemptions they are talking about. If you import, you pay VAT on importation – if you are not aware. 

Madam Speaker, what I would like to put across is that upcountry hotels are the most affected ones. We cannot only talk about exemption of VAT on food, among other things. I propose that more exemptions be granted to upcountry hotels. We must agree here with the minister to either push them to the Tax Procedures Bill or grant them here. 

I will give you an example. Upcountry, you must pay local service charge to stay in a hotel. Is it necessary to pay a local service charge? If it is was allowed and Government compensated local governments, it would go a long way to help those areas perform better?

Two, VAT is not only on accommodation but even on drinks. The current state is that they charge VAT on beer and whisky, among other taxes. Is there a way Government can come up to make sure that all the inputs in upcountry hotels are exempted from tax? This is what we should agree with the minister right now before we move to the committee stage. Does he agree we move it in the Tax Procedures Code Act or we leave it in here?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issues have been noted. We shall now go to the committee stage. I put the question that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will be adjusting the Order Paper to permit the Attorney-General to respond to some of the issues we raised on the Floor yesterday. However, that will be after we have finished with the VAT Bill. Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT)(NO.2) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 1 by substituting “1 July 2020” with a new date as follows: “1 April 2020.”

The justification is that this is important because there are a number of manufacturers and producers that have been producing the specified supplies since 1 April 2020 and not charged tax. This followed a Cabinet decision to waive tax on those supplies so as to make them affordable during the COVID-19 pandemic period.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you make it start from 1 April 2020 and there are hotels, which were charged VAT at that time, does it mean that they would claim the VAT, which they were charged? The charges were remitted to Uganda Revenue Authority; will they claim the money back or are there specific items you want to include from 1 April 2020?

MR BAHATI: Thank you. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi wants us to confirm what he knows. Of course, if the date is from 1 April 2020 and there is anything that you claim from URA, you start from April. In other words, they will claim it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 as follows:

1. 	In paragraph (a)(ix) by inserting immediately after the words, “disposable medical face masks” the words, “or reusable facemasks made of fabric.” 

2. 	By substituting paragraphs (xii), (xiii), (xviii) and (xx) with the following: 
“(xii) bouffant non-woven surgical cap; 
(xiii) protective goggles with indirect side ventilation; 
(xviii) biohazard bags; 
(xx) disinfectants or sanitizers.”

3. 	In paragraph (b), in the proposed paragraph (qaa) (i), insert immediately after the words, “disposable medical face masks” the words, “or reusable facemasks made of fabric.”

Justification: to clarify which COVID-19 medical supplies are to benefit from exemptions. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I understand we have not yet finished clause 2. Honourable chair, do you have another amendment?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, we still have amendments to make under clause 2. We propose to insert the following new paragraphs in the correct alphabetical order and renumber accordingly: 

“by inserting immediately after paragraph (hhh) the following: ‘(hhha) the supply of accommodation in tourist lodges and hotels inside a radius of fifty kilometres from the boundaries of Kampala from 1 April 2020 to 30 June 2021;’” 

The justification is that this is intended to grant temporary relief of one year and three months to hotels within the radius of 50 kilometres of the boundaries of Kampala from paying VAT. 

“by inserting immediately after paragraph (pp) (vi) the following: 

‘(vii) manufactures chemicals for agricultural and industrial use, textiles, glassware, leather products, industrial machinery and electrical equipment, sanitary pads and diapers.’” 

The justification is that this is intended to extend incentives given to strategic sectors and others provided for in the Investment Code Act. 

“by substituting for paragraph (vv) the following: 

‘(vv) the supply of services to conduct a feasibility study design and construction; the supply of locally produced materials for construction of premises, infrastructure, machinery and equipment or furnishings and fittings, which are not manufactured on the local market, to a hotel or tourism facility developer whose investment capital is $ 10 million with a room capacity exceeding 30 rooms; or to a meetings, incentives, conferences and exhibitions facility developer whose investment capital is not less than $ 1 million.’”

“by deleting paragraph (lll)” 

Justification: to rectify the conflict with paragraph (lll) under the VAT (Amendment) Act, 2020. Paragraph (vv) provides for 100 guests while paragraph (lll) provides for 30 rooms. The amendment therefore reaffirms Parliament’s intention under paragraph (lll) provided under the VAT (Amendment) Act, 2020. 

I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you are building a road in the United Kingdom or even in Kenya, the price is higher. If you build a hotel in Busia, for example, where sand and other materials are near – (Interjections) – with half a billion shillings, you can build a hotel of 30 rooms. Why do you want to peg exemptions to the highest bidder yet the best person to benefit is this low investor of Shs 500 million or Shs 200 million? 

I would not mind about foreigners. To promote locals, we should make it lower. People have built hotels with 30 rooms for only Shs 300 million or Shs 500 million. Why are you talking about US$ 1 million which is about Shs 3.7 billion? That is almost four billion shillings!

I would like to move an amendment that for foreigners, you can put any amount of money but for the locals, it should not be more than US$ 100,000, which is Shs 370 million. The justification is that we want to encourage locals to benefit from these exemptions. 

MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also would like to talk about the 30-room hotels. We have seen hotels that have come a long way; after they started with less than 20 rooms, they have been upgrading year after year. The moment we insist on 30 rooms, it will mean hotels with less capacity are going to find a problem. Look at Collin Hotel; you can consider it a 5-star hotel today but it started with only 14 rooms.

If we are to promote the hotel and tourism industry in Uganda, with the intention of encouraging locals to benefit, the issue of 30 rooms should be completely deleted. We should only consider any developer with a plan to have a hotel. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson of the committee, you know I have been complaining about this issue for some time. In the last financial year’s budget, there were incentives for people who are in the free zones. We, who are not in the free zones, had no access to those incentives. 

I am a hotelier and I employ a lot of people. I support the local markets and industry but I am not in the free zone, so I cannot qualify. You are discriminating against the indigenous entrepreneurs in this country. I do not even know why you denominate this money in dollars. This is also not right.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chair. In addition to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has submitted, I would like to say that some of these lodges are constructed using local materials; the cost of spear grass cannot be compared to the cost of versatile iron sheets or tiles. Therefore, quantifying and putting a nominal rate of $1 million for a local investor - even for a foreign investor - would be prohibitive to the tourism industry.

We should focus more on promoting tourism and encouraging people to put up more accommodation facilities since these are lacking, remove the limitation of the 30 rooms and the $ 1 million as a way of giving incentives to the local people to put up hotels and lodges. In a way, this will promote tourism.

In that way, we shall increase our foreign exchange earnings. Even local tourism will be promoted. In December, if somebody books, say Mweya Safari Lodge, you will not get accommodation around Queen Elizabeth National Park. This means that our capacity to accommodate tourists is about 40 to 60 per cent and, therefore, if we are prohibiting people from putting up facilities, there are many Ugandans who have land in those tourism areas but they are not able to raise the $ 1 million. However, they can put up a lodge; cottage by cottage and in a space of about 10 to 15 years, somebody has those 30 rooms. We should relax it a little bit and promote local investors to invest in that industry. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, a serious Government would pay more attention to its citizens than foreigners. That is why when countries like Kenya and Ethiopia got openings in South Sudan, they picked interest as a country and not as individuals, like Ugandans do.
    
If you research on the small hotels we are talking about, they are employing our people better than the big hotels. They even try to accommodate them. However, the moment you pick more interest in other people than the citizens of your country - it is not fair. Maybe you need to ask them for their work plan.

The local people are also working towards reaching the level of those people you are talking about. I support hon. Centenary and the other Members. Let us pay attention to our people by giving them those priorities other than always looking at those first-class people and foreigners. Yes, we like them -(Interruption)

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you for giving way. I would like to give information to this House. Two years ago, the Committee on Education and Sports went to Buliisa and it was very difficult to find a hotel that could accommodate more than 10 people. If we do not give chance to the locals to begin small and then grow, we will be killing this industry.

I would also support the other Members who say that it is better to support the local leaders than going for the big ones. The investors are good but let us begin with home people. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, let us not think that these are foreigners who are not known, like people inside here are telling us. They are lying to us yet they are the real owners of these investments and they are selling themselves in the capacity of foreigners. Thank you very much.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we are now at the Committee Stage. It would be very helpful for Members to propose some amendments so that we can find a way forward. What this amendment refers to is the supply of services to conduct a feasibility study design and construction. We thought that for people offering these services to be exempted from VAT, we should have a minimum. The minimum, which the House passed, excluded the capacity of hotels.

This amendment is providing the capacity of rooms exceeding 30 and a value of $ 1 million. I do not know what Members are suggesting now. It is a general debate and yet, we had already finished it. If we could probably get some proposals, we could then make a decision.

We are concentrating on the services of construction and feasibility studies but other incentives for the hotel owners have already been catered for. Hon. Ssewungu, this is a serious Government and that is why we have been here for a reasonable amount of years. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I know that this is not an amendment from the chairperson but it says, “...for construction of premises, infrastructure, machinery and equipment or furnishings and fittings, which are not manufactured in the local market, to a hotel tourism facility developer whose investment capital is $ 10 million with room capacity exceeding 30 rooms.”

Mr Chairperson, give us a way forward.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the best way forward, like the minister suggested, on the issue of thresholds is, if the House is not comfortable with the threshold of $ 10 million, we should invite proposals. If the House is equally not comfortable with the threshold of 30 rooms and on the $ 1 million, we also invite proposals along those lines.

The whole intention here is to incentivise the industry and anything that is favourable since we are conducting this debate in the spirit of providing favourable measures to enable businesses cope up the COVID-19 situation. I have a feeling that we should reconsider our thresholds and move forward.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I just acknowledge that the committee has moved from the original proposal of 100 guest rooms to now just 30 rooms. They have brought it lower.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we would like to make a proposal. One, dollars are very dangerous for us. Why don’t we deal in currency points for Ugandans?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, this is an old law that has dollars. We cannot just change it at this stage. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, let us move 10 rooms at $ 50,000 for Ugandans. 

The justification is to promote the locals to grow and the more they grow, the better for us. 

I have just an SMS here, which says “A brick in Teso is Shs 60 and a brick in Kampala is Shs 400”. Therefore, if you price Shs 400 vis-à-vis Shs 60, -(Interjections)– Is it Shs 150 in Busoga? That is for you, Members. They will sell to you bricks at Shs 150 because you do not know the prices. We, however, are dealing with those who know the prices.

I would like to propose that for locals upcountry, we give them a condition of $ 50,000 with a minimum of ten rooms. The justification is to promote local investment. 

MR MUSASIZI: Can we first dispose of that one? I am just wondering whether $50,000 can construct ten hotel rooms for tourism. As we invite ideas, let us make justifiable proposals in order not to kill the intention of this proposal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us have some reasonable proposals please.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I am very uncomfortable with limiting the number of rooms because we do not have any straight proven correlation between the amount of investment and the number of rooms. I can build ten rooms but the investment I put in can even double the one of 50 rooms.  

Therefore, maybe, we just go for the amount of capital so that we leave the rooms to be open because tourists may be comfortable even sleeping in a hotel of only five rooms but when they are well made. We could drop the issue of the rooms and only set the amount of money. 

MR BAHATI: I would like to suggest that we can move with the figures alone, leave out the rooms and also reduce the amount of money from $1 million to $300,000. It is because $ 300,000 is almost like Shs 1 billion. Therefore, an investment of Shs 1 billion – (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: I seek a clarification from you, honourable minister. You know when Uganda Tourism Board – I think that time, it was under Mr Asiimwe – to attract tourists upcountry, encouraged what they called “home stays”, where if the tourists find it comfortable to stay in a home arrangement, they registered those homes. Someone who has four or three bedrooms would turn them into a homestay like we have seen when we go out of the country. What would happen to those type of houses? Wouldn’t you want to also encourage Airbnb in Uganda like the way Uganda Tourism Board was proposing? How do we handle that? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a Value Added Tax on the supply of services. 

MR BAHATI: Yes. So, I think $ 300,000, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, would be a good way of moving forward.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, hon. Bahati, you have a point of removing the number of rooms because somebody could decide to build a very good restaurant with two rooms but with a big compound for people to relax in. 

In the spirit of us moving, I would like to propose that the capital to build tourism hotels in the upcountry should be $ 100,000. In the radius of 50 kilometres to Kampala, the capital should be $300,000. 

The justification is that around Kampala, it is quite expensive to build a hotel compared to upcountry stations. I believe hon. Bahati will agree with me and my chairperson, hon. Musasizi, will understand what I am putting across. 

MR CENTENARY: In that industry, we have local investors and foreign investors. I would like to agree with hon. Nandala on the $ 100,000 but I would like to propose an amendment that we take $ 100,000 across the board for local investors, and $500,000 for foreign investors. It can even stay at $ 1 million for foreign investors so that we allow our local investors to also put up hotels. I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are talking about a tax on supply of services. That is what this issue is really about. It says, “Supply of services to conduct a feasibility study, design and construction, supply of locally produced material for construction of premises, infrastructure and etcetera, and fittings not available on the local market to a hotel tourism facility whose capital investment is -” Here we have said $10 million – “with a room capacity not exceeding 30 rooms.” I think we have abandoned the rooms.

It is really about the supply of those services like feasibility study. You will have a feasibility study for a facility of $300,000?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are seeing supply of consultancy and even construction is there. In fittings, it is talking about equipment and others. So, all of them are together. 

MR MUSASIZI: Let us not lose the intention. What we are dealing with, like you have guided, is supply of consultancy services, feasibility study and supply of construction of materials. At the same time, there are proposals, which have been made but I find it difficult to accommodate them because when you say “supply of services by foreign investors and local investors”, I wonder how this applies to the proposal we have here.

I would like to propose that since the minister is willing to come down from $1 million to $300,000 and he is also willing to concede on the number of rooms, we agree with him and the question be put so that we move forward. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the provision be amended as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: It was not in the old Bill. It is an insertion. You had two other insertions, hadn’t you? You had two new proposals: the one on clause 2, which we have handled and number two, which is a new insertion.

Therefore, I put the question that a new provision be inserted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
 THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2020

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that The Value Added Tax (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: The title settled and Bill passes.

4.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the original report and the minutes of the committee on the Value Added Tax (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2020. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, before we go to the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020, it is indicated that the Attorney-General has a statement to make on issues we raised yesterday.

4.02
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am making this statement in response to the matter that was raised yesterday by the Speaker and specifically, by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, in this House. The issue then was the actual election dates for the general elections of 2021.

The legal provisions pertaining to the appointment of the polling day include, among others, the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005. Section 18(1)(a), specifically states that the Commission is to appoint an election day and tallying places of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005. It provides that “The Commission shall, as soon as practicable after the nomination days, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a day, which shall be known as polling day.”

The Local Governments Act, Cap. 243, section 107, states that “The Electoral Commission shall issue a public notice, which shall be published in the official Gazette and public media appointing a day or days, on which elections of all or a category, of Local Government councils or administrative councils shall take place.”

Under section 16l(a), the Electoral Commission is supposed to appoint an election day. That section 161(a) provides that the “The Electoral Commission shall, by notice in the Gazette and the local media, appoint a day for elections at the village, parish or ward level as soon as practicable after nomination days, by notice in the Gazette. That appointed day shall be known as the polling day.”

The Electoral Commission has recently concluded the nominations for both Parliamentary and local Government council candidates. They have confirmed to me today, that they will announce the polling date details for the elections of members of Parliament and local Government councils tomorrow, which shall be Thursday, 22 October 2020, at a press conference at l0.00 a.m., at the Commission offices.

The Electoral Commission has further informed me that they shall in the same way, announce the polling date for presidential elections, in accordance with section 16(1)(a) of the Presidential Elections Act, 2005 as amended, after the nominations for presidential candidates. The nominations for the presidential candidates are due on 2 and 3 November 2020. They shall also announce that date on either 4 or 5 November 2020. That should be immediately after that nomination.

In conclusion, as Parliament was raising the concern on polling dates yesterday, the Electoral Commission was at that time busy inviting the media houses to release these dates tomorrow, as I have already said at 10.00 a.m. I beg to submit.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the time I have participated in elections of this country, the presidential and parliamentary elections normally take place on the same day. The learned Attorney-General has told us that the Electoral Commission will tomorrow announce the polling date for the parliamentary and local Government and the ones for presidential elections on the 5th. I would like to know from him whether this time, the rules of the game have changed.

Secondly, we are moving into an election but we do not know the maximum number of people who should be invited for a consultative meeting of candidates. Are we operating under the old law? If there is a new one, which one are we operating under? 

The guidelines that I saw being issued to us, when we were being nominated, were for COVID-19. When I tried to inquire from my district registrar, he said we can have meetings of up to 50 people. I asked him that if the churches have been allowed to have up to 70 people, why wouldn’t we have a harmonised position, especially, if the Standard Operating Procedures of COVID-19 have been met? What is the maximum limit of people, a candidate must meet, at every meeting? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, last time, we talked about section 18 of the Parliamentary Elections Act. I told you that my interpretation is that, that is a date for putting the matter in the Gazette. This law does not prevent the Electoral Commission from telling us, the candidates, about the elections. This is just for notification in the Gazette. That is all. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Can I answer hon. Centenary or should I answer at a go?

THE SPEAKER: Wait.
 
MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the Attorney-General for the statement to this House. 

The clarification I would like to seek is, the Attorney-General has talked about the presidential nominations. The election dates will be announced after the presidential nominations. We know that parliamentary and presidential elections are held at the same time. That is something you have to be very clear on when you are coming here.

The other issue is that we were nominated and are now officially candidates. They are telling us to observe the SOPs, when we actually do not know how to proceed while campaigning. The Electoral Commission should be very clear on this. Are we supposed to have a meeting? How many people can attend it? Is it a rally? As a candidate, I need to know whether I am flouting the guidelines and regulations of the Electoral Commission or not. However, there is no one giving that information. 

Madam Speaker, during our nominations, people were doing their own things because there was no clarity on what one must do. I think the Attorney-General should be very clear. Otherwise, some candidates may be penalised for doing what they do not know because there is no clarity on what is meant to be done. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Attorney-General. This is the first time I am seeing an abnormal situation in the process of nomination and elections. Whenever we are being nominated, we have been aware of the election date because of the roadmap. 

It is unfortunate that the learned Attorney-General has come here to tell us, “They have informed me.” Now, informing you is not official to us. That is your personal conversation with the Electoral Commission. That is why this Parliament asked you to come and inform us. I wonder whether we are shifting from the legislation and the laws governing elections, as the Attorney-General stated before, to press conferences. 

Presidential and parliamentary elections are carried out on the same day. However, the Attorney-General has told Parliament that the Electoral Commission will have a press conference to tell us the date for parliamentary and presidential elections. How are we looking at the Constitution and the Parliamentary and Presidential Elections Act? 

The Attorney-General would have come here and given us an official communication, not a personal talk between him and the Electoral Commission. More so, we know he is not among those who stand for elections but he is a beneficiary of becoming a minister through an Article of the Constitution that gives him that room.

I am talking the truth. The Attorney-General does not go through the process of elections but he uses an Article of the Constitution that appoints him as ex officio in Parliament. 

Honourable Attorney-General, we are members of Parliament who go through an election. That is why the Speaker came out to ask you to come and inform Parliament. Therefore, as the learned Attorney-General, you must come up with the official positions, not personal conversations with the Electoral Commission. A press conference cannot be taken as a serious deliberation to this Parliament. However much you shake your fingers in front of me, I am telling you facts. That is what is happening. 

When we are here, we must command decorum. I am using the microphone given to me and the Attorney-General is intimidating me, yet, I am among those who cannot be intimidated on this Floor of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.13
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, on 15 October 2020, I was nominated. After nomination, the registrar of Serere District informed us that he needs us this week, to agree on the programme. Some of us objected and said we did not know the election date. Nevertheless, we all agreed to go. 

At 3.17 p.m. today, I received a call from the District Registrar of Serere. Although vague, he was specific that he had got a communication from the headquarters that they could only meet with us to harmonise the campaign programme, once the Electoral Commission has gazetted or given them a date for elections. They told me to hold on and they were informing all other candidates, with the exception of the sitting members of Parliament, that, no campaign rallies will be allowed until they get a communication.

I thought that was more specific and that is the message I expected from the Attorney-General. That is the type of information we would want. Then, of course, we wanted the date of the election. If you are stuck to what you are quoting in the law; that it can only be after nominations, then - of course, we know that voting for the President and Parliament are on the same day. He should just be clear to us that after 3 November 2020, we will be informed but what is going to be announced tomorrow, maybe, if you are referring to local Government – for us, we know parliamentary and presidential elections are on the same day. 

There is no way you can announce a date tomorrow and another one on 4th or 5th. I am now taking what has been communicated to me by the Electoral Commission through the District Registrar, that there is no campaign but sitting members of Parliament can conduct business, of course, being limited on the issue of numbers. Thank you. I thought I should be able to give that information. 

4.16
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The details provided by the learned Attorney-General appear to suggest that the Electoral Commission wants to invoke Article 61(3), which provides that in some circumstances, the presidential, parliamentary and local Government elections cannot be held on the same day if it is impractical. 

Can the Attorney-General and the Electoral Commission be clear to us that this time you intend not to hold the presidential, parliamentary and local Government elections on the same date, as provided for in Article 61(3)? 

If tomorrow you are going to appoint a date for only parliamentary elections and then after nomination for presidential candidates, you are going to appoint another day, you should tell us. 

In addition to that, under the law, members of the same political parties are allowed to campaign together. Some people wait for their presidential candidate to campaign for them. Certainly, because you have not been campaigning, you may not know.

However, where members of the same political party would like to campaign with their presidential candidate and you have not yet opened the window, are members of Parliament allowed to campaign? In Lira, I was told by the Returning Officer - and I have also been informed in other parts of the country - that members of Parliament should stop campaigning on the 8 January 2021. 

In the law, campaigns stop two days before the main election date. The 10th of January will fall on a Sunday. It means that the Electoral Commission is aware. Can you clarify whether we are going to have the polling day together or you intend to have it differently? Thank you. 

4.18
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You directed the Attorney-General to come here and tell us about the voting days. 

However, there is a tendency of Government trying to take Parliament lightly. Whatever information we ask for, they wait to relay it through the Uganda Media Centre. This is an institution of Parliament; an arm of Government. When you asked the Attorney-General to come and tell us the dates, he referred you to tomorrow, where there is a press briefing at Uganda Media Centre so that Parliament and the Speaker can go there and listen to what they are going to say.  

Madam Speaker, I think this is demeaning to us because you informed him to come here officially. I do not know the reason the Electoral Commission has not had that courtesy of notifying the Attorney-General to inform you officially here. We do not mind whether they had a press conference or are having one or when they will tell us the dates. Our major concern is that if Parliament instructs, and then the Attorney-General comes and tells us to wait for a press conference tomorrow; that does not sound well and does not add up, Madam Speaker. 

4.20
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the little that the Attorney-General has given us. However, he has shown that he does not have full authority to manage the process because he has been very reserved on what to share with us yet we trust him so much. 

Madam Speaker, what I raised here earlier was that as sitting members of Parliament, we have responsibilities in our respective constituencies. Some of our constituencies are submerged because of floods and Dokolo falls in that category. There are other areas in Teso, Kasese with similar issues. Therefore, since schools are opening, the public would expect the MPs to do some work to enable those schools start.

In my area, boreholes are already submerged and so, the members of Parliament are expected to help the community in the construction of new boreholes to assist the children. The issue is that when I carry a bag of cement to help in the construction of a borehole, it will be misconstrued to be buying voters because I am already nominated. Therefore, we want you to clarify these matters to us because we still have responsibilities.

In the past, we used to be nominated in December and elections would take place early February of the following year. Now we have been nominated in October, we have the whole of November, December and January and we are members of Parliament. What do you want us to do when the public is expecting a lot from us? Please can you clarify that?

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, when I went for nomination on Thursday - we had been told to go with our programme - I told the Returning Officer that I had no programme because I did not know when voting would take place and so, that I had nothing to give them. Why are we being treated as if we are small toys being moved on the chessboard, keep quiet and wait for the Media Centre etc?

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened very carefully to all the concerns of the honourable members and I intend to answer all of them. 

The issue that you initially raised about the relevant sections of the law - let me go to Section 16 of the Presidential Elections Act. It reads, “The Commission shall, as soon as practicable after nomination dates, by notice in the Gazette appoint:

    a) A date to be known as polling day; and (b) the time and place.”

Madam Speaker, when you interpret it, even literally, the Electoral Commission, which as you know is chaired by a Judge, seems to me to clearly fall under this provision because the provision partially says, “…as soon as practicable after the nomination dates.”

THE SPEAKER: You know, that is for purposes of notification of the whole country by Gazette because that is where official things are announced. However, there is no law that says that they hide it until you go to the Gazette.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I agree with you and I appreciate. I think the point is not that it is being hidden. The point is that it is being organised in the context of all the other work that they were doing - please bear with me, Madam Speaker. In addition, when we talk about the interpretation, they are within the law.

Let me go to hon. Ssewungu’s concerns –(Interjection)– if you could kindly give me a minute. I did not point any finger at you and I do not mean to disrespect you. You have said that in the past, the dates have been known and are on the same day. Now, if you recall, yesterday, the issue that hon. Ssemujju Nganda raised was that MPs have been nominated. So, if you are saying, as I have just read here - that after nominations - “Why aren’t you telling us the date because it is saying that we have been nominated?” 

That is why they are saying that tomorrow - and Madam Speaker, I will be happy to come and announce the whole programme here tomorrow –(Interjections)– The reason they are going to give the dates tomorrow is because the honourable members are entitled, as by law, to be told the voting date after nominations. That is as far as MPs are concerned.

As far as the presidential candidates are concerned, a similar section of the law says that the date for voting presidential candidates shall also be announced after their nominations. Therefore, all I said in my statement is that tomorrow, what is going to be announced is the date for both the MPs and the local council members.

Hon. Ssewungu and hon. Odur asked why I couldn’t say that it is the same thing after all there has always been the same election date for the President and MPs. The only thing that this Electoral Commission Chairperson is doing is to wait for the nominations of the presidential candidates to end and then in accordance with the law, he will declare their election date. I did not say –(Interjection)– hon. Ssewungu, you must listen to the other party first before you can oppose - that the dates are going to be different. All I said is that according to the law, after your nomination, you are entitled to be told -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, are you suggesting that a Gazette will be issued relating to the members of Parliament with a certain date and then another Gazette will be issued in relation to the President about the same date?

MR SSEWUNGU: Point of order!

THE SPEAKER: Please, allow the Attorney-General to explain.

MR BYARUHANGA: Can I respond to the Speaker? Hon. Ssewungu, at least respect the Speaker, if you do not want to respect me.

THE SPEAKER: Allow the Attorney-General to answer.

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes, Madam Speaker, that is what I am saying and I am saying it because the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission is saying that he is following the law to the letter. The law says that after you have been nominated, you will be told your election date. The MPs have been nominated and so, tomorrow, they will be told their election date.

Under the Presidential Elections Act, it says after the presidential candidates have been nominated, they will be told their election date. I did not say that the days will be different; all I said is that they are going to announce the one of the presidential candidates after they have been nominated.

Madam Speaker, hon. Sebaggala asked, why the Media Centre? Isn’t this looking down upon – First of all, the honourable member asked how many candidates are going to be allowed to elect. What the details are, especially considering that this is going to be a peculiar type of election or rallies. All the other attendant facts of the elections - the number of people and the rallies, among others, are all going to be announced tomorrow. 

Hon. Sebaggala asked why at the Media Centre and not officially in Parliament? It is not meant to belittle Parliament. Honourable members, it is true that I am an ex-officio Member of Parliament and it is also true that I am a Member of Parliament. I would be the last person to disrespect the House that has given all of us the respect that we all deserve. Therefore, it has nothing to do with disrespect. 

I would be quite happy if Parliament would sit tomorrow, to come and tell you the exact details. As we speak, they were just finalising. Of course, I have the authority to tell him that before you go there, let me go and inform Parliament but I certainly do not disrespect Parliament, being a Member of Parliament myself. 

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal asked about Dokolo in particular and she reminded us that some of these areas have been affected by floods. Yesterday, I think you talked about children who are going back to school and that if you are to give them money, somebody may mistake it for a bribe. My answer to that is, from tomorrow, among the releases is the actual campaign road map. From then on, you will be able to give the children school fees and also be able to go and help the flood victims. 

Well, you will be able to do that without it being mistaken to be bribery. That is all that I can say. Otherwise, even in your own right, everybody is free to give school fees to their children and to help the victims of –

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, some people have lost their seats in petitions for just contributing money in a church.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, for that one, I do not have a specific answer.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it would be procedurally right for us to expunge the Attorney-General’s information to this House. First of all, he is already misleading Members. Immediately after nominations, I think it is against the laws of elections to give out gifts or anything because we are candidates. However, he is telling hon. Cecilia Ogwal that she can go ahead. That is very dangerous.

Secondly, we are now in a terrible situation with our Attorney-General. When he comes to the Floor of Parliament and he suggests that because the presidential nominations have not taken place, the Electoral Commission cannot give the date for presidential elections but because we have been nominated, they can hold the press conference for parliamentary elections - That is totally abnormal and whoever will succeed him in that office will find irregular communications that might taint this Parliament. An Attorney-General is not somebody simple; he is the legal advisor of the Government and he must have taken into consideration all the legislation and laws governing elections. 

Madam Speaker, there is no way - and I have never seen this since I became a Member of Parliament and even before I joined Parliament - that the road map comes out without the date for elections. It is not there, honourable members. This is official and here we are –

THE SPEAKER: I think we are flogging the Attorney-General but the person doing this is somebody else.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General must also be fair to us. Let him say that he has no answer to that question and we move on. However, if he comes with a submission that is against the laws of Uganda - With your advice and our input, we are failing to understand what he is doing here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, before he comes, I need clarification. You have all heard how the Attorney-General answered me. The Attorney-General has no answer for me because he is saying that I should wait for tomorrow’s press conference then I can start helping. Does it mean –?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, I think you are familiar with the fate of Members who have been caught in that situation. Please advise yourself on what to do and do not get into it.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, are you saying we should not execute our mandate as members of Parliament from now onwards?

THE SPEAKER: In the circumstances. 

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. On that particular issue, I would invite hon. Cecilia Ogwal to read the case of Fred Badda vs the Electoral Commission. It is very clear on that aspect and it is better to stand on the side of caution than to go full blast.

Secondly, the procedural issue I would like the Attorney-General to respond to relates to his statement that polling dates can only be announced after nomination and in the Gazette. Learned Attorney-General, what is going to be announced tomorrow? Is it the information, which is already in the Gazette or what is going to be taken to the Gazette? 

The two are completely different and the Speaker has been labouring to explain that announcing a polling date and taking that announcement to the Gazette are two different things. Announcing does not stop you from taking to the Gazette and I think an Election Commission that has been planning for an election and that has a road map should not, in any way, find it extremely difficult to announce a polling date subject to information in the Gazette. I think that is where the problem is. 

Practically, colleagues who are submitting here, every returning officer has been asking contestants to avail campaign programmes and that has been very difficult. A campaign programme is dependent on a polling date because of the requirement of stopping campaigns a day prior to the voting. Now, that is not very clear and I think that is where the problem is. Why has it become practically difficult for the Electoral Commission to announce a polling date? Even the sections you have provided do not, in any way, occasion any injustice if the announcement is made prior. The problem can only be if the gazetting is made prior to the nomination. 

What the Electoral Commission has been doing is that they make announcements and then do gazettement later. That has been their practice and I think that is where the challenge is. When we bring out the Gazette of today, is it already in the Gazette or are they going to make the announcement and gazette later because the two are different?

Finally, on a procedural issue, yesterday you directed the Attorney-General to come to this Floor and clarify on the provisions of Section 14(a) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. It is on the Hansard. Unfortunately, I didn’t hear him say anything about that when he came. He was responding to the nomination dates. 

When confronted with a legal fact, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is evasive. He just went on to explain but completely ignored the law. 

The Speaker directed that you come and guide on that aspect. I do not know whether you are ready for the answer because the Speaker directed that the Attorney-General should clarify why money for political parties is not being shared equally as per the provisions of Section 14(a) of the Political Parties Act.

MR BYARUHANGA: Once again, Madam Speaker, thank you for the patience that you have exhibited with all of us regardless of some of the accusations. I sympathise with hon. Basalirwa on the second aspect, which he has just referred to - the one of Section 14. Clearly, he is the one most interested in it. I concentrated on doing the homework on the subject that immediately had the attention of all the Members and that is the one I have been belabouring to answer.

I did not have time to address myself to Section 14, which I am happy to do and return tomorrow. However, as far as the answers vis-à-vis the Election Day is concerned – again hon. Basalirwa said that there is nothing that precludes the Electoral Commission from announcing the date before the nomination. Well, it is true there is nothing that precludes them nor is there anything that actually stops them from following the law in its strict sense.

I appreciate what I have heard, that in all the elections prior to this, they have been announced on the same day. In fact, when I was having a chat here – in any case, the mandate of the Electoral Commission is to manage the elections and, in that context, it is independent. 

I demanded certain answers from them, and they responded to me in accordance with the law as they cited it to me and as I found to be correct when I crosschecked it. That is what I beg to submit.

The gazetting of the dates will also be tomorrow. The announcement of the day will also be tomorrow, and all the other attendant factors will also be tomorrow. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I think now you know that you are on your own. Yes, let us proceed to other business.

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we moved this Bill yesterday. The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR BAHATI: It was time for us to go to the Committee Stage.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I think the minister moved the motion and the report was given and we were listening to the comments. Honourable members, the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill. I think there were Members who wanted to say some things yesterday. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you were interested in addressing the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill yesterday.

4.43
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This recommendation is talking about the committee’s recommendation that the education sector be included among the worst hit sectors by COVID-19. Well, that is true. 

I also want to add here that the hospitality and tourism sector is also one of those that have been severely hit and should, therefore, also be included to benefit from these waivers.

Secondly, regarding the interest and penalties, I would like to inform the House that there is a tendency by the URA to wait for tenures – five years, six years, et cetera; then they come and audit a company. When they audit, they say that the penalty and interest will accrue from the day the company filed the returns. If it is 10 years, then it is from the 10 years. 

This has made companies collapse because URA deliberately decides to come with assessments and interest and penalties to close companies or businesses. It can also be used by people fighting political wars. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, since we are going to waive penalties and interest on arrears, I want to tell the House that at that stage, we could also put an amendment in the tax procedures that if URA does a tax audit or an investigation, then the tax due should be from the day they conclude the audit. It should be from that day that the penalties and interest should accrue if the taxpayer does not pay in time.

Finally, we are talking about waiving arrears, interest and penalties on outstanding arrears. How about the companies, which – as we may recall, we had to waive all taxes for taxpayers some time back. Why don’t we do it again at this time because the whole country is in problems? We have people who have failed to pay because of COVID-19. I am sure that with this problem that we have, the chances that they will pay are minimal. They have laid off workers and businesses have gone down. I feel that we should go an extra mile and commit that all the taxes due from people who have not paid for a long time should be waived. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.47
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute South County, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I need from the minister or the chairperson is that people whose tax liabilities fall due by 1st April are given up to September. Effectively, they have six months to pay. Then, taxpayers whose tax liability is by 30th June are given only three months and yet they are in the same situation. 

Why don’t you provide six months that is uniform for both situations? If you are supposed to pay your taxes by 1st April, you have six months taking you up to September and if you are supposed to pay by 30th June, you also have six months to pay, taking you to December so that it is harmonised and you are fair to all businesses. So, you will explain to the minister who is normally a bit stubborn when it comes to such matters since you are friends.

4.48	
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have also observed in the recommendations that we were proposing an exemption of VAT on face masks and other COVID-19 related items. (Interjections) Yes, we did. 

I also want to propose to the minister and recommend that since Government has not been able to provide ambulances to all the districts and constituencies, we should consider removing the environmental levy, which is prohibitive otherwise, we have many good Samaritans willing to donate ambulances but the environmental levy on those ambulances is much higher than the cost of the ambulance.

Madam Speaker, this is the recommendation I am giving to the honourable minister. He could consider bringing an amendment to that effect so that we are able to avail ambulances without having challenges of acquiring them at a high cost.

4.49
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda East, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, before I make my comment, I have one observation. There is a precedence in this House that when considering Bills- admission of new proposals, which have not gone through the committee, should not be permitted. Otherwise, I see a risk of colleagues moving towards bringing new things at this stage, which the committee has not had an opportunity to think about. 

That notwithstanding, hon. Odur raised a very good point on consistence of the period we are giving. I would like to agree with him that where we are providing from 1st April to 30th September - these are six months. Since we are starting with June, it would be better that we go for six months up to 31st December. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of the amendments, I believe that there will be another opportunity towards the close of the financial year for Members to address the required changes.

I would like to confirm what hon. Centenary said. I went to Arua with hon. Osoru. She had purchased six ambulances but she was paying taxes of almost half a billion. This is a serious issue but I think an opportunity will come.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of ambulances, I also feel pain, as a Member of Parliament. The only constraint we have is the law that is before; the Tax Procedures Code. Yet the law that applies to the environmental levy is the traffic law. I really do not know whether we can accommodate this, under a different law. That is a challenge we have. However, we can come back with a separate law and amend it so that we handle this matter. Otherwise, Members have been suffering.

The second point is on the exemption for the principle tax that people are supposed to pay vis-a-vis the penalties and interest that we have been charging overtime. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think it would be fair to balance. We are helping people but at the same time, we need tax to support the economy. If we waiver the interest and penalty arrears, that would be good enough to balance the two. 

Yesterday, we did forego a measure that was worth Shs 178 billion. On rentals, it was Shs 40 billion. Therefore, to continue losing that amount of money is not good for the economy. I beg the House that we maintain the amendment, the way it is, and give relief in terms of interest and penalties but the taxpayers should contribute towards the principle amount that they have earned.

4.54
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono South, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I agree with the minister in regard to the issue of having penalties and interests. 

When a Member of Parliament purchases an ambulance, before they are given that chance, they are supposed to attach it to a health centre in their area. The challenge we are getting is that the moment you hand over that ambulance, they do not service and take care of the driver. 

I remember when I was a mayor, I assisted hon. Betty Nambooze, when she bought her first ambulance and attached it to Mukono Health Centre III but it was not an easy task. Why can’t it be ?
Madam Speaker, a Member of Parliament is helping the area. We have seen many health centres without ambulances.

We have agreed to the waiver of the penalty and the interest but the challenge now is attachment to the health centre. If hon. Kadaga has bought an ambulance for Kamuli and she is able to pay the other tax and waive the penalty and interest, let that be done. They usually force you. When you go to the health centre people and they are not interested in what you are doing, they just dodge you for months. This is another concern.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us go to Committee stage.

MS JANE AVUR: Madam Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of hon. Nandala-Mafabi to the committee observation - (i) because he brought in the issue of the tourism sector. I would like to say that it is already catered for. The Bill seeks to defer taxes for persons carrying on business of tourism, manufacturing, horticulture or floriculture. So, tourism is already catered for. We are just adding the education sector.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, let us go to-

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1, do stand part of the Bill. 

MS AVUR: Madam Speaker, the committee proposes amendment in clause 1 as follows: Substitute for “1 July 2020” a new date as follows: “1 April 2020.”

The justification is that the proposals were intended to come into effect from the lockdown, after the Cabinet approved the measures.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, the question is that clause 1 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS AVUR: Madam Chairperson, Clause 2: Amendment of the Tax Procedures Code Act, 2014. We propose to redraft clause 2, as follows:

“The tax Procedures Code Act, 2014 is amended by inserting immediately after section 40A the following new sections:
40B. Deferment of payment t of tax until 30th September, 2020.”

(1) 	A person registered as a taxpayer under section 4 (i) of the Act and who was liable to pay tax on or after 1 April 2020 and before 30 June 2020, shall have his or her liability to pay the tax deferred until 30 September 2020.

(2) 	The deferral referred to under sub-section (I), shall apply only to a person who is a registered taxpayer involved in the business of education, tourism, manufacturing, horticulture or floriculture.

(3) 	A person registered as a taxpayer, under section 4 (I) of the Act, and who was liable to withhold tax under section 116 of the Income Tax Act Cap. 340 on or after 01 April 2020 and before 30 June 2020 shall have his or her liability to pay the tax withheld deferred until 30 September 2020.

“Section 40B: No interest or penalty shall accumulate on the outstanding amount of tax during the period referred to in sub-sections (1) and (3).”

Justification

The proposal is to allow persons carrying on the business of education as well to defer tax for the specified period. 

Section 40C: Waiver of Interest and penalty on unpaid principal tax.

Any interest and penalty outstanding as at 30 June 2020 is waived. 

Justification

This is to provide a stimulus and relief to taxpayers and the economy as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic outcomes and also clean up the URA books because they have a lot of arrears, which they are finding difficult to collect because the penalties and interests, in most cases, are much higher than the principal amount. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposals –

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chair. From the consensus with the chairperson of the committee and the Members, we thought that 40(b)(1) could be separated into two. So, we will have sub-section (a) catering for tax liability that would fall by 01 April shall have the liability to pay the tax withheld deferred until 30 September. Sub-section (b) says tax liability falling by 30 June shall have his or her liability to pay tax withheld deferred until 31 December 2020. This will take care of the period of six months. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we are persuaded by the proposal hon. Jonathan Odur has put forward. Therefore, we concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what date is it today? Today is 21 October 2020. This law was meant to have come in force before 30 September 2020. I think for us to be able to make a law, which has meaning, we should shift all these days to 31 December 2020. It is because as we speak now, if we are talking of 30 September 2020, then this is past the law. So, I would like to persuade the minister –(Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, in the spirit of consensus in the House, we also concede that everything comes to 31 December 2020.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the clause be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for a third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2020

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded. Can we have the report of the committee?

5.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020 and made the following observations:

    1. The Bill provides for 1 July 2020 as a date for commencement. However, there are donations, which were made towards prevention, treatment and containment of the COVID-19 Pandemic between April and June 2020. The law should, therefore, commence on 01 April 2020 in the midst of the lockdown when most of the donations were made.

    2. The effect of the Coronavirus Pandemic has left many sectors affected, of which agriculture and industry have not been spared. Most of the farmers supply schools, restaurants and hotels, which have been closed for some time. This has affected the earnings of most of the people in Uganda, the bulk of which depend on subsistence agriculture. 

	There is need to exempt income tax from persons involved in the manufacture of chemicals for agricultural and industrial use, textiles, glassware, leather products, industrial machinery and electrical equipment, sanitary pads and diapers. This will help extend incentives to strategic sectors that had been omitted from the proposed amendments.

    3. The Bill provides for a gift made to the Government as deductible expense for purposes of facilitating the Government in the prevention, treatment and containment of the COVID-19 Pandemic. This will provide for a deduction of charitable donations made by taxpayers that have since 01 April 2020 responded to Government’s call for charitable donations to fight COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that the Income Tax (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2020 be passed into law, subject to proposed amendments. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson, does this mean those who donated posho, eggs and bananas to the National COVID-19 Taskforce can claim deductions? It is because I want to make a claim since I donated posho. (Laughter)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I am trying to put my mind to this but we are dealing with a Bill on income tax; unless we want to say that the items you have mentioned qualify for income tax under presumptive tax methods. Otherwise, I am wondering where an individual like you, who donated posho and eggs, would qualify under this arrangement. 

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Speaker, I think we always make a mistake by thinking that, for example, if I filed my PAYE and they deducted at source, I would have no capacity to claim. In reality, one is supposed to file their return at the end of every financial year. The income in a financial year includes income from employment, business, and agriculture; mention it!

Therefore, if Madam Speaker gave posho out worth Shs 10 million, she would prepare her tax returns having all sources of income, subtract the Shs 10 million as a donation and apply the taxes on the balance. If she paid some money at source like PAYE and withholding tax, she would deduct it and the balance would be paid or claimed from Government.

Definitely, we should have made the law in such a way that anybody who donated and filed their returns, whether an individual or a company, should claim their donation.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, any comments on the Bill?

5.11
Mr jonathan odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues. First, the proposal in the Bill appears to be asking Parliament to legislate retrospectively because these companies have already donated. The rules governing such legislation require that the facts are presented before us.

Therefore, for all those companies and persons that donated, we must have the facts here so we know, for each case, how much they contributed. 

Secondly, I would like to know how we are going to ascertain the value for some of the donations. We know that some people came with a truck that carries a ton but they claim they had given eight tonnes; we watched it on television.

We also know that Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) said that some of the donations were not fit for human consumption but these people are going to claim. There are even some vehicles that were donated whose value is difficult to ascertain.

Therefore, since we are going to legislate retrospectively, the principle is that we must have all those facts before us just like we did some time back during Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) days for the departed Asians’ property. We knew all the property that had been taken by Government forcefully. So, can we have these facts here? Otherwise, the intention is very good and only needs to be supported. 

Therefore, to lock the window for exploitation and for people to take advantage, we must have those facts here to help us know that so and so donated a double cabin; it was worth Shs 300 million but we know that on the market it does not cost that; instead, it is worth Shs 200 million and we harmonise. Thank you. 

5.13
Mr Robert centenary (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, chairperson of the committee, for your presentation. In one of your recommendations in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill – I do not know how you skipped it – but you talked about agricultural inputs. I know that some of the nursery bed operators provide those inputs for planting. They normally supply them on credit to Government but the latter takes a long period to pay. In the process, the income loses value. On top of that, you charge them withholding tax.

Somebody invests about Shs 10 million in the nursery bed but by the time they are paid the money, the value of money is about seven million shillings. Even on this, you charge withholding tax?

I would like to propose that if Government is not able to pay those people on time, they should exempt them from that tax because after all, it is Government that will have delayed to pay them hence making their money lose value in due course.

5.14
Mr Johnson muyanja (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I do not know the spirit under which we are considering donations. Even in the past, when some of us who are operating schools gave out bursaries, Uganda Revenue Authority considered that as part of the profit but that we had only considered to willingly share it with the needy.

Why should we now –(Interjections)– definitely like my colleague said, it will be very difficult. I saw an ambulance, which was donated to Government during COVID-19 in April, already grounded but that person can say it cost Shs 400 million. 

If people donated willingly, what is the idea behind considering them for a tax waiver? That should not be so because all of us have suffered in a way or another and that was a way people offered support to Government under COVID-19. Can the chairperson or minister tell us why?

5.16
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, one is the question you raised when you said, “If I donated posho or Irish potatoes and I am accounting for my taxes, I’m I entitled?”

The answer to that is “yes,” because a donation is a donation, whether in cash or kind. What URA will do is to satisfy the cost of your donations in kind. We have a number of methods to use. We can get the prices of these things in the market using Uganda Bureau of Statistics. 

Also, URA will be able to verify where you got this documentation that you submitted and you will be entitled.

It is important that we offer this relief because as you recall, these donations came at a time when we needed them. Therefore, for us as Government not to offer this gesture of relief would not be right.

I do not remember the questions, which were raised by my friend, the member of the great party of the past, UPC, but I think they have been covered. Thank you. (Laughter)

Mr okupa: When I look at the period you are giving - April to 30 September - have we closed receiving donations? I thought Government is still receiving them.

Since the effects of COVID-19 are still being felt, I would think we would give it up to the end of the year or even end of the financial year.

You are deferring the penalty and interest to only that period but suppose somebody donated posho this October, what happens? 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, people have been generously donating, not only for COVID-19. We have gone through several disasters. Even now, the people of Kasese and those in other areas have received so many donations because of floods. How are we going to separate the different donations and contributions that we make voluntarily in order to give back to the community? How are we going to say that this one is for the pandemic and we should waive and give them concession? How shall we say that we should not waive the one for the Kasese floods? How are we going to handle it? 

I would like to propose, as a Ugandan, that when you voluntarily come out to donate - like many of us donate to churches, widows, orphans and disasters - it gives back to the community from your heart. For you to follow the Government and say, “Give me tax relief because I have given a donation” is not African and not part of our culture. 

Madam Speaker, unless somebody is targeting some companies that have benefited from COVID-19 supply or donations and they want to make money out of them - If they gave in the name of donations, why should they follow it up and ask for tax relief? I am not convinced by what the minister is giving us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, did they give the intention for which they will get relief or did they give to support Uganda?  

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as I wait for our technical bench to send me a note on some specific issue, what I know is that the purpose for this was that the law already provides for donations for charitable organisations. If you donate to a church or a baby’s home, you are already catered for. However, there was no specific law that provides for donations to Government. That is why we have brought this one to clarify this. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, if you have some further information – I can see you in a fighting mood – give it peacefully. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. David Bahati, I am not in a fighting mood. I am a very peaceful Ugandan and I shall remain so. 

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda called for help. You heard of people getting their trucks, loading Matooke and bringing it at their own will. If you wanted to tax them - instead of bringing 100 bunches - 30 per cent of 100 is 30 bunches - he should have left his 30 bunches at home and brought 70 bunches net of tax. If he wanted to bring posho of Shs 10 million but he wanted tax exemption, he should take off 30 per cent of Shs 10 million, which is Shs 3 million and leave it at home so that he brings posho worth Shs 7 million. 

From what hon. Cecilia Ogwal, my mother, has stated, it is not bad manners to donate to a person who is badly off. This is because the Government is not the one, which ate food. Government is not the one using ambulances but it is the poor people of Uganda who could not afford food. However, you are now coming back to tell those people of Uganda to pay tax for the food they ate. We never asked for your food and pickups. It will be wrong for us to come and exempt people who came – We even gave them leverage because they appeared on TVs advertising their products; we gave them free adverts. Even the President was a chief campaign manager of the advert. 

Therefore, it would be wrong to add money to people who have already got leverage. Madam Speaker, it will be wrong for us, as Parliament, to pass this into law. In fact, they are not complaining and they never came to tell us that they want tax exemptions. If they want, next time, they should apply and say that they are going to donate but want tax exemptions –(Interruption) 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. Madam Speaker, when they called for ambulances, your members were the first ones to bring 198 ambulances with promises that they were going to service and fuel them, something that has not been done up to today and we are not complaining.

Let this 10th Parliament not act as a rubberstamp. People outside this Parliament are complaining and we cannot simply stand here or sit here and endorse what we see as a loophole somewhere for a few people to benefit. We should be counted among those who are going to say “no” to this. 

It was a donation, we did it willingly. Can I have one Member of Parliament here complaining because of his or her ambulances? Why do others complain? We also donated posho. Madam Speaker, I saw you donating blankets. How often have you come here to complain? This is a trick and they are involving Parliament. People are watching so that we continue to carry the blame, as the 10th Parliament. I thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that from what we have seen, Government wants taxes. I think we should first thank the committee for writing a report but we cannot take it.

Madam Speaker, we cannot be taxed for a donation that we never asked for. Everybody did it willingly. In that context, I would like to make a proposal and move a motion that this Bill be rejected. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we hear the House and the mood in which it is. The House seems to not be in favour of the direction of the Executive. I would like to beg that we consider another amendment, which is different from this. We concede on this particular one of donations and we will not argue even at the committee stage but there is another – 

THE SPEAKER: Where is it? 

MR BAHATI: There is another amendment, which the chairperson can elaborate on.

5.27
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, that amendment is very dangerous. I have gone through it. We had rejected it here before and the committee is attempting to smuggle it in. If you look at the long title of this Bill, it is about allowing deductions on COVID-19 donations. This committee is proposing something that is not connected to this Bill. When we are legislating, we are not supposed to depart from the long title of the Bill.

Therefore, the issue of these exemptions that are proposed – We had rejected it here and now I see that it is being brought but it is not related. 

I invite you, Madam Speaker, to read our rule 128 of our Rules of Procedure –(Interruption) 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to help him. I would like to note that this is an insertion of a new clause and since the House has already rejected this, we concede.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. Can the minister now withdrawal his Bill?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we had another clause. However, the chairperson of the committee said they are withdrawing. I want to officially say that we are temporarily withdrawing the Bill. We shall come back on that particular one. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Bill withdrawn let us go to the next item.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING APPROVAL OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2013

5.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament seeking approval of Parliament to amend the second schedule to the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013, that was tabled on 11 February 2020 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development- actually, this is not a motion but a report.

The committee considered the motion and made the following observations:

The amendment of the second schedule of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013, is required to address a gap in Uganda’s current legal framework which does not make provision for the regulation of Virtual Asset Service Providers (VASPs). This poses a risk for VASPs to be abused for money laundering and/or terrorism financing in Uganda and globally. 

As a result of lack of a regulatory framework in this field, many Ugandans have fallen victim to scams perpetrated by individuals and companies purporting to be engaged, for example, in crypto-currency margin trading, whereas they are actually Ponzi or pyramid scheme.

Fraudsters trading as “Dunamiscoins (Uganda) Ltd” and another group trading as “Global Crypto-currency (Uganda) Ltd” have cheated Ugandans of billions of shillings. 

Although the fraudsters are currently prosecuted in courts of law for their fraudulent activities, the victims of these scams have limited options for recovery of their funds.

At the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) plenary meeting which was held in Paris, France from 14 to 19 October 2019, the regulation of VASPs was discussed in terms of mitigating the risk of using them to launder money and financing terrorism. As a result, the FATF amended Recommendation 15 to incorporate the regulation of VASPs as requirement by all jurisdictions. 

By amending the second schedule in order to lists VASPs as accountable persons, Uganda will be complying with the global anti-money laundering and countering financing of terrorism standards set by the FATF.

Considering the global need to mitigate the risk of abuse of VASPs for money laundering and terrorism financing, and the new requirement by the FATF, the board members of the authority resolved and approved the proposal for amendment of the second  schedule, on 6 December 2018 and provided their endorsement guidance that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development exercises the powers granted by Section 139(2) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, to amend the list of accountable persons.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that in accordance with Rule 55, of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Parliament in accordance with Section 139(2) of The Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013, approves the proposal by the minister responsible for finance to amend the second schedule of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members. The chairperson has reported that the minister requested for authority from this House to amend the schedule for the reasons given. Therefore, our work is really to say either yes or no.

5.35
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, Parliament discussed that matter a couple of months ago. To bring it now in the moods we are in now - we are trying to deal with the moods we are in, you know that bringing it now is like forcing me to take quinine when I do not have malaria.

I would request the minister to have mercy on us to bring it when we are fresh and we address our mind to that issue because anti-laundering law is very important. We should address our mind to the issues and we should legislate knowing very well what we want to achieve. I beg to propose that we defer debate on this matter so that we study it further in order to come up with an appropriate position. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I slightly disagree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that our capacity to handle this important issue is diminished because of the mood we are in. We have handled even more important issues than this. Therefore, we still have capacity to handle business of the House.

The problem that we are facing colleagues is that the Ponzi schemes are going on. You have raised these issues in the House specifically the Member for Youth for Western Uganda has been very keen about the Ponzi schemes. The members of the public have been conned because of these schemes. Therefore, we need a law and need your approval to make regulations against these people who are engaged in these schemes. Everybody knows these schemes that are taking place. They need to be regulated and we cannot regulate them without your approval.

Madam Speaker, we have this capacity to stop these conmen going around defrauding the public. Give us authority to regulate them so that we protect the public. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may have seen some people who undressed when we were having the Central Executive Committee (CEC) Elections. There were women who undressed in Kampala because they had failed to solve their problems; these were the victims of the Dunamiscoins. They had been cheated in Arua and Kampala. 

When they came to complain, I called the Prime Minister together with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Bank of Uganda, Financial Intelligence Authority and Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority and asked them to solve these people’s problems. Therefore, there is actually a problem.

These virtual asset providers, need to be captured and regulated. I remember that I addressed the House on that issue of the Dunamiscoins 

5.39
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, this issue of the virtual businesses is a threat and a big problem. There are even members in this House - I know a member who almost committed suicide because he was defrauded by people who deal in these crypto currencies. We know the gravity of the matter. 

We even know some ministers, moreover from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I can even name them, if time allows but I do not want to – otherwise, that is how members ended into the “thing”. Some of the people involved in this, are children of the big people. They even dubbed the President to open the business in Serena here. It was only the Governor, Bank of Uganda, Mr Emmanuel Mutebile, who was opposed to the idea. 

I think, it is just the way the chairperson presented his report; he did not put more meat to enable people understand and grasp the matter properly. Otherwise, this is a big problem in this country. We need to solve it, if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can assure us that this is the remedy. However, this law cannot stop people from defrauding but we want to limit defrauding people.

Madam Speaker, I am reluctantly convinced that we support and pass it, if this will help us to solve the problem. For me, it is because of that colleague, whom I know, was really affected by this. If that assurance is given to deal with those – you can see that level, where women had to undress. The little savings people had made, they had to –

I would like to plead with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that we should take the quinine, as a prophylaxis to solve this problem. Hon. Bahati, you may pass these copies to hon. Cecilia Ogwal so that she can go through some of them, as we finalise. Therefore, I would like to appeal to members that we pass it because it is just an amendment that can solve the problem. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, among those who were cheated of the Dunamiscoins, was a very senior police officer, who got Shs 140 million of his retirement, took it all there, and lost it all. He said that he was embarrassed to speak before me but he said that it was the truth. 

5.42
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, the House may be reluctant to consider this but these conmen have even reached our people at the grassroots, in the villages. 

I would like to know whether this is a scam that is well orchestrated by people here, in the centre. Otherwise, they have raided our people in the villages. Every time I am in the village, I am told that a group of people have lost their savings to people who come from Kampala and other big cities to defraud them.

I am very reluctant but I think we should consider this, if the opportunity can be granted now that we can save our people who lose their small incomes through well organised fraudsters, who move from the centre and go to disorganise our people in the rural areas. I would like to be part of this, if it can be a lasting solution to those who are cheating our people.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, my feeling is that even if we passed it, I do not think it is going to cure the problem. The problem we have is that people want quick money; this business of thinking that quick money is easy. We must get a remedy for this. Maybe, education, publicity, among others. For example, I am sure you have all got emails saying you have won a rotary of $ 1 million. You find a member saying “I have won a rotary” and he follows it and ends up in Nigeria or London, and they con him of the little they have. They can even ask for your bank account.

In the villages, they say when you bring Shs 1,000 then you will get Shs 2,000. Now, the one who is asking you to do it, for example, he says “bring Shs 10,000 and you will get Shs 20,000”. Doesn’t he also need money? Why can’t he bring his Shs 10,000 and make the Shs 20,000? It is like going to the witchdoctor and he tells you, “I want to make you rich; bring this and I make you rich” and yet the witchdoctor is very poor.

Madam Speaker, what I am trying to put across is that there is no way, the law we want to pass, will address money laundering. If I went to the bank and I picked my Shs 100 million and took it to this man of virtual assets, I believe he has not stolen. I took it willingly to him. He will give me a receipt and transact in it. 

The only thing is that it is a criminal act, which should be dealt with by police. Maybe it can be in the contract obligations. Otherwise, this law, which you want to pass, to cure virtual money laundering, will not work. 

Since we have a minister in charge of publicity - instead of Mr Ofwono Opondo making noise, he should be talking about such or economic monitoring but not this law. Anyway, since we have asked mama to swallow quinine, let us add chloroquine and maybe, we can help hon. Bahati to go and sleep thinking he has done something. If they can even steal from one of the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who knows economics - he was conned Shs 250 million. What wouldn’t they do to my grandmother in village?

Madam Speaker, this law, which we want to pass will not address anti-money laundering.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, it may not fully address but it is our responsibility to make laws for this country. Let us help as far as we can.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have heard my two sons plead that I should be forced to take quinine, in order to save the lives of some of our members of the community. In view of that, as a mother and a grandmother, I agree that this law be passed. However, next time, I should not be ambushed because I always need to understand details and ensure that we do not rush to make decisions. 

However, for this particular case, knowing that some of our colleagues were involved and almost committed suicide, I think we should save the lives of the people who are involved in this. Therefore, I beg to concede and I have agreed to swallow the quinine.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that this House do approve the motion for the resolution of Parliament to permit the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to amend the second schedule to the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013.
     
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the original copy of the report and the minutes of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. 

I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had a final thing to say. I do not know when you are front loading us. (Laughter)

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, yesterday, we laid here a motion for borrowing and today, while in the committee, we have been advised by both the technical staff of Parliament and the committee clerk that we should separate the two requests. 

I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to withdraw the proposal to borrow Shs 4.3073 trillion through domestic borrowing and up to US$ 600 million from International Monetary Fund to finance the budget deficit for Financial Year 2020/2021.

I move to lay a motion for a resolution of Parliament to borrow –

a)  up to Shs 4,307.3 billion through domestic borrowing to finance the budget deficit for the Financial Year 2020/2021;

b) 	US$ 600 million from the International Monetary Fund to finance the budget deficit for the Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to move. 

Also, to say that we are very grateful that this House was called to consider a lot of work for the ministry of finance and we have been able to complete it. Yes, we still have some work to be done but we are very grateful. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the new motion is sent to the committee, because it had already been moved; it was just for separating them so that when they are reporting, they write about both. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for interrupting your recess. You need to now go back and talk to the real people. House adjourned sine die. We shall invite you when we have urgent work to do. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)
 
