Monday, 31 October 2005
 
Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s meeting and to appeal to those who are not here to turn up tomorrow so that we can accomplish the rules relating to the general elections in time to enable the Electoral Commission do its work. 

Secondly, I would like to take this advance opportunity to wish the Muslim Members of this House a very good Idd, as well as the Mufti of Uganda and all the Muslims in the country. I do not know whether it is tomorrow or Wednesday, but we wish them Idd el Fitir and Blessings of Allah. Thank you.

2.36
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of public importance regarding the registration of voters, which was purportedly put to rest on Sunday. I took trouble to tour my constituency in parishes namely Lubaga, Ndeeba and Mutundwe and Najjanakumbi, and I saw a very difficult situation. Although people are silent at the grassroots, a good number of them have not registered because of inadequacy of the materials in the registration process. One camera in Lubaga has been serving two parishes. In a parish like Mutundwe we have nine villages and people have to wait until a camera comes back to them. Is it not a violation of human rights for an individual to wait for a camera, which does not come, only to hear a pronouncement that the registration exercise has ended? 

I would like to use this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to propose very humbly that since this is our country, we are all concerned about the elections, which are coming next year. Uganda has had a very turbulent history related to bad elections and inconsistence in voting. It is not too late for us to propose that the Electoral Commission extends the registration exercise for about two weeks. 

Madam Speaker, I have also seen people who are working at the registration desk, most of whom have been reluctant to turn up. It is just that they got the assignment when they were unemployed and there is a lot of reluctance among them because they suspect that there will be no payment. They sent me to make this alarm in this House that in view of what is happening, even their reporting to duty is full of reluctance. I appeal to the Electoral Commission, through the Minister of Constitutional Affairs, to ensure that these people are paid.  

Finally, to the Electoral Commission, it is not late for them to extend; they do not have any convincing reasons for not extending because of inadequacies in camera supplies. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Justice wish to say anything about this?

2.39
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I apologize for not being here when the comments were starting, but I got the general drift from what hon. Lukyamuzi was saying. The issue is not entirely due to me. 

On the 28th of October the Electoral Commission itself realized that more time than had been given was necessary and they officially extended the registration period to include last Saturday and last Sunday. However, I note the concerns expressed by honourable members and will communicate these concerns to the Electoral Commission with a proposal for extension. 

I cannot commit the Electoral Commission on this matter because as you know, the Constitution prevents any person or authority from directing or controlling the Electoral Commission in its work.  All I can constitutionally do is to articulate this concern and recommend to them an extension. Madam Speaker, when you see me departing earlier than the end of the session, I will exactly be going to do that. I thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LABOUR DISPUTES (ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT) BILL, 2005

2.42
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Employment Bill, 2005 be for read the first time. It is accompanied by financial clearance from the Ministry of Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have started with the Employment Bill; you are not going in the order in which we put them?

MRS BAKOKO: I am going in the order. Oh! I had my own order. I am sorry! Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005 be read the first time. It is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you have satisfied the provisions of Section 6 of the Budget Act by presenting the Certificate of Financial Implications, I hereby commit the Labour Disputes (Arbitration and Settlement) Bill, 2005 to the Committee on Social Services.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH BILL, 2005

2.43
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005 be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does it comply with Section 10 of the Budget Act?

MRS BAKOKO: It is accompanied by a certificate of clearance, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, having ascertained that the Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications under Section 10 of the Budget Act, I hereby commit the Occupational Safety and Health Bill, 2005 to the Committee on Social Services.

BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2005

2.44
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Employment Bill, 2005 be read for the first time. It is also accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, having ascertained that the Bill complies with Section 10 of the Budget Act, I hereby commit the Employment Bill, 2005 to the Committee on Social Services.

BILLS
FIRST READING

LABOUR UNIONS BILL, 2005

2.44
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Labour Unions Bill, 2005 be read for the first time; and it is also accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Having satisfied the requirements of Section 10 of the Budget Act, I hereby commit the Labour Unions Bill, 2005 to the Committee on Social Services.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT NO.2) BILL, 2005

2.45
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Local Government (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded; you can proceed.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for doing a thorough job. Although I do not see them here, they did a good job. We shared views and I only would like to comment on their recommendations.

There is only one outstanding problem, which I would want this House to consider and actually take the position of government; that is the issue of secret ballot voting for the lower elections. The committee is of the view that we have elections by secret ballot all through.  Government had considered this and found that we may be pushing ourselves beyond the limit. We must run a system that operates within our financial means. We have over 40,000 LC Is - otherwise called villages – in this country. The committee is proposing that all elections at local government and at administrative unit levels shall be by secret ballot, using one ballot box for all candidates at each polling station.

Madam Speaker, they go further to say in their justification that if different symbols are identified, it can reduce the expense of printing ballots with candidates’ pictures, which will be unique for each electoral college. Different symbols at all levels will mean printing the same ballot paper for each level of election, which would be cheaper. This simply means that for each of the 40,000 villages, you have to have different symbols and for the subsequent levels the LC IIs, LC IIIs and so on. I do not understand how the committee would overlook the complexity of this particularly as we go into the multi-party dispensation. 

Given the list of registered parties now, I understand they are about 32, I can visualize on the basis of only logic that you could have 30 different parties represented at each level of the 40,000 villages. There will be 30 candidates and you are supposed to have different symbols at all levels so that according to them, you will reduce the cost. Each party will have its own colour and each candidate will obviously have to be looked at as a separate person and so on. This presents a situation where the budget of this country could be entirely spent on elections only and then other things will be at a stand still. 

I want to further point out that at the village level, people know each other very well. There is no secrecy about who is supporting which party or who is supporting which candidate. In each village, those who share a drink talk about it, even after they have voted they go and say, “I voted so and so”. More so, if parties are at the grassroots, which appears to be a belief of some of the political party leaders that they are everywhere, and in every village, people would have been registered as party members anyway. They would have been known to be of this party or the other. So, secrecy at that level beats me. 

We are trying to adopt individualism, which is characteristic of the industrial society where people may be neighbours geographically but do not know each other and never bother to talk to one another. In our villages, people are intensely in interaction, they know each other, they attend burials together, they belong to the twezikye (let us better ourselves associations), and I doubt that secrecy in this case, which is so expensive, is justified.         

The committee seems to think that political parties will not percolate to the local level and affect the political climate there. I do not see how this is going to be avoided because that is the primary unit of any political organisation. Madam Speaker, I have no problem with many of the other proposals and the observations, I welcome them.

I would like to commend the positive attitude and cooperation we have received from the committee, and we look forward to a continued cooperative relationship with the committee.
  
I would like to point out also that the issue of the Shs 30 billion approved by Parliament to replace graduated tax is no longer a problem as we have been able to sort it out with the Minister of Finance. It was more of a misunderstanding than a deliberate decision to starve government because we know that without the working of local governments, the whole country is at a standstill. That has been sorted out and the Finance and Local Government ministries plus the Local Finance Commission are together working out all the details. I am almost sure that there will be no more problems relating to that. However, I want to point out that still that amount of money is small with the small size of our economy and budget, and we cannot stretch it beyond reason.

About Kampala becoming a city, I am anxious than the committee. There are certain things we must sort out to make sure that Kampala is in –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it seems you are responding to a report, which has not yet been presented. You are moving faster than the committee.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, Madam Speaker, I thought in the meantime, the chairman would appear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, you are supposed to move your motion, speak to it and urge the House to proceed to consider your Bill.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am only anxious to get this out of the way, but I take your advice and take my seat. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming pupils and teachers from Namutumba Primary School in Busiki County. You are welcome! Can I now invite the Chairperson, Committee of Local Government?

2.57
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Lydia Balemezi): Madam Speaker, I wish to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government, on the Local Government (Amendment No.2) Bill, 2005.  

Introduction: 

The Local Government (Amendment No.2) Bill, 2005, was read for the first time on 27 September 2005 and was referred to the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government for scrutiny in accordance with Rule 103 and 104 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee considered the Bill and now wishes to report its findings.  

Methodology: 

The committee received and examined memoranda from various stakeholders including the following: 

1.	The honourable Minister of State for Local Government and his technical team.
2.	 The National Political Commissar and his technical team.
3.	Urban Authorities Association in Uganda.
4.	The Uganda Local Governments Association.
5.	Forum for Promoting Democratic Constitutionalism
6.	UWONET
7.	 Hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki - on workers’ representation.

The committee experienced difficulties in appreciating the matter. The committee also visited local governments in eastern Uganda.
  
The scope of the Bill: 

The Bill seeks to amend the Local Governments Act, 1997, in order to give more effect on the decentralisation of functions, powers, responsibilities and services and to ensure smooth implementation of the decentralisation policy. It also provides for the following:

1.	Streamlining local governments’ elections.
2.	Harmonizing the Local Governments Act, 1997 in line with the recent amendment of the Constitution, including a provision for appointment and disciplinary control of the CAOs and town clerks. 
3.	Repealing the reference to personal graduated tax. 
4.	Laying the foundation for transition from the Movement to multiparty political dispensation.
5.	Making a provision compelling district deputy speakers to serve on part time basis while the tenure of the speaker is on full time basis. 
6.	Making a provision for resignation of public officers 30 days before nomination for posts in the local governments. 
7.	Making a provision for the reduction in the number of secretaries on the executive committee of the local government from five to three. 
8.	Making a provision for the re-establishment of town boards that, prior to the enactment of the local government, were instrumental in shaping the emergency of town councils such as Mukono, Kasese, Hoima, Masindi and Mpigi.

Observations:

The method of lining up to vote as opposed to secret voting is synonymous with post election conflicts, instability and enmity. Cases of domestic violence and separation in marriages are also common with this method of voting. Funds should, therefore, be availed to finance for voting by secret ballot.

The use of public facilities attached to an office for election purposes has become a common practice in Uganda’s politics. To ensure firmness during the election period, civil servants and other public officers who intend to contest in elections need to be barred from using such facilities to gain unfair advantage over their opponents.  

The conditions, especially those of numbers, used for gazetting a town council, municipality or city status are high. This has had a negative impact on the desire or the opportunity for a town to graduate to a municipality or a municipality into a city in order to improve their levels of service delivery.

The function of the Department of Physical Planning in the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment is not prominent probably because it mainly handles local government affairs and yet you will agree that the physical planning function in districts is lacking. If this function reverts to the Ministry of Local Government, it will give an assurance that areas to be declared town boards, towns, municipalities and cities are planned and facilities provided before assuming their new status.

The concept of town boards is not new as in the past it provided the basis for organised planning for areas preparing themselves to be declared town councils. This concept was inadvertently omitted during the enactment of the Local Government Act, 1997. If restored, town boards will be empowered to develop planning schemes for orderly planning and development control of large trading centres striving to gain town council status. 

Some district councils have in the past attempted to remove their chairpersons based on unfounded allegations, moreover in an irregular manner, which exercise has proved to be costly to them. It is the considered view that the procedure for the removal of a district chairperson should be elaborate, presided over by the judge of the High Court or someone qualified to be a judge. This function cannot be left to any judicial officer, given the meaning in Article 151(c) of the Constitution. The meaning includes magistrates grade II and other persons associated with courts of law. 

The volume of work handled by a district speaker’s office does not warrant the existence of a full time deputy speaker. Maintaining the status quo is also costly to the districts.  

The Shs 30 billion that was approved by Parliament as compensation for graduated tax was diverted to other payments like that of district chairpersons and facilitation of the restructuring exercise. Without funding, therefore, council operations countrywide have experienced difficulties. This has mainly affected LC IIIs who are expected to benefit at the rate of 65 percent and LC V at a rate of 35 percent. In addition, the financing of development projects is experiencing difficulties.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommendations are as follows:

The ministry should liaise with Gender, Labour and Social Development to enact a proper legal framework to establish councils for the elderly and Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) to facilitate elections of their representatives at various local governments levels.  

A judge or someone qualified to be a judge of the High Court should chair proceedings for the removal of a district chairperson.

The ministry should liaise with Urban Authorities Association in Uganda and the Uganda Local Governments Association to review the conditions required for establishing town boards, towns, municipalities and cities. 

Graduated tax compensation due to local governments should be remitted as approved by Parliament. 

Government should expedite the law seeking to give Kampala City a special status. The law will have far reaching implications on the administration and governance of the city.

The Department of Physical Planning currently in the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment should revert to the Ministry of Local Government to better handle matters pertaining to the physical planning, which is a predominantly local government function. 

Town boards should be empowered to collect revenue on behalf of the district.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank all those who assisted the committee with valuable information at the time of considering the bill. Subject to the amendments proposed to the committee and any that may arise from you, honourable members, the committee recommends that the Bill be enacted into law. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I have looked at the report and certified that 11 of the 25 members have appended their signatures. This is more than the required one third, so it is eligible for debate.

3.08
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee for bringing the report on this very important bill. I thank them for the extensive consultations they made. Since the Local Government Act was enacted in 1997, many changes have happened. That was the first Act, which was enacted after the decentralisation and the new Constitution of 1995, with powers being given to local governments or devolved to the local governments. 

At that level there were a lot of new synergies which were muscled in order to lead the various districts. It is also true that over the last ten years, many new districts have been established.  This amendment was, therefore, important for it will address the gaps and omissions, which may have come as a result of the changes.

I will support the committee on the law elevating Kampala to a city status and finally react to a few other issues. Madam Speaker, we are in the process of nominating our leaders in the various parties. Without a clear guidance over the status of the city, it gives us scepticism over what we should do. The leaders I am talking about are district councillors and councillors at the municipal level.  We know that by amendment No.1 of the Local Government Act, divisions within city council were elevated to a municipal level. There were a few issues, which remained hanging and, therefore, that clause was never effected. 

We are now awaiting action on the divisions of Nakawa, Makindye, Kampala Central, Kawempe and Rubaga, which we hope will all be established municipalities. Now, we are still speculating and we do not know what will be our fate. Therefore, it is important that this law comes as quickly as possible. I am glad the minister is here. The people I represent are waiting for this law.

I support the recommendation on the post of the deputy speaker. It is true that when the post of the speaker was established in the Local Government Act, it was a new arrangement within the local government and the roles of the speaker were not very clear then. The structure, which was adopted, was the same that pertains in the national Parliament. That is why the districts were able to say that they should have a speaker and a deputy speaker. However, it is true that more often, the speaker performs all the duties, leaving the deputy speaker idle. 

Considering the financial status in many of our districts, it will be important that we consider the level of public expenditure. We can only do this by putting off some of the posts that we can do without. I, therefore, support the elimination of the deputy speaker’s post. 

I congratulate government upon the abolition of graduated tax. It had become a nuisance, particularly when it came to the process of tax collection. I am sure that more was spent in the collection than what was collected. In various circumstances, the collection turned out to be more political than it was administrative. It was such a burden to collectors and local governments. I salute government for abolishing this graduated tax.  

However, I appreciate the committee’s recommendation that the government should transfer the equivalent of what was being collected to the local councils. It is not fair that all LC Vs and LC IIIs receive just salary from government. Eventually, there will not be meaningful understanding of what graduated tax used to be. I suggest that every district identifies areas, in terms of non-conditional grants and specify where they think different amounts of money should go.  Otherwise, when we see it as money mainly given to the chairman as salary, it creates a negative picture. Many people do not wish to see that what was their compensation in terms of graduated tax has been reverted to sustaining the leadership in the district. I suggest that local governments have priority areas, so that they can have this money sent for purposes of those identified activities.

I conclude by supporting the recommendation that the physical planning department be transferred back to Ministry of Local Government. The many mushrooming town councils and town boards call for immediate intervention from government. Being within the Ministry of Lands, Housing detaches them from the very administration, which manages the expansion of these cities. When we talk about their developing status, they may never put into account those very issues, which are fundamental to the establishment town councils, town boards and municipalities. I, therefore, request this august House to accept the recommendation and the government takes hid and transfers the physical planning department to the Ministry of Local Government. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.17
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work. There are two concerns that I would like to address: page 1, under the methodology No. 7 reads, “Hon. Dr Sam Lyomoki – on workers’ representation. The committee experienced difficulties in appreciating the matter.” The committee does not seem to favour the representation of workers. 

We had a meeting as workers representatives and found out that at the councils of various districts, majority of the interest groups are represented. The elderly are proposed in this amendment bill; the youths, the women and people with disabilities are represented.  Therefore, I do not know why the workers have not been considered.  The experience we have gone through indicates that even the labour officials at the district level have been marginalized since the creation of the decentralisation exercise in this country. They are not facilitated and are just neglected. I think one of the reasons is because there is no councillor who knows industrial relations or even the problems the workers experience. We need at least one at least on each council for every district. This will help us to make the production of this country and the economy boom. Therefore, the request to have one representative on the district council should be considered.

My second concern is in regard with violence on page 2. The committee’s observation is true. In the past we have seen people fighting each other just because of lining up behind the candidate whom one may not support. We have seen many women suffering under this kind of situation; when a husband supports a different candidate, the woman becomes a torture victim. I think this issue of having secret ballot at the local council should be emphasised equally because we have seen it happen. Now that we are getting into multiparty politics, it is going to be worse. We need to protect the woman because she has a right to express herself in this country and to decide on issues that matter. On this note, I thank you for the good work done. Thank you.

3.20
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. I am a bit saddened that a number of colleagues from the front bench have chosen to treat some of these matters lightly. I am not amused with their attendance today, and yet some of the issues we are raising will demand answers from Ministry of Finance in as far as this report is concerned.  

Madam Speaker, the issue of diversion of the graduated tax compensation makes me uncomfortable. Why should it be diverted to handle other activities in the districts? (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you arrived, the minister said that is no longer an issue as he took us through the second reading. All those have been provided for. Is that true, honourable minister?

DR EPETAIT: I beg your indulgence. I was now reacting on the report itself. If that is a matter that has been sorted out, then maybe I should leave it out. My understanding is that even the Shs 30 billion that was provided for, as a compensation for local government, would still be – let me leave out that area.

My other concern is the issue of the Department of Physical Planning. I do not have the figures right now of what has been appropriated to that department in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, where it is housed to-date. However, my observation is that it is a department, which has for long been grappling with under funding. Mere transferring it from one ministry and to another when the basket to that department is not improved will not perform any miracles. 

The committee observes in (d) on page 3 that the function of that department in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment is not prominent. It is not just because it handles Local Government affairs but because of the perpetual under funding of the department and yet the volume of work it is supposed to handle is very immense. Therefore, even if that department remained where it is and it is well facilitated, it could undertake the job. If we choose to take it to the Ministry of Local Government and continue giving it peanuts, we should not expect any improvement.
  
I would also like to observe that most of our town and city boards have gone into a mess because these days everybody is a physical planner. When you buy land the seller says, “No, I want the road to pass here. You should make your toilet to face the other way.” Everybody is a physical planner and, therefore, there is need for us to improve the appearance of our towns and municipalities by strengthening the role of that department. I am still convinced that even if it remained in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment with improved facilitation, we would see better results.

The committee makes an observation in paragraph (d) page 3, about use of public facilities by those who intend to run political offices or to contest for elective positions. Now that amendments have been made to the law requiring any public officer who wishes to stand for a parliamentary seat to resign his office 90 days before the day of nomination, we have not gone ahead to specify up to which period any public officer who wishes to run say, for LC V or a district councillor can use the public facility before the nomination day for such an office. 

I find it very difficult to make a distinction between the individual and official or political activities. While the Speaker was chairing he said, “Look, I am a public officer and I go to my home with a public vehicle. I find people in my compound waiting to see me, how will you call public duty?”  How are we going to enforce this observation of insisting that a public officer who wants to run for a political office does not use a public facility such as a vehicle for that matter?

On the other hand, if somebody is a public officer and he is not going to stand for any position but is seriously using public facilities for campaigning for his friend, that would still tantamount to abuse of public office. Therefore, in my opinion, local governments at district level are best placed to monitor the usage of public facilities especially vehicles. Local government should do this by maintaining an itinerary of every vehicle or motorcycle used especially by those who have intentions of running for political offices. 

However, in my view, enforcing the law in this particular aspect is not going to be a simple matter. Nevertheless, I want to agree with you that this is an issue that would be best placed under Local Government. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue I wanted to raise is that of voting by show of hands or lining behind your candidate but someone else has already handled it and I do not want to be repetitive. However, let me add that voting by lining behind a candidate of your choice is a recipe for disaster and contrary to our goal of promoting free and fair elections at all levels. I urge that we mobilise resources for this cause and ensure that voting at all levels is by secret ballot. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.29
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On this occasion, I am a bit reluctant to give a vote of thanks to the report makers because their recommendations are not attainable. It is good for Members of Parliament to endeavour to make proposals that are workable. Therefore, to forward proposals that are not practical defeats one’s expectations, as I will elaborate. I will make just three points:  

First of all, I would like to agree with previous speakers that although there is a constitutional option for elections to be carried out in the open it is no longer fashionable for elections to be exercised in this manner. Any county in the world that exercises elections in this manner will be marked internationally as a country that is inviting danger for itself. 

I would like to add that it is total primitivism and backwardness for us to endeavour to exercise elections in this way. We have had enough of the circus of previous elections where people lost their dear ones because a candidate spotted them not voting for him or her. 

Secondly, although independent candidates are allowed at parliamentary level, I think the same should trickle down at local government level. We must be open and avoid double standards. If an individual is allowed to stand independently at parliamentary level, the same should happen at local government level. You have no excuse for creating double standards and you should take this from me very seriously.

The third point I would like to make is in regard to recommendation number five that states that government should expedite the law seeking to give Kampala a special status. We should not be wishful. When are we going to implement that? Why didn’t the committee elaborate on this? They should have admitted that much as that is their focal goal, in this time preceding elections this is not attainable.   

I will give an example of the implementation of the regional tier that is supposed to take place in July 2006. Since we are going to the polls in March, suppose the total number of people voted into this Parliament ignore the recommendations of the regional tier and decide instead to reframe it into a fully fringed federal arrangement, how can you guarantee that the assumption of the regional tier to be implemented in July will fall suit? 

Without prejudice, I would like to assume that the committee intended to quash people’s expectations using recommendation number five. Just to give light to the Commissioner of this Parliament namely; hon. Zziwa, in accordance with the amendment to the Local Government Act 2001, it is not a do and you should not rejoice that Kampala has become a municipality. Kampala is already a division in Kampala and according to that amendment a city division is equivalent to a municipality. 

I saw some people rejoicing and celebrating that Mengo had gained municipality status but I did not see any do in celebrating. What were they celebrating other than the obvious? As far as I know, in accordance with regional tier, every region that became a tier was entitled to a municipality. Therefore, in the case of Buganda where I have some shares, nobody should have rejoiced simply because someone talked about a municipality. We can only rejoice when Mengo becomes a district.  

Finally, I would like to challenge the committee. You do not seem to be aware of the nature of elections to be carried out under the Local Government Act. As such I am reluctant to support the report because you should have given more stringent instructions to the Electoral Commission in implementing local government elections. For your information, if local government elections do not go well, do not expect any other elections to go well –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, did you receive a copy of this Bill?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you read the objective of the Bill?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I cannot disagree with you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you are castigating the committee and going in the Hansard yet you are putting them to task on issues that are not in the Bill. Can the clerk read the objectives of this Bill, please just to help hon. Lukyamuzi? 

Hon. Lukyamuzi, the objective of this Bill is to provide for a number of things but not for elections generally. There is already a law on elections, which law we have been using. This Bill is to make other improvements into the law but you are insisting that they should have concentrated on elections and nothing else –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: You are very right, Madam Speaker. I was of the view that due to the forthcoming elections, the bill required extra engineering in order to catch up with events that tend to influence elections. Thank you very much.

3.38
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done. However, I think it would have been better if all observations were put as part of the recommendations. This is because if they are left as simple observations, they are in essence not being given much weight yet some of these observations are very crucial. 

Like some of my colleagues especially one of the scholars of Mazrui have said part (a) which is about domestic violence, that emanates from these elections, should have been given more emphasis. This is because considering the forthcoming elections, the political arena is already very paralysed and I know that we do not want to have a repeat of the current situation in Ghana.

About Kampala, as my colleagues have already put it, I would like a deadline to be set on when we are going to deal with it. This is because there is a lot of uneasiness concerning how Kampala is going to be run. For example, as councillors are we going to resign? What is our fate? So much is being done but we need a deadline. I would have preferred if the committee had come out with a concrete date or deadline so that we can know exactly what will happen to the status of Kampala, and to the councillors and leaders such as my colleague and sister hon. Zziwa so that she can know where she is going to stand.

MRS ZZIWA: I wish to inform hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, my brother that the Kampala city woman seat is ensured in the Parliamentary Elections Act.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I have not got the information clearly. Anyway, I thought she was going to –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Let me clarify, Madam Speaker, with your permission.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I give her the Floor.

MRS ZZIWA: The clarification I want to give is that the issue concerning the posts of Members of Parliament were dealt with in the just concluded Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Act, which we dealt with last week in this House. Therefore, issues concerning district women members of Parliament and city woman member of Parliament were also dealt with. That is why I want to assure hon. Sebuliba Mutumba that his heart should rest in peace, his seat is still safe.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Since I am one of the Members of Parliament from Kampala, I think it is important that I give information to the two Members of Parliament. In accordance with the contents of the regional tier amendment, which recommended that the implementation of the contents of that bill be in July, it goes without saying the pronouncement that Kampala is the capital city of Uganda will not see change the July expected date. There is no way you can diverse things before elections. Therefore, the two of you should rest assured that things will go on normally.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I think you are speculating and are in breach of rule 60. Let us debate what is before us.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my colleagues particularly hon. Zziwa. I am not worried about anybody coming to my constituency, as they know that I am a formidable force. However, I invite her to come to my constituency and we will sort this out. 

I would like to comment on (g) which talks about the volume of work handled by the district speaker’s office. I would like to say that this is only a tip of the iceberg. These are some of the things we should expect as we vulcanise this country. We created more districts and as a result expenditure has also gone up. Likewise, many more positions are coming up which in future may have to be reduced due to increased expenditure. 

We need to revisit all structures and carry out a restructuring exercise. I know the Minister of Local Government is here and I assume that after 2006, he will still be the minister. He needs to undertake a thorough study on the organisational structure of local governments in most of these positions. For example, even now my colleague was floating a proposal concerning workers’ representatives. 

How long are we going to include them when so many people are demanding that the wage bill is too big? We need a thorough study on (g) from the secretariat of Local Government so that we come up with ways of saving taxpayers’ money. I believe that in future even Parliament will be curtailed to cut its numbers. 

Therefore, much as this recommendation has been made, there is need for a thorough study at local government level so that we can cut down on our expenditure. Otherwise, I would like to thank the committee for trying to highlight some of the observations. I hope they will be implemented and followed. I thank you.

3.44
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution is to render emphasis to the point earlier raised by hon. Lukyamuzi. In the scope of the Bill, the report talks of providing for streamlining local government elections and laying the foundation for transition from the Movement to multiparty political system of governance.

We may recall that this Parliament under the Constitutional (Amendment No.2) Bill, which is now an Act, passed an amendment to Article 72 to the effect that any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate independent of a political organisation or political party. This House also went ahead under the Parliamentary Elections Act, which was passed recently, to provide that under the multiparty political system, nomination of candidates may be done by a registered political organisation or party sponsoring a candidate or by a candidate standing for election independently. 

Much as the report of the committee talks about streamlining local government elections and laying a foundation for a transition from the Movement to multiparty political system, I have tried to look through both the Local Government (Amendment No.2) Bill, and the report but I do not see provision for candidates for local government at any level to contest on an independent ticket. 

I think it is the right of an individual who does not want to stand under a political party or organisation to be given an opportunity to stand independently. Therefore, it is only prudent that we streamline this and include the issue of independent candidature. At a later date I intend to move an amendment to this effect but I felt that it would be good to articulate this issue now. I thank you.

3.47
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report but I am concerned about the compensation for graduated tax. I wonder whether the committee looked further and addressed the issue of matching grants at district level. This is because all the programmes, projects and even loans that have been approved by this House have a component of matching grants by the districts. As it is, these districts do not have income anymore and even if you compensated the –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I said at the beginning that this problem has been sorted out. However, let me clarify further by saying that at first Ministry of Finance officials thought that the money we voted for paying the salaries of district leaders was part of the Shs 30 billion.  They went further to include some of the money we had voted for the establishment of new districts in this amount. However, this was sorted out. The Minister of Finance, our officials and I, met and it was made clear that the Shs 30 billion was in addition to these two other expenditures.

As I reported, the appropriate machinery was put in gear and all was sorted out. The money that had not been sent was sent last month so there is no shortage. However, I want to point out that this money is insufficient and we should not confuse this. The Shs 30 billion is now being dispatched on a monthly instalment basis but it is still not what we would like to see our district governments getting.

MR BANYENZAKI: I thank you, honourable minister. However, I would have been happier if you particularly clarified on the issue of matching grants. This is because compensation of graduated tax does not answer the question of matching grants yet if this issue is not handled by the central government, there is a high likelihood that these districts will not have enough money for these grants. They need money to run programmes and projects and I hope that the relevant ministry will address this so that programmes at district level continue to function.  

My other concern is about physical planning in this country. The issue of insisting that physical planning, which is currently in the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, be reverted to Ministry of Local Government without addressing the issue of capacity and without recruiting and training more physical planners, will not cure any problem. As I speak and I stand to be corrected, I am told that the reason there is delay in approving plans and other business handled by the physical planner is because there is only one physical planner to handle all the plans in this city. So, if –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Every division has at least two planners so it is not a question of lack of personnel. In fact, this very afternoon before I came here the chief planner of Kawempe was in my office over an issue concerning a road reserve that has been grabbed and we were attending to that. The issue, therefore, is not that there are no planners. There are other constraints involved that I do not want to talk about now since we are focusing on this bill. When we handle the status of Kampala and the constraints that led us to think of giving it a new status, I will explicate on this as well. 

MR BANYENZAKI: You have made my point much easier. For each division in this city to have only two physical planners means that Kampala has only ten planners, which ten do not have support staff. You can see my point. Actually I am just helping the government realise that the capacity of physical planning in this country is inadequate. 

Furthermore, for you to say that there are other issues involved that you cannot enumerate here goes to amplify my concern and observation that there is no capacity. The government or ministry concerned should go ahead and look into the capacity of physical planners and address the issue of recruitment of support staff.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that the committee made some recommendations that do not appear in the bill. Therefore, however much you drum them we are not going to take a decision on them. Can we remain within the Bill?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you very much. Mine is just information. I think that as a country becomes more urbanised, people begin moving away from rural areas. As a result, settlements like trading centres, townships, towns, municipalities and cities come up. It is for this reason that I support hon. Banyenzaki. In my constituency of Otuke, there are ten trading centres located in several sub-counties. I have been trying to get planners for them but unfortunately this was interfered with by insecurity. 

However, it is interesting to note that there are literally no physical planners upcountry. When you want one you have to write a letter, come to Kampala and if you are lucky you can then pick up the one planner in charge of the North and take him upcountry. Therefore, it is true that we are only trying to assist the minister in view of the upcoming changes in the society. 

We must be able to plan for these trading centres and townships. If the hon. Member of Parliament is saying that there is a problem, the minister should be humble enough to accept this and later say, “How can Parliament assist me with more funds so that we can solve this problem of capacity?” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate that there is lack of capacity, but are we going to address that matter in this bill? The policy statement concerning this has its time and since the budget cycle has begun, Members should interact with the minister on this because as it is, this bill will not address that matter.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I was dwelling on this issue because I know that this is a very big problem in this country, and because of the rate at which we are urbanising and I think the minister has taken note of that and this is an opportune time to address this issue.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.56
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Suffice me the indulgence belatedly of congratulating you on the success during the NRM elections. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Aggrey Awori.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I also take this opportunity to commiserate with those of us who were not successful. I would like to assure them that what they are going through, we in UPC have been experiencing it and some people thought we were on the wrong track. Now you know what it is to indulge in multi-party politics. I thank you.

Coming to the report first and foremost, this matter of secret ballot should be part of the Constitution; all elections should be held under secret ballot without disqualification. So, for us to bring it as a mandatory condition in a local government law is superfluous. One day I hope we will amend the Constitution and make it mandatory that all public offices should be held by secret ballot in terms of election.

Two, I note in the Bill itself one of the intentions was to prepare local governments for multi-party politics. Again they did not go in enough depth to prepare local governments for multi-party politics. Madam Speaker, when you come to multi-party politics, there is an element of a vote of no confidence in the administration. Any group of persons belonging to a political party or organisation who feel that the head of a particular local government is not running it properly do not have to find a fault in its own style of management. But when you feel that he, as a person belonging to UPC or DP or NRM for that matter, hopefully not can be voted out of office on purely multiparty political system, I think this one should be explored.

Madam Speaker, let me quickly run to this other issue of urban planning. If there is one aspect of local government that has been totally ignored is –(Interruption)

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I hate to interrupt my colleagues when they are making their contributions. I must apologise to hon. Aggrey Awori, but I stand up to clarify my mind that we should provide for the removal of a properly elected leader, purely on the basis of multi-party politics? Are you proposing we should abandon grounds for the removal and just say we are a multiparty system, drop dead or something? I find it difficult. I think since you are a very senior leader, aspiring for greater things, you should be in position to clarify this point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Aggrey Awori, I was equally left at sea by - what do you want us to do, if you could explain?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you my honourable colleague in charge of law in this country. It is true, once a person has been elected through universal adult suffrage, one person, one vote universally, it is true it becomes increasingly difficult to remove such a person from office on the account of having lost the confidence of the people. However, it is not possible for us all the time to revert to the people to remove such a person. There should be a provision or acknowledgement of the fact that the majority of the councillors can express lack of confidence in that chairperson’s capacity to lead the district especially if he is insisting on his party policies.

I know that when we come to serious party politics, every person contesting for a public office will be using a party platform. If the district chairperson of Busia District is elected on the UPC ticket and he fails to uphold the tenets and principles of UPC, we have every reason, we as councillors of UPC or even rival political parties, to show our lack of confidence in its leadership. So, Madam Speaker, I think this is a provision, maybe not in law but it should be acknowledged that on the basis of party politics we could express lack of confidence.

Three, when you reduce the number of secretaries or positions in the cabinet of the district council, again you are narrowing the base of satisfying the various elements. You know political office is a way of reward and performance, you give to those you feel can perform and you want to spread it out to broaden your base.  So, I think it was a mistake to reduce the number of secretaries from five to three.  

Madam Speaker, before the honourable colleague came to the Floor, I had started on this point of the most abused department in every council, the urban planning department. I will give an example of new Naguru Estate. Before this administration came into being prior to 1986, it had been properly planned; roads, sewerage, water and so forth for the East African Community. Immediately this administration came into being they tore it up completely. I can even take this august House to see the sewerage system which was just cut up; the roads which had been designed are just being cut up. If you look at the mansions, which have come up in Naguru, to get to those mansions it is impossible. It is –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, actually the information I want to give hon. Aggrey Awori is complementally because some time back in this House there was a matter pertaining to the land in Butabika. There were about two investors who had been given land in Butabika, and the matter became so controversial that it was referred to the Committee on Social Services. We have never had a report from that committee but from the best of my knowledge, as I speak now, all the land except the piece, which was left for the hospital, has been allocated. There is construction of roads and you cannot actually tell who is giving authority to do so. I wrote a letter to the responsible authorities, I have never received any response and this matter is lying quiet.

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. As a matter of a fact, I am his tenant. I live in his constituency, which was originally mine by the way.  So that is why I am talking about Naguru.  

If I may divert and go back to the point my honourable colleague has raised, it even came up in the Committee of Social Services when people were apportioning themselves the land belonging to Butabika Hospital. The Director of Butabika Hospital pleaded and literary cried before the committee saying, “Look, we have to expand this facility”, the Butabika Mental Hospital and the Minister of Local Government or something like that, at that time hon. Otafiire said there is no such thing. We have got evidence to show that the land belonging to Butabika Hospital has been given to fictitious, and I use the words, “fictitious” investors. One time I told you about –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance from your Chair, in the sense that while debating the Bill, a serious issue has come up. Would it not be prudent that we request the line minister to come before Parliament and give an explanation about that issue tomorrow, since we cannot comprehensively come up with a solution right now?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are quite right. Actually I was trying to establish from the clerk whether we did receive a report on that matter. I remember there was a dispute between the Minister for Lands and the Minister of Health about the ownership or otherwise of that land at Butabika and we had asked our committee to look at it. I am trying to ascertain whether we received the report or whether it is ready. Does the Minister of Local Government have information?

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, why don’t we stand over this and tomorrow morning the minister comes up with an explanation about this issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether we have the right minister. That matter was the Ministry of Lands. Minister of Local Government, do you have anything to say about this matter?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the two issues should be separated. There is an issue, which is specific; relating to the hospital or ownership of the land where a hospital is going to be built.  That should be put aside. What we are talking about regarding Kampala city, I have set up a commission of inquiry, which is looking into the sale, the lease and purchase of land in Kampala and according to the papers recently, there are now public hearings. I would request that honourable members who have any issues to deal with land, that they approach this committee, it is headed by Prof. Katorobo. It is a high-powered inquiry and it arises out of recognition that land handling in the city has not been following procedures. Therefore, there is room where Members of Parliament can go and help the public to address this question.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I agree with my honourable colleague but I think hon. Banyenzaki is raising a different point and it is important for government to undertake to make a statement on what happened to the Butabika land. I undertake to communicate this to the Leader of Government Business so that he arranges to make a statement on this matter. It cannot just be brushed aside. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Attorney-General for making that commitment to brief the Leader of Government Business to come up with a report to this august House. It is a serious matter. Not only Butabika but also the old Nakawa and Naguru are being given away again to fictitious investors. People are being evicted, they have been given notice to vacate and yet those houses were built according to a certain plan. We do not see a new plan on how these new investors will come up with these high-rise flats. There are certain considerations, which must be taken into account before you come up with high-rise flats.  

The purpose of Naguru originally was to provide accommodation for the middle class that would support the government and the private sector in terms of staff. If you push the poor people away, outside the city because you have made the inner part of the city very expensive by virtue of your planning, how do you expect them to travel from Bweyogerere, Mukono and beyond to work for you in your offices? The office messenger, manager and office superintendent, cannot afford this high-rise flats you are going to put up.  Madam Speaker, this so-called development without planning is not on.  All you want to see is development, development and yet no planning!  

We have a very big high-class slum in one of the suburbs here; I think it is tank hill. Madam Speaker, for lack of planning, you cannot reach a particular house or a mansion. If I ask anybody in Naguru, “Do you know where hon. Maj. Kazoora lives?” His house is a very conspicuous mansion, you can see it from far, but you cannot reach it. How does he fly there? He meanders around other people’s homes, until he gets there. That is not only him.  

For me even in Ntinda, for anybody to reach me I cannot tell them, “Come to No. 10 Sezibwa Road” or something like that, no. They have to look and ask, “Do you know hon. Awori’s house?” “Yes, the third house when you turn left, you see a black gate, ask from there”. What kind of planning is this? Is this urban planning where you have to use trees as a signpost? Madam Speaker, this is not planning.

Last but not least, again this matter of how to promote a town council to a municipality is ridiculous. The terms are so stringent. I do not see it happening except by political decree. I will give an example. In terms of population, Busia town is bigger than Tororo Municipality and Tororo town is now a municipality, with a smaller population than Busia. What yardstick are you going to use? You talk about 100,000 people before you become a municipality. So what about these poor new districts, when will they ever get municipalities into their districts?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up, hon. Awori.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, these are serious concerns. The trouble with us is that we are making laws but the capacity, the political will to implement the law, is not there.

4.15
MR EDWARD KAMANA WESONGA (Bubulo County West, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report well articulated, although I find a few things misplaced:  

One, when you look at page 2, at the beginning, the committee says, “The committee also visited local governments in eastern Uganda” and stops there. Madam Speaker, I do not understand the statement. The committee must have earlier on had a reason as to why it visited Eastern Uganda. What I suspect, until I am clarified, is that there were a number of petitions coming especially over the matter of newly created districts, among which is my district. The committee and the ministry seem to have suffered from what a student of management could call indecision because what is happening is that, that new district was created, it carried out its elections as required by the law, it has had –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I think the honourable colleague is now beginning to contribute in a speculative manner. Maybe the best would be to demand for a clarification from the committee as to which districts in Eastern Uganda were visited so that we shall then discuss on an informed decision rather than speculating. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Wesonga, I think you should leave the issues of the new districts until our committee reports back on the assignment we gave them. Otherwise, everybody will start demanding to know about their district and their town and their road, and so on. You just ask them, they will tell you where they went.

MR WESONGA: I thank you for your guidance, Madam Speaker. The earlier they do it the better for this nation and the better for the people of Manafwa District.  

Madam Speaker, I noted on page 3, where the committee says, “This had a negative impact on the desire or the opportunity of a town to graduate to a municipality, municipal council….” The point again touches the newly created districts. These newly created districts have by law town councils, and the country today has gone multiparty and FDC conducted its elections. When it got to where the headquarters are located, they started wondering as to whether the town council should have its own separate organ or the sub-county –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the subject you are raising is so important that I think you should raise a question to the minister for an urgent answer, separate from this debate. Can you raise an urgent question so that tomorrow he answers specifically on the principles of those things you are saying?

MR WESONGA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your guidance and for that matter I ask the Minister of Local Government to come up with a statement concerning the local councils in the newly created districts? Do they operate separately from the sub-counties, which already existed in those areas where the headquarters were created? Do they carry out separate elections or remain under the old sub-counties? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.21
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Lydia Balinese): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for the raised concerns, and I have to thank hon. Zziwa for raising this issue on the municipality. But the committee has also handled this and we are waiting for the ministry to give a clear definition as to how this will be coming up and how it will be implemented. It is within the pipeline and the ministry is handling this issue.

Hon. Epetait, the committee also thanks the ministry because the ministry has come out to give a clarification that they have handled this matter, and we are just waiting to see it implemented down in the districts.  

On the issue raised by the same member as to how the ministry is going to enforce the period given to aspiring candidates as to when they should resign, the committee is also waiting to see how the ministry will be enforcing this law. And we hope they are coming up with guidelines because the committee also raised this concern, and the ministry promised that they were going to work out guidelines.

Hon. Amongi raised a concern on the laws giving freedom to a candidate to opt to stand as an independent candidate in the local government elections, and this has already been stated in the election law. So, under local government, wherever we talk about elections you cannot come up with the detailed explanation as to how elections should be conducted, but it has already been catered for under the law governing elections. I thank the Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think we have done two laws on elections: the presidential elections and the parliamentary elections. They cannot be super imposed automatically on the local governments unless it is stated specifically that the same law shall apply on all the other elections.

MRS BALEMEEZI: I thank you, honourable Speaker, for that guidance. But the members had taken it for granted that since these laws are applying for the elections, this could be applied in the local government. But if it is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you may have to move an amendment to the effect that the principles applied an independent candidature should apply and you say it in the law so that it is made part of the laws. We may have to do that. 

MRS BALEMEEZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee will comply. The committee noted most of the concerns raised by the Members to the ministry and the committee is still waiting for the response from the ministry. Especially, for example, the complimentary statement raised by hon. Ruhindi as a concern raised by hon. Aggrey Awori on Butabika land and the way the ministry was looking at the way infrastructure was coming up without proper physical planning. But the ministry has promised the committee that we are going to get a comprehensive report on this so we are still waiting. So, I would like to move the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKEER: Just ask a member to support your report. 

MRS BALEMEEZI: Pardon?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall deal with the amendment at the committee stage.

MRS BALEMEEZI: Yes, these are the comments raised by Members, which I had to respond to. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson.

4.27
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members for their contributions to the bill. I would like to respond very quickly to some of the points raised without necessarily being exhaustive. 

Hon. Zziwa welcomed the Bill and without any surprise, as the person representing Kampala, she was interested in how Kampala will look like under a new status. All I can say now is that a Bill will be presented to this House, whose contents I cannot now anticipate because a lot of research is going on to look into all the different aspects with a view also of comparing how other capitals are run, to make sure that we have a law that will be comprehensive; will probably be related to other cities that will be created in the country. 

Yes, I welcome the idea by the Deputy Speaker that office should not be full time and I think I will conquer with all accept that one honourable member was thinking of its abolition. I think abolishing it is a bit too radical. We need that office, but since it is a part-time, we will look at it that way instead of the current position, which is a full time. 

I also welcome her contribution relating to the transfer of town and country planning to the Ministry of Local Government. I would like to inform the House that this is already in the pipeline within government; both the Vice President and Leader of Government Business are already aware and it is a matter of the administration getting sorted out. 

I would like to take the point here, unfortunately, some of those who raised this are not here. The planning function in local governments surely falls within a sector of local government rather than management of land. I do not want to overstate that because it is very clear that where country and urban planning either currently located cannot be used as it would be used if it were allocated in local government, because local governments are now the consumers of the services that are rendered by the country in the urban planning. 

Hon. Ssentongo; she is not here. I was wondering how we are going to find workers in villages. Then she talked of having to be represented at the district by one worker. The way that person will be arrived at becomes tricky in districts where you do not have industries. Then, we shall include peasants and what else; they are also represented by the different representation. So, the question of specificity of the workers representative at the lower local levels becomes a bit tricky. I think I need more guidance from them than taking it automatically that we understand it. 

Hon. Epetait was not amused by the Front Bench. I would like to return the same point that the Back Bench does not amuse me either. I think the presence here is rather diminished and you should not necessary have to think that the ones who are on the front bench are the ones who must be blamed for the rest of this House. 

Again to go back a little to this question of fiscal planning, the moment it is properly located then budgeting will be a consideration. It is not an issue that when it comes, for example, now with the town board, which we are introducing in the bill, it means that it is going to be more concerned for planning in the districts and therefore, they are going to plan the expenditure for town board. When we are allocating money from the centre, this is going to be considered. Since we want to heighten the activity of planning as everybody has noticed that the urbanisation process is taking on. 

The Ministry of Local Government is already in touch with Habitat. Ministry of Local Government would put it in the next budget; certainly, we are going to put something to do with country and urban planning, if it comes to the ministry. 

DR EPATIAT: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I want to agree with him now that once a department is well parented, focused budgeting can take place. Therefore, I would not hesitate to have that department go to Ministry of Local Government because there is yet another sector, which is suffering from the same problem, the Animal Industry Sector. And that is the very reason that we have also been saying that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries need be split. Merging the two sectors of Agriculture and Livestock has caused unfocused budgeting. So, it is also one of the areas, which are not properly parented and, therefore, I want to agree with him that the solution to focused budgeting is to have those sectors well parented. Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Lukyamuzi has difficulties in appreciating the difference between a municipality and a district.  I have tried many times we have sat in my office, to explain to him the advantages of a municipality over a district. I obviously have failed as a teacher or a communicator or as a colleague. I have hit a wall. It is very difficult for me to explain it to him, but I would want to inform this House that in the allocation of support for local governments, an urban area receives two dollars per head compared to one dollar per head for a rural district. 

Therefore, conceiving Mengo as a district instead of Mengo as a municipality simply means getting less for the population on Mengo, which is totally urbanized than it can get under the status of a municipality. But if this is what hon. Lukyamuzi cannot see, I will hold it against him when he finally succeed in getting little for his area. 

I believe that looking for federalism or third tier or whatever it is, should be to benefit your population, the people you represent. You will get less than you should get if Mengo is a district, instead of being a municipality. That is a fact and if hon. Lukyamuzi wants less for his people than they should get, he can go ahead but the government cannot allow it, we are going to do the right thing for the people.

Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba wants a deadline on Kampala’s status. Again, he is not here but let me inform the House, nevertheless, that a lot is involved or a lot of research is being undertaken to make sure that we have a law that is as comprehensive as possible, as I said earlier on. As for a deadline, I would be the one to want it probably much more than him because we really have had uneasiness about the running of Kampala and the sooner we can have it the better. 

Therefore, the pressure on us is very high. As to the fear of representation –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the constraints faced by the honourable minister on this matter. But could he not give us some indications? I know fixing deadlines in stone or casting them in stone may be very difficult. Could he not give the people who are involved in all this some guidelines, because to be frank with him, people are actually confused in this city? 

Some parties are holding primaries for certain posts within the city, but they do not know whether these posts will exist; they do not know whether they should abandon them and stand for others, which are a sure deal within our constitutional framework? There is confusion. We need concrete guidance on this matter than what is being brought out by the honourable minister.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, hon. Ruhindi is a lawyer and he knows that the existing law operates until a new one supersedes it. Nobody can sit here and speculate and give guidelines when the guidelines should come in a bill. The bill is the one, which gives guidelines on which Parliament makes a decision. If I were to give guidelines now, they would simply be my own views and I am not about to misguide the population with that. Let hon. Ruhindi tell the members of Kampala, as he knows them, that they will operate within the current law and let tomorrow take its own course when it comes. And those who keep wondering whether the existing units will remain and so on and so forth, the law will say what it should say and Parliament will pronounce itself in that case.

On the issue of independent candidates, let us look at it and think like my colleague here that we are dealing specifically with local governments. We are not dealing with the principles, which should be explicated in other laws. But if we must announce that we must provide for independent candidates in local government, so be it appropriately presented and we will look at it.

I think hon. Banyenzaki was answered in someway - I have already answered you really. It is true that urbanisation is increasing, but that is why we are introducing town boards. A town board precedes a town council and the moment a trading centre gets in the armpit of the authority of the town board, then its chances of being planned and being promoted to the next stage are higher. And we have been simply making political presentation, but now we are likely to have more technical presentations of which area should be promoted to what status from the practical technical point of view.

I thought hon. Atubo’s issue was – this is not absence of planners. They may be few in number and more may be needed, but that does not explain the absence of planning. It means those who are in place are not doing what they are expected to do and the explanation, therefore, is elsewhere and not simply in the presence of planners. We have planners in the city centre here; KCC has a whole department of planning. 

As I mentioned, tangentially road reserves become occupied by buildings. It is not because people do not know that the road reserve is there and by law defined but that even planning is not there. Planning is there, but still you find a road reserve has been occupied by a building. And even a plan is there, but you still find a road reserve has been occupied by a building and it is precisely why we thought Kampala should be better run under a different arrangement.  I want to assure hon. Atubo that the return to town boards is precisely to address the question of increasing urbanisation and, therefore, introducing a planning component in our work. 

Hon. Awori thinks that the Bill we have here did not go deep enough in understanding multi-partyism and so on.  I wish he were here. I want you to pass a little joke to say, if he thought that the Bill amending the Local Government Act could guarantee his party returning to power, he was overshooting the mark. There is no depth we can go to that guarantees anybody to takeover power; we are only talking about how elections can be carried out to produce a local government in the country. I wanted to refer him to Section 15 on the issue of removing local leaders. It is provided how a chairperson can be removed and this has been amended and more expensively in the Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2001, Section 8. It is very clear how a chairperson of a district can be replaced and the provision in the bill is that, we should have a judge presiding over the tribunal and this is all provided for, Madam Speaker, so there is no need to worry.

With regard to the planning of cities and the country, Madam Speaker, I spent a week recently in the Netherlands and motorists are provided with radars in their cars to show where you are located. He was talking of going to hon. Kazoora’s house, wherever you are located, you just say, “the road to Kazoora’s house” in this case the Netherlands and you are located on the computer where you are, the map comes on the screen, you can see where you are going and as you ignite your vehicle and move, you are told to turn left, right and so on until you get there. We are not yet there and if hon. Aggrey Awori thought we are about there, then he is forgetting that there have been years of wastage in the history of this country. But I was amazed at the distance - they tell you where you are now 200 meters in your car, which means that every inch of the road, of the country, is fixed. You can see it, you can move about on the radar and if it is a fly over, you are told now turn and see it and you can see it on your map. Hopefully that stage will come here, but as we talk now, all Kampala can have, are all the buildings numbered and have its map available. If not on the screens of vehicles but at least available for valuers and tax collectors so that we should be able to run a city with all the resources it can mobilise.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Actually that kind of technology is being developed for mobile phones. Two years ago, the Nokia research centre in Helsinki began to think of developing such technologies and I think initially it will be applicable to big cities of the world. It would be a good thing for your government, Sir, to probably link up with those researchers as a minimum for us to have such a facility in Kampala our capital city.  

I think as the parts of the world advance in terms of technology, we need to keep in stage with them otherwise we shall get left behind. So, that technology is something that probably the Ministry of Finance, through the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, need to begin scratching their heads about.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I agree with your comment and contribution only with one rejection. You said, “your government” please, put the words “our government” I would appreciate that. It is the Government of Uganda, and it is our government.  

Lastly, I want to comment on Wesonga’s problem as regards Manafwa District. I would really like to exonerate myself from the problems that exist in that new district. It is up to the leaders of both Manjiya and Bubulo to meet and agree on how to do things. If they cannot agree, it is very difficult for the Minister of Local Government, Kabwegyere or somebody, to make things happen. Let me close that one by pointing out that this is a technical question, the issue of newly created districts and the elections of the newly created town councils.  

I want to inform this House that it is true the boundaries of new town councils have not yet been fixed. It is the question of historical times and the procedure is already provided within the law.  So, what the newly created district councils need to do is to go through the process and bring them over for us to continue in order to complete the processes. But in the meantime, these town councils are in the sub-counties where they are located.  

I would appeal to Members from the newly created districts to liaise with us and with the Electoral Commission so that we can find a solution intermediary before we actually have pronounced ourselves on the newly created boundaries defining town councils. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I thank all the Members, the committee and the contribution from the House and your guidance. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you now have to move us to read the bill for the second time.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Local Governments (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT NO.2) BILL, 2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the course of the debate, one or two issues came up, which we think should be resolved before we conclude the Committee Stage. In particular was the issue of the independent candidates because any lacuna in the law can be either positively or negatively exploited, and I think it is not desirable at this stage. So, either the minister or the committee you can move that amendment tomorrow. So, we will adjourn and start the Committee Stage tomorrow.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member Betty Amongi actually has indicated to me and to the chairperson that she has an amendment to that effect and we have no problem with it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The House rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 1 November 2005 at 2.30 p.m.)


