

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 28 October 2021

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. You are most welcome. 

As you are aware, a lot of business has been referred to the committees, which business we are waiting for the committees to report back on. Whichever committee is ready should bring the business back. Those that were given 10 days, if they are not ready, should come and seek for an extension of the House for them to be ready.

I also want to inform the House that yesterday, the presiding officer informed you about one of our colleagues, hon. Ssegirinya. I can confirm that hon. Ssegirinya is at Murchison Bay Hospital, undergoing treatment. 

We have been there, as Parliament. We are working a way out – if he is referred – to see that we support the process and have him get better treatment. (Applause) We shall work together with the Government in insuring that he gets better treatment. There should not be cause for alarm; we will support our person.

I have also got a confirmation – because the sports team has been complaining that there is no money for sports – from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; they are going to release money for sports. So, the sports team will be going for their activities. Thank you very much.

I would like to inform Members that COVID-19 is still there and we should continue maintaining the Standard Operating Procedures. From next week, we shall require Members to come with their vaccination cards; we want to confirm that Members have been vaccinated. Let us be examples to the rest. We need vaccination cards for us to see that Members are vaccinated so that we pass the message to the whole country. Thank you very much. 

2.22
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MR Matthias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. On your communication, I wish to confirm to the House that this morning – and part of the afternoon – I visited hon. Ssegirinya in Murchison Bay, where he is detained and undergoing treatment. The honourable member is not well.

I wish to implore the State to consider the fact that while they have a right to arrest and try, they should know that they would not be able to prosecute and try somebody who is in a bad health condition. Therefore, I want to agree with the Speaker that the House takes up this matter and liaises with the State to have the Member given appropriate treatment so that we can recover his health in the immediacy. 

I am not possessed with the capacity to narrate his health ordeal here but it is not something that anyone of us would love to associate with, as being responsible for. Therefore, I want to further confirm that today, together with hon. Zaake, hon. Joseph Ssewungu and hon. Joyce Bagala, we visited the honourable member.

Whereas the health workers in the facility are doing their best, there are limitations for which they need to be assisted to make sure that a job of a professional nature is undertaken to recover the Member so that other issues are handled when his health condition is properly addressed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Members rose_) The Leader of the Opposition has stated that we take responsibility. We are going to make sure the Member is treated. If it means – we cannot say “abroad”; we are waiting for a referral. In case there is a referral, we can treat the Member anywhere and in any part of this world. (Applause) He is a Member of Parliament and has an entitlement. Therefore, as Parliament, we are committed to that. We need support from the Government to ensure that we are able to access the Member and have him treated. (Members rose_) I hope the procedure is not on hon. Ssegirinya. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome your communication in regard to your engagement with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding the budget cuts. 

The operation of Government envisages that this Parliament is an independent institution and so is the Judiciary. These two institutions perform very important functions in running the Government. By the fact that this Parliament appropriates money, I feel the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should never at any one point attempt to revise the budget or freeze it without coming back to this very same House, especially when they are attaching the budget of Parliament and that of the Judiciary because these are independent arms of the Government. 

I feel that this commitment should be addressed and this reassurance should come from the Government to you, Madam Speaker, that this is a very serious matter that has affected this House and this House cannot perform –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to the Member is that appropriation is the work of the Government, especially Parliament, not the Executive. By the time they are tempering with the budget – if there is anything to be changed – they should come back to the Floor of Parliament. There is no way the Executive can sit and start adjusting the budget of the country; it is not allowed. Otherwise, they would be taking the role of Parliament and that, actually, is contempt of Parliament, which is very bad.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much. Let me give way to my brother to further inform the minister and then, I conclude.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, hon. Odur. I think if we are to function together as the three arms of Government, with respect to the principle of separation of powers, it would be prudent for us to check one another while maintaining that respect as enshrined in the Constitution. 

The Constitution is very clear that the powers to appropriate are with us. All stakeholders in Government - the Executive and Members of Parliament - appropriate and pass the budget that fits the order of the day.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my brother is that the last Parliament passed the Budget for the Parliamentary Commission. So, it is not prudent for the people in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to alter or freeze or frustrate it because then, it brings a stalemate between the Executive and us, and that would not be good.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you. Let me conclude. I think my brothers have ably supported this point. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the roles of this Parliament is to appropriate. When we do appropriation, if there is anything that is supposed to be done, it must come back to this House. It is very disturbing that our committees cannot work. 

The other role is oversight but when you find the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cutting money coming to Parliament, it is disturbing. Now, if Parliament cannot do an oversight role, then what are we left with? Why are we here?

Yesterday, we passed a resolution in the Parliamentary Commission that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should never tamper with the budget of Parliament and the Judiciary. Let us have respect for separation of powers because for them to perform, they need Parliament. They are going to bring budgets and loans here but what will we use to facilitate Members to go and do the oversight role?

Government Chief Whip, we need action on this. The Prime Minister is part of the Parliamentary Commission and we agreed with her yesterday that this must stop. We need money in Parliament for us to be able to perform. Therefore, stop making Parliament a begging institution; we beg all the time and salaries delay because we are not given money. We cannot do the oversight role because we cannot be given money. Government Chief Whip, do you have something?

2.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, it is unfortunate that the work of Parliament cannot move smoothly because of such a situation. I just wanted to reassure colleagues that the leadership of the House has been engaging with Government and I know further engagements are going to happen, and we are in support of the leadership of the House because all these ministers are Members of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, we are going to work with you from the side of the Executive and see that we sort out these issues such that they do not happen again. Be assured of our support. We know you understand the challenges and once we have them, what is very important is communication – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We understand the issues that are there – the issues of COVID-19 - but let us not stifle the operations of Parliament. It is like we are handing over Parliament to the Executive. 

2.28
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point you are raising that Parliament should be enabled to do its work is very important. The Executive arm of Government has never, at any one time, wished to suppress the work of Parliament because it is very important for us to move together. 

The information I want to provide is that at the beginning of this financial year, all of us appreciated that we were going through the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic and the budgets of the different sectors of Government were suppressed, including our ministries. This was to enable us put more resources into fighting COVID-19, especially getting oxygen and other medical supplies. However, we implement the budget through the law. We have never flaunted the law. For instance – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baryomunsi, when you were cutting the monies, you did not come back to this House. Therefore, leave that aside.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, the law allows the Executive to spend up to 3 per cent and report to Parliament within four months. Beyond that, we bring a supplementary expenditure request here and that is why on the Order Paper, we have that supplementary request and that is provided for in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. That information I am sure of is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know the 3 per cent is not cutting. What we are complaining about is not the 3 per cent. We are complaining about freezing what was allocated to the Parliamentary Commission. The committees of Parliament cannot work. We gave out a loan and these people cannot report back because they have failed to go to the field. For you to be able to work, allow us to also work so that we work together. 

The Executive cannot bring a loan request and we fail to process because there is no money. The truth is that the money has been cut off. Let us not cover what cab seen by the naked eye.

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure as the Chairperson, Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation. Under Rule 179 of our Rules of Procedure, it is provided that the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation shall handle assurances as made on the Floor of Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the procedural matter on my communication? 

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Yes, Madam Speaker. Let me conclude. What is happening right is that individual members are writing to the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation, when the fact is that the committee can only work on assurances made on the Floor of Parliament.

Under rule 179(7), it is provided that, “The Speaker shall allot time for Members to raise specific Government undertakings and assurances made in their constituencies.” Having received very many letters addressed to me, I stand to raise a matter of procedure based on the following prayers:

    1. That you guide on how we should handle these letters so far written to us, naming assurances made in various constituencies;

    2. That your office allocates the time provided for under rule 179(7) so that Members can raise their assurances as made, promises and pledges, in their constituencies by the different Government ministries.

Madam Speaker, I beg that you allow me to inform you that hon. Okae Bob of Kwania North wrote a letter about the promised ferry – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, give those letters back to the Members. The Members will bring them and we shall give them time to present. The rules say that we should allot time to the Members, not to the chairperson. So we shall give them the time to bring their pledges, you capture them and you process them. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is on that note that I humbly request that the date and time of those pledges is released by your office so that these Members can proceed to utilise the same. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will do that. Please give the letters back to the Members. We will give them the time to present whatever pledges that were there. Matters of national importance.

MR MPUUGA: On the Order Paper, the LOP had a statement to make which is not reflected. Could we be allowed, with your indulgence, to consider under the Rules to amend, if we have space? That statement was well considered and accepted by the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition had asked for a slot to make a brief statement. We are giving you five minutes to make your brief statement on the paper that you have given us. Please go ahead and make your statement now. 

2.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With your kind indulgence, I will make this statement. Again, with your kind indulgence, I might use more than five minutes. But we shall limit ourselves to the time. 

The statement, I believe, has been uploaded on the platform for Members to follow. We sent copies to the Leader of Government Business and the Chief Whip. 

The statement relates to our position as the Opposition on the directives of the President on awarding contracts especially on roads and health facilities across the country to individuals and the UPDF. This issue is becoming dicey and is raising concerns across Government departments and the private sector. I have asked my shadow minister for works to read the statement on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you

2.38
MR YUSUF NSIBAMBI (FDC, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the interest of time, I will just make a brief statement that has been uploaded. I am sure you have had time to look at it. 

We are deeply concerned specifically about the involvement of the President of the Republic of Uganda in matters to do with awarding contracts. 

This practice is not only irregular but it is also illegal. In the first place, the President is informally meeting service providers at State House and issuing directives, commanding Government agencies, ministries, departments to enter into formal agreements with those service providers based on his whims and wishes. 

Whereas the President, as the Fountain of Honour, enjoys executive authority under the Constitution, the same must be exercised judiciously and within the confines of the law. What is happening is that the presidential directives contravene established law. 
 
Of recent, the President has issued out close to five directives and other general arbitrary directives. 

We have a letter dated l5 May 2021, where the President directed the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to enter into an agreement with a Chinese Company, Zhongmei Engineering Group, on a pre-financing arrangement for the construction of Kanoni-Misingi–Mityana Road.

We also have another letter dated 21 June 2021 where the President directed UNRA to enter into an agreement with Chongqing International Construction Corporation (CICO) on a pre-financing arrangement.

There is another letter dated 21 June 2021, for the Packwach Bridge. And another dated 29 July 2021. There is also a general letter issued in the month of August 2021, where the President wrote directing the Executive Director of UNRA to award contracts to three Chinese entities. 

What is surprising is that we are only looking at Chinese companies and the President giving directives to do with pre-financing. 

Madam Speaker, additionally, on l July 2021, the President directed the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Health that beginning this Financial Year 2021/2022, all contracts or projects for the construction of schools and health centres should be given to the Uganda Peoples' Defence Force (UPDF) Construction Brigade.

In a nutshell, this is not only arbitrary but abuse of office. We believe, with all due respect, the President has no mandate under his docket to do whatever he is doing. This is very dangerous for this country and for this House to just look on when the Fountain of Honour is abusing and breaching established laws.

That is why we stand here, Madam Speaker, to seek not only your indulgence but also the active participation of this House to stop this kind of conduct. It is unpalatable. It is illegal. It is procedurally wrong and improper. 

He is not only circumventing procurement laws but he is giving advantage to specific companies hailing from a specific country. This must be interrogated. 

When you look at the PPDA Act section 79, procurement methods and requirements are specified, specifically part 4 which I will highlight in the interest of time; there must be open bidding. You should not just go to State House. It must also follow international bidding requirements. It must be domesticated and you look at domestic bidding requirements. 

So, the quotation - direct procurement and everything else must go through a process. There must be no discrimination. There must be transparency, accountability and fairness. This is lacking in the process if you just go and meet the President in State House.

With regards to the UPDF’s engineering brigade for the construction of schools, we take exception to this kind of conduct. The UPDF, as a unit, should really go for open bidding like any other units.

So, the letter to the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education and Sports, directing that those agencies should really only contract with the UPDF, again – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you summarise, please? 

MR NSIBAMBI: I am summarising. It contravenes the law. 

The most important point for the House to consider is this pre-financing arrangement. These are loans. As President, you cannot guarantee or give out a loan. It must be cleared by this House, which is not the case. So, -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, just a correction on that. There is no loan that has ever been given out by the President. It is this House that approves loans. 

MR NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. But we are talking about pre-financing arrangements where you give a directive that a certain company should enter into contract without advance payment. 

So, we have a lot of unconstitutional issues with which we are uncomfortable. I, therefore, pray that the ministries where those directives are given, specifically; the Ministry of Works and Transport, the Ministry of Health and other agencies should stop taking those directives as if they are mandated under the law. I also pray that this House moves to advise His Excellency the President to stop that arbitrary conduct. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We are not debating that. The Leader of the Opposition, I thought you had delegated.

2.46
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Just to clarify the facts, since the statement is made, we shall require a response to the House by the ministries concerned, firstly on the issue of pre-financing. 

With due respect, pre-financing is indirect borrowing without Parliamentary approval. Pre-financing is a public debt to be paid at a future date. Under the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), it is a form of borrowing to which we would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and explain whether he is privy to the arrangement under pre-financing and simplifications to the attendant rules of the land. This includes situations where we have directives by the President to ministries to offer contracts to particular entities. The conditionality or directives should be debated by this House. 

We are raising a red flag because the World Bank itself has raised a red flag on some of the contractual arrangements to which it is even threatening to cancel funding. 

We ask that you direct the concerned ministries or ministers to come and offer a plausible and unequivocal statement to the House for a dual debate by both sides of the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will need a response by the Attorney-General on the issue of the Presidential directives. Also, I want you to be aware that when the President gives directives, it is not express. It is upon the technical people to make sure that you do the right thing. If the technical people do not do the right thing, then we will bring you to book. So, on the Presidential directives, give us a law that backs the President’s act. Present the proposed law to this House on Wednesday. 

We have a matter of national importance from hon. Elijah Okupa. Let us make it short. 

2.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise two matters of national importance. They relate to the Ministry of Health. It has come to my notice that the health workers have decided to connive with the people who do not want to get vaccinated against COVID-19. They have started selling the vaccination cards to people who have not been vaccinated. 

I have evidence here. This incident happened in Butaleja District, Bugalo Health III, Busaba Subcounty. Vaccination card number 000050 - the person who got vaccinated was asked to photocopy the original vaccination card. Then they wrote the person’s name on the photocopy and the original card is returned to the health officer. Here is the copy of the vaccination card. I have decided to cover the name of the person.

It is a serious matter which needs to be addressed. It is not only limited there. It is common in the East. I know of a group that is planning to go to Nigeria under a certain sect where my relative who has refused to be vaccinated is a member. She said they are going to be ordained in Nigeria. They have bought a number of cards illegally and yet, they have not received vaccination.

I want the Ministry of Health to take note of this and be alert at the airport or gateways for a group that is going to Nigeria to be ordained. This is going to cause problems to this country. In your communication, you asked the Members to produce their vaccination cards.

I want to lay a copy of this vaccination card on Table. The Ministry of Health should be able to take it up and sort out that matter in that health centre and that region.

Secondly and finally, -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before you move to the second one, since you know the team that is supposed to go to Nigeria, why don’t you direct us to them and we take action?

MR OKUPA: I am going to disclose that in confidence to the Ministry of Health and the security officials.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi, please, follow up on that. 

 MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI: I will, Madam Speaker. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The second one is on what is happening at Entebbe International Airport. The other day, His Excellency the President commissioned the lounge and also directed that the Government of Uganda takes over the COVID-19 testing. 

Unfortunately, most of us have travelled during this time and when you arrive at the airport, they take your sample and they release you to go to a hotel. They tell you not to leave the hotel until you get the results, which are sent to you either via your email address or telephone number.

However, what is happening at Entebbe International Airport – in fact, what happened last night was that people’s samples were taken and they were left to wait for eight hours. Here is the picture. Let us move it around. People crowded at the lounge and that also will exacerbate the spread. 

Madam Speaker, so –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byarugaba, welcome back. While you were away, we agreed that everybody should wear a mask and we also thank God for your life; that you are back on your feet.

On the same note, we would also like to welcome back Gen. Ali. We missed you a lot. We are thankful to God that you are okay now. Thank you. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you for those kind words. I also would like to thank my colleagues, especially those who knew that I was indisposed and offered fantastic and very many prayers. I have been indisposed since 16 January to date. It has not been easy for me but here I am and I would like to thank everybody. I would like to particularly thank the Speaker’s office and the Clerk’s office that intervened to save my life. Thank you.

The information is that I travelled last week from the hospital and I used a late flight. I was with my attendant, who also happens to be my wife. We arrived at 4.00 a.m. and I was herded - I have got one jab and I still have to take another one because of obvious reasons. I had to undergo a mandatory test and I agreed to that.

However, I was herded directly from where you collect your luggage with armed army men. I tried to object and they shoved me. I even pulled out my card and said please, I am a law abiding citizen and I know what I am doing. I am going to go for the test. They still insisted but I refused to enter. They use a very old, ram shackled and very dirty vehicle; they huddled me in. I tried to object but they huddled me in and I ended up in a very squalid and cold place where they carry out testing.

That place is next to Lido Beach, it doesn’t have toilet facilities and I was there for four hours in very cold conditions. It even rained and my luggage was wet. It was so bad and I imagined those people I travelled with; they were very many students. They could be backpackers from Turkey.

I wondered; if I could be that angered, what about those visitors? What were they seeing? It is high time - the information I would like to give is that it is such a terrible situation at the airport and it needs urgent intervention by the Government. Otherwise we are mistreating and even scaring away the few would-be visitors to our beloved country. I thank you for the opportunity.

MR OKUPA: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, as the economy is trying to recover, tourists have started coming back but when they get this type of treatment, we shall take a long time to recover economically. Let us have a human face when handling this matter.

Madam Speaker, if it pleases you, would the minister respond? However, the committee responsible must also have a spot check on this. These are the matters of importance that I feel I should raise and should be addressed by the Government urgently.

Also allow me to thank you for the support the Parliamentary Commission gave to Gen. Ali and hon. Byarugaba. I personally followed it up and we thank God that they have come back bouncing. May God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take note of the concerns that have been raised by hon. Elijah Okupa and supplemented by hon. Byarugaba. 

On behalf of the Ministry of Health, I would like to first apologise for those incidents where our colleague, hon. Byarugaba and other travellers, have been mistreated or poorly handled as they came in at our testing facility at Entebbe International Airport.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I get a clarification? Is “Test and Fly” our Government testing facilities?

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, that is where I am going now. I am -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like you to first withdraw that statement “our testing facilities”. That is not our testing facility.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, at that time, those who were carrying out the services were neither from the Government nor the Ministry of Health. That is where I was going next. That is why, because of so many complaints, the Government decided to take over these services.

As I have said, a team led by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister came, inspected and ensured that services are put in place and are carried out by the Ministry of Health and other Government agencies.

As of now, the Ministry of Health has improved the services and as I speak -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kawooya, before you proceed, I would like to ask you. When did the Government take over the testing?

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, the opening and official take over was done last week by -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As of today, the same ‘Test and Fly’ are doing the testing. 

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, I am giving a factual statement. This morning, because of the concerns, a team from the ministry left for the airport. I got in touch with the leader of the team - the Director General of Health Services - as I was coming here and he told me that he is still engaging the team that are at the airport.

I would like to pledge that you give us time next week and we come back here to find out what has come out from the investigating team that has left for the airport. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if we do not have correct information, it is not good for us to get up and talk in anticipation. I would like you to come with a write up; how did ‘Test and Fly’ get this job to do work for the people? Who are they? Why don’t we have the testing done by the Government? We do not mind testing; let Government do the testing. If we are in a ramshackle place, then we will know that as Government, this is our position.

However, we cannot entrust people’s lives to private people. We need a write up on that. We will send a team there to monitor and see what is happening. However, we need a report from the ministry.

MS KAWOOYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. This is the request that I made; the team is there today. We shall come back next week with actual information and where we stand.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would like a report on Tuesday regarding that issue. Do you have information to give?

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, he is part of the team that has been monitoring –(Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Elijah Okupa for raising this important matter.

I rise to give supplementary information to the Ministry of Health.

On the first issue raised by hon. Elijah, it is criminal for a health worker or any other person to falsify information and provide certificates for COVID-19 vaccination, when he or she has not been vaccinated. The Government will seriously investigate this matter and this should not be allowed. If you have any information, like you said about members of the Parliamentary Sports Club who will be going, kindly give it to us and we will investigate. Otherwise, it should not happen.

Secondly, in case there are members who are still hesitant, I would like to assure you that the COVID-19 vaccines we give to people are safe and efficacious. There should be no reason whatsoever for anyone to fear being vaccinated.

On the issue of testing for COVID-19, the Government has been testing in-coming passengers from countries, which we classify as Class Two. They are 10 in number and that is where the risk and burden of COVID-19 has been very high. They include India, U.S.A, Kenya among others.

The Government, through the Ministry of Health partnered with the private laboratory service providers like Test and Fly Laboratory –(Interjections)– to provide testing at the airport and they have been testing. However, due to the challenges hon. Byarugaba has narrated, a decision was taken by the Government to take over –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. After your wise guidance about testing for COVID-19 from the airport, you ruled that the ministry should come back on Tuesday with a report. 

Secondly, the minister said there is a team from the ministry, which is already at Entebbe. When the Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance stood up, she again said that the minister is part of the team at Entebbe.

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding right, after you already ruled that the House should wait –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not raise a point of order against a point of procedure. (Applause)

MR OKOT: Madam Speaker, you ruled that the minister brings the report on Tuesday, on the matter which is burning almost everybody. Otherwise, when you go, you get embarrassed because you do not know the people extorting money and embarrassing very many people. We want very clear information.

Madam Speaker, you have already ruled on the matter. Therefore, are we proceeding right to continue allowing more information yet you have already given a directive?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Baryomunsi, we need a report. Since the minister said you are part of the team, we need a report on Tuesday, covering the following. One, how did you acquire the Test and Fly Laboratory, as the best institution to test our people. Two, why can’t the Government do this, now that you have opened up that Government does - Why do we have two institutions doing it? Give us a report. Stop giggling there. 

Three, I would like you to interest yourself in the people who are coming back to Uganda. How long do they take? They test and keep them there yet the test results are sent on the phone. Why don’t you allow them to go?

We are not blaming you – hon. Anifa, learn to listen to what people are saying. It is not you who is testing. We want to help Ugandans. This is why you are there. Therefore, we are asking for a report to help your ministry to work. Let us not defend things that cannot be defended. If I gave you my own experience, you would not believe it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: My understanding is that Parliament needs to get information but if it is not interested, that is another issue. However, I am not part of the committee –(Interjections) – I am trying to explain.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not that Parliament needs information. Ugandans want better services.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes. I beg that you allow me to inform Parliament on what is going on.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my brother, Dr Chris Baryomunsi. With due respect, we epitomise the representation of all Ugandans here. Not only do we travel as individuals but also other Ugandans. 

We are talking about the inconvenience created at the airport, not only to you –(Interjections)– let us go slow on this. This is the issue people are presenting. We are saying: we have travelled to other countries and seen the procedure. In those countries, either you test an individual using the rapid test and give results within 20 or 30 minutes, as the person waits for their baggage in a clean area. Or, you refer them to their residence and send the results –(Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have made a ruling. A report must be presented to this House on Tuesday. Anything you want to bring up do so on Tuesday, when the report is being presented. Hon. Nsamba, keep your cool.

MR NSAMBA: On procedure - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which procedure? Okay.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, we passed money here for port health COVID-19 laboratories when COVID-19 started. When the minister is coming here on Tuesday, she should report to us on the money we allocated to the Ministry of Health to establish the port health facilities at Mutukula, other borders and the airport. We expect to get a state of the art laboratory at the airport. Why are we going for Test and Fly Laboratory? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will be in the report.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. This House represents two sides; the Government and the Opposition side. Of course, there is the side of the backbenchers and the frontbench on both sides.

When we are debating here, the whole country is watching and so, it is important that both sides be given room to present their sides –(Interjections)– I am raising a point of procedure. Are we proceeding well, when the Government side is not given a chance? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Honourable members, when you are speaking,
we listen. Why don’t you want other people to talk?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, please.

MAJ.GEN. MUHWEZI: I would like to know why when I or the Government side speaks, you all stand up but when you speak, we listen. Why don’t you let me make my point? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, please, leave the General to finish his statement. Can you keep quiet?

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: I think it is important that we give each other respect –(Interjections)– yes, because I am a Member of Parliament like you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your procedural matter?

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: What I am saying is that after you ruled that a report be brought on Tuesday, Members again rose and debated the matter when our side had not been allowed to finish. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I have made a ruling to that effect. Honourable members, I made a ruling that we need a report on Tuesday. However, Minister for Security, you should not expect me to pick a person who is seated. I pick Members who stand up. I have already told the minister to bring a document, which he is going to do on Tuesday.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I rise on a point of procedure, Madam Speaker. I have been in this House since 2006. The procedural matter I am raising is: Members raise matters, which are very urgent like the situation at Entebbe International Airport, as hon. Okupa has raised. 

As Government side, we already have answers to address some of the questions being raised. So, isn’t it procedurally correct that you always find time to allow Government to respond to issues where we have answers instead of making us appear as if we cannot respond? I am saying this because that can allow us address issues, which are current there and then. The report would come only as an update later next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked for a report to that effect because whatever is being said is contradicting. I travelled yesterday and I know what I am talking about. 

3.16
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Members who have already raised matters of national importance. The matter I am going to raise is actually related to what they have been saying. The matter is about Civil Aviation Authority; take note that I am member of NRM.

Madam Speaker, there is gross mismanagement at the Civil Aviation Authority. I am not going to talk about the health issue because it has already been talked about. It is a known fact that Civil Aviation Authority collects parking fees from people who drive to the airport and long-term parking fees from travellers who go away for some time, leaving their vehicles behind.

However, when the collections for the tollgate and the long-term parking are made, the information we have is that the directors at the Civil Aviation Authority just go with a bag, the way you manage a pool table and pick the money that is supposed to be banked on the Consolidate Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have evidence to that effect?

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I said that it is alleged. I have all the allegations and I am going to lay what I have on the Table. When you talk about management of staff of the Civil Aviation Authority - there are erroneous deductions on payments to staff - money for leave and so on. Staff at the Civil Aviation Authority are crying. You find Shs60,000 or Shs70,000 being deducted and yet, all these deductions are erroneous. The top management is aware of what is happening but they are not addressing the situation.

I have the following prayers to present, in respect of Civil Aviation Authority:

    i. We request –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, in 2019, we amended the law and we did away with the Civil Aviation Authority and therefore, it does not exist. What we have is Uganda Civil Aviation Authority. The clarification I seek from my brother, hon. Silwany, is whether that body that Parliament did away with is actually still operating illegally or actually he meant the new body that the law be put in place? (Laughter)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, I am talking about the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority and thank you for correcting that record. Anyhow, I have the following prayers to put forward:

    i. The Minister of Transport and Works and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development conduct forensic audits or follow up the activities and what is happening at the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority in regard to the management of the tollgate, to collection from parking fees to management of staff and the deductions being made on staff payments;

    ii. The Auditor-General interests himself and does an immediate audit on the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority so we can we get that report because if this delays, Ugandans who are working there, the travelers and taxpayers will continue to be injured with the actions of the management of Uganda Civil Aviation Authority –(Interruption)

MR KIMOSO: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I wonder whether we are proceeding right with the allegations put forward by my brother.

The Auditor-General who is an officer of Parliament audits this institution and the audits have been going on. It may look indifferent to go ahead to do that, when this institution is annually audited and considering that these allegations do not have substantive evidence tabled –(Interjections) I am on procedure and I am protected by the Speaker.

Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether we are proceeding well to allow Parliament to entertain allegations without material evidence tabled before it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority has had a number of issues. I am referring it to the Committee of COSASE. We shall take further actions as other allegations come in. The COSASE will report on the allegations that you are talking about, honourable member.

MR SILWANY: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

3.23
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which concerns the Ministry of Education and Sports. A week ago, the Ministry of Education and Sports, at the Uganda Media Centre, read out a new policy for teachers in Uganda, where they are phasing out Grade III teachers and those with diplomas.   
 
However, as a member of the Committee on Education and Sports – where I have spent some time – we have been asking this ministry to table this policy so that before they implement it, we look and determine whether it is possible. As we talk now, according to them, they have made Shimoni Demonstration School one of the first universities. I know what Shimoni Demonstration School is. 

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that before any implementation of this new system – qualification for teachers – let this policy be tabled before Parliament and the relevant committee looks at the importance, weakness and SWOT analysis of what is going to take place. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, the policy will be presented to the Committee on Education and Sports and then the committee will bring it to Parliament.

MR SSWEUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Hon. Aogon rose_) We are on matters of national importance and I do not see you on my list.

3.24
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of national importance. 

On 6 October 2021, the security officers of Uganda Wildlife Authority shot dead one person in Bukwo District. In addition to that, yesterday evening, the same rangers shot a certain man, aged 18, and we even expect him to die because right now, he is not talking. Last year, they also shot two people just within my constituency. They got one man milking his cow and shot him. Another one was shot while he was running.

Last week, I went to my constituency and called all the leaders from all the subcounties that border the forest. We carried out an audit and found out that about 50 people have been killed by the forest rangers within a span of four years. About 10 women have been raped –(Interjections)- and those are the ones that have declared. You know some women even hide. About 50 people are limping: they have bullets inside their bodies. I have a report and I will bring it here.

Madam Speaker, today, I would like to be guided by the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, together with the Minister of Internal Affairs, on whether these forest rangers have got powers to shoot and kill. When you look at other security officers such as the police officers, when they shoot and kill, they are prosecuted. 

I have even seen Uganda People’s Defence Forces officers being prosecuted and sentenced to death. However, these ones have been killing and raping at will. In fact, one of the officers by the name of Hanifu Waiswa, who killed two people last year, recently also attempted to kill one of the forest officers and that is when they realised that the man had become dangerous. That is when they arrested him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your message has been delivered.

MR CHEMONGES: Madam Speaker, my prayer is to know whether the forest rangers have the right to shoot and kill and whether the animals are more important than our people. Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, they do not have a right to kill and the animals are not more important than human beings. 

What can we do, hon. Muhwezi?

3.29
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Madam Speaker, I am going to inform the relevant ministry and the security agencies to follow up this matter. Definitely, there is no armed officer who has a right to kill at will. Therefore, if they shoot and kill, they will be held responsible to explain and the law will take its course.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need the action you will have taken on that.

MAJ. GEN.  (RTD) MUHWEZI: The relevant ministries will come back to respond to this report made by the honourable member.

3.30
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for granting me leave to raise this matter under rule 49. This matter is by way of reminder as well. The political leadership of the newly created administrative units – the subcounties and town councils – have never been properly facilitated to take office. The Ministry of Local Government has not been clear on how these new administrative offices are supposed to operate.

In the entire Lango subregion – and I believe in the entire country – the ministry has opted to selectively identify some town councils and advance money for them to operate. We now have a looming threat by the political actors – elected by the people but cannot exercise their political authority – threatening to drag the Government to court because it is this Government that brought a motion to this House, accompanied by the certificate of financial implications, that they were ready to create those administrative units.

The same Government organised elections and people were called to participate. Now, they cannot provide. Every time this matter is raised here, we do not get clear answers.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that – after this, I will invite and beg your indulgence that you allow Members to give testimony of what is happening. We can give it five minutes later –(Interjection)- my brother, I will give you after.

My prayer is that this is a serious matter and the Government cannot run away from the responsibility to finance and provide an enabling environment for political leaders to exercise their authority. Otherwise, it has become a big problem to Members of Parliament: every time we go to the constituency, we are being asked about this matter. 

Today, we would prefer that the Government clarifies whether they are ready to operationalise these administrative units and if not, a motion should be brought here and we reverse it and they take care of the consequences and damages they have caused to the members of the public.

Secondly, in my constituency as well, we have had a serious hailstorm, which has affected the two subcounties of Etek and Agali. At Olweny Rice Irrigation Scheme that is housed there, a number of rice farmers have been affected. I would like to invite the attention of the Government to address this matter by providing the appropriate relief. 

However, I would like to add one prayer; that we need an audit of these questions that we present here. We raise matters of national importance about these hailstorms my brother, hon. Tayebwa, says Government will act; but you wait for six months and Government does not act. 

Can he assure us that even for the last three months, you can come here and give us an audit of Members who have raised a matter and how Government has addressed them? 

The information I have is that it appears like in some places, they act faster and in others, they do not. This is not a proper way of how Government should execute duties. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He will give you an audit of the areas that have been acted upon. I must appreciate, you acted on my area. I can testify to that. 
The issue of administrative units was raised and has been raised several times. We are supposed to get a response from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and local government. What is the way forward?

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Victoria Busingye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. That question was raised here about a month ago, and the Ministry of Local Government submitted a supplementary budget of Shs 29 billion to cater for the 774 units that are still not yet operational. 

Some issues arose that the ministry is putting right so that this problem is solved once and for all. Together with the question of structures for the 10 cities that are already operational, the Minister of Public Service is about to complete the proposed structures to be tabled to Cabinet for approval. Then to Parliament for final touches. 

I would therefore request that since the Minister of Public Service is not around and we were supposed to have a meeting with the Nakasongola group, but I opted out because of this, I beg that you give us two weeks to come up with a tangible and final solution to this matter for Members to carry back to their constituencies. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is that supplementary in this schedule 1? 

MS BISINGYE: The supplementary budget is to cater for the start-up fund and all other funds that so far have been given out, like the COVID-19 Fund and the start-up for the Parish Development Model.

I beg for two weeks to liaise with our sister ministry and we come up with a tangible response - (Interjections)- we shall come - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, this is an inter-ministerial issue that must be handled by local government with finance and others. She has asked for two weeks. That is not a long time. We have been waiting for this. Let us give it the last chance of two weeks. 

Honourable minister, we expect to hear from you in two weeks’ time. It is a very serious issue. It affects the whole country and we are not going to continue waiting. It has not only taken one month; it has taken a long time. Since we started the 11th Parliament, this thing has been raised. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTERS ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK 2-4 NOVEMBER 2021

3.42
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, you have always heard this type of statement from the Prime Minister who is not available today. I am now standing in for her as the Deputy Prime Minister. 

Normally, we start with statement of business by the Leader of Government Business. Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament requires the Leader of Government Business to make a statement in the House regarding the Government business of the succeeding week. 

I am, therefore, submitting the following statement of government business for the succeeding week, that is, 2-4 November 2021. 

There are three Bills:

    1. The Competing Bills, 2021
    2. The Animal Feeds Bill, 2021
    3. Veterinary Practitioners Bill, 2021

I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. The minister has given us a report of the proceeding week and this will be introduced in the next week. I urge you Members to prepare for what the Prime Minister has presented. You may take your seat, Prime Minister.

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for indicating to us what will be placed before us next week. I think that would be a better mode of operation. I would like to thank you for that. 

Would it not be appropriate, Madam Speaker, if the same Bills were laid before this House? This is because in his presentation, he is indicating the Bills. Members of Parliament would be going through as he comes next week. 

Are we proceeding well that the Prime Minister just reads and does not give us the same? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is what he is going to present next week for the first reading. We are proceeding very well. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have a supplementary schedule number 1. 

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a Supplementary Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2021/2022 covering two items. First is the Supplementary Schedule 1 within the three per cent legal limit amounting to Shs 1.343 trillion. Secondly, Supplementary Schedule 2 for prior approval by Parliament amounting to Shs 2.476 trillion. The total supplementary under Schedule 1, therefore, is Shs 3.819 trillion.

I beg to clarify that the question earlier put about financing the new town councils and subcounties is adequately catered for under this schedule. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what about Parliament? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Parliament is actually a statutory expenditure. It does not come under supplementary appropriation. It is a matter that can be handled separately. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just say you will handle it. Members, as required under rule 153(3) of the Rules of Procedure, the Supplementary Schedule is supposed to be referred to the different sectoral committees. As prayed by the minister, I will suspend the rule on referring the supplementary schedule to the relevant sectoral committees such that we handle this budget only from the Committee on Budget under rule 172(3) because it is an emergency. Since all the chairpersons of sectoral committees are Members of the Committee on Budget, they can give their inputs there. 

So, this supplementary budget is referred to the Committee on Budget. The committee should report back to the House in 10 days. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DEGAZETTE WAMALE CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE, KIULA CENTRAL RESERVE AND BAJO CENTRAL FOREST RESERVE IN KAYUNGA DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have councillors from Bbaale, Galilaya Subcounty in Kayunga. They are represented in Parliament by hon. Charles Tebandeke and hon. Idah Nantaba. They have come to observe the proceedings that we are about to start. You are most welcome, honourable councillors. (Applause) This is your Parliament. We thank you for sending us your Members of Parliament. Thank you for joining us. 

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure, which states:
“
    1. Subject to subrule (5) of this rule, a Member shall not refer to any particular matter, which is sub-judice.

    2. A matter shall be considered sub-judice if it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, the discussion of such matter is likely to prejudice its fair determination.

2 (c) Civil proceedings shall be deemed to be active when arrangements for hearing such as setting down matters for hearing have been made, until the proceedings are ended by judgment or settlement or withdrawal; or 

4. 	A member alleging that a matter is sub-judice shall provide justification to show that sub-rules (2) and (3) are applicable; 
5. 	The Speaker shall make a ruling as to whether a matter is sub-judice or not before debate or investigations can continue.”

The Motion that the honourable member wants to propose is for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to degazette Wamale Central Forest Reserve, Kiula Central Forest Reserve and Bajo Central Forest Reserve, all in Kayunga District. 

The NFA ran to court seeking the nullification of many land titles that had been issued out of these central forest reserves to private individuals fraudulently. This is because investigations were done. NFA ran to court to repossess – It is because sugarcane plantation growers had started invading the forest reserves and taking part of the land. 

Because NFA ran to court, those matters are still before court and they have not yet been decided. I want to lay evidence of the same court cases before Mukono High Court that pertain to the subject land where NFA is seeking court to nullify these titles that were issued to these land grabbers or private individuals who have gone ahead to encroach. 

When this matter came to the Floor of Parliament last year, Parliament could not proceed because I sought Parliament to intervene, by way of sending the minister to the locus, to stop the earth moving equipment that were putting down the forests but the Speaker then could not help because the matter was before courts of law.

As we are wait for the court to decide, a Member of Parliament comes to the Floor of Parliament seeking Parliament to degazette the same forest reserves when NFA is spending Government money in trying to secure this land for purposes of environmental protection. 

Are we, therefore, procedurally moving well if we allow the degazetement of forest reserves for which we are trying and putting in a lot of efforts to protect and repossess? (Applause) 

Allow me to lay on Table evidence that the cases are still in court and they have not yet been decided. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have a look at the documents? 

MR ANTHONY AKOL:  Madam Speaker, I got confused when you were talking about the people who are in the gallery from the constituency to observe what happens on the Floor of Parliament. You said that the representatives of the people are here. 

Surprisingly, one person wants to present the petition that came from his people on the Floor of Parliament but the other one is stopping him. What I do not understand here is -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, let us respect each other. Listen to each other.

MR AKOL: What I do not understand is that in the Tenth Parliament, we had the same confusion. I have a memory of that struggle on the Floor of Parliament on the same issue. 

We are saying the Government should degazette - and yet you are saying the Government went to court - if it were people who went to court, I would understand the confusion. 

Madam Speaker, we want to direct the Government to degazette and it is the Government that went to court. Therefore, where is the complication? I do not understand this.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure arising from the motion, which was about to be moved by a Member. 

This motion has not yet been moved and it is a fact that this issue came before the Tenth Parliament. I wonder whether it would not be procedurally right for the House to allow you to look into this in detail. Otherwise, the issue of forest reserves is very serious that it must be considered by this House. We have people who have settled on them and they have nowhere to go. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to consult further on this matter and then give us appropriate information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are already debating on a motion that has not been moved. The prerogative is for the Speaker to determine whether it is sub-judice or not. 
Honourable members, allow the motion to be moved, pending the ruling of the Speaker. We will determine the merits of it because we do not know the contents in it. Allow it to be moved. If we determine that it is contempt, then we shall not pass the motion.

Honourable members, Parliament does not degazette. It is the Government to degazette. We are going to ask the Government to ensure that they go through the normal process of degazetting.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is that we have a colleague here, who has said that he does not understand. Are we proceeding well to continue presenting the motion, with a colleague who said that he does not understand properly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who said?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Hon. Anthony Akol.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have made a ruling. Can we move the motion?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, I obviously agree with your ruling but to make us appreciate this matter fully, hon. Aida Nantaba must present the facts that are relevant for us to decide between what is in the motion and what she is complaining about. We must know the parties in court and which court. What are the particulars of the issues? What is the dispute before court so that we can compare with what the motion will be presenting? Until we have those facts here, then we can appreciate -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is why I am saying that we move the motion and then defer the debate. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Can she first give us that information before we can -

3.58
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all agree that when we talk about forest reserves, there is a lot of interest, as you can see from the House.

I recall very well that in the Tenth Parliament, hon. Nantaba laboured to present these issues. It is a fact and she is speaking about the same. What we do not know is whether the same land titles being referred to in the court are the same land titles that the honourable member is presenting?

I would like to propose that we allow the Member to present his motion. It is up to us to see whether there will be debate or not. Otherwise, the Speaker will rule on it. It has already been mentioned that it is the Government that went to court. 

Madam Speaker, let us hear the prayers of the Member. In the prayers, if he is urging the Government, then the Government should come and say this matter is in court. This is simple and it is what I want to state.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tebandeke, can you present your motion? 

MR NAMBESHE: The rule of sub-judice is crystal clear, as day follows night. Therefore, you cannot debate or deal with a matter, which is in court. 

Secondly and most importantly, the National Forest and Tree Planting Act, 2003 gives powers - and it uses the word “shall” in sections 7 and 8. The role to degazette or gazette central forest reserves or forests is a preserve of the minister and the minister, by law, is the one to move a motion to degazette or gazette forests, not a Member of Parliament or any other person. That is the Act of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know why you are insisting on the same thing I have ruled on.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Honourable colleagues, the Speaker has made a ruling and once a ruling is made, the rules are very clear on how we can challenge the ruling of the Speaker. I request that we respect the ruling of the Speaker and then move on from there. However, we cannot keep debating the ruling of the Speaker without challenging it. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tebandeke –(Interjection) No.

4.02
MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present the motion, allow me to inform this House that I was not in the Tenth Parliament but I have come to know that on 24 February 2015 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Present your motion.

MR TEBANDEKE: I have come to know that on 24 February 2015, the first title on Bajo Forest Reserve was produced, when hon. Nantaba was the state minister for lands. (Applause) 

I am here to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to de-gazette Wamale, Kiula and Bajo Central Forest Reserves in Kayunga District for human settlement and industrial parks moved under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda:

“WHEREAS currently, Government has gazetted 506 central forest reserves in Uganda, three of which namely; Wamale Central Forest Reserve, Kiula Central Forest Reserve and Bajo Central Forest Reserve are located in Bbaale and Galiraya subcounties in Bbaale Constituency in Kayunga District;

AWARE THAT Wamale, Kiula and Bajo Central Forest Reserves have a combined acreage of 6,625 acres;

NOTING THAT land constituting Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves have been heavily settled on by residents, numbering about 70,000 households, resulting in the establishment of four trading centres, seven parishes and 29 villages in the two subcounties;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has issued land titles to residents on land belonging to Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves, who continue occupying the said land as lawful occupants and have established communities, schools, hospitals and places of worship; 

RECOGNISING THAT due to increased urbanisation coupled with the availability of agricultural output that can be used as raw materials in agro-processing industries, the land currently occupied by Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves in Kayunga District is suitable for establishing industrial parks, which will in turn create more jobs, ease accessibility of land for investments, introduce new research, technologies and skills development as well as boost Uganda’s exports;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT Kayunga District, where Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves are located, is a densely populated district with a total population of 368,062 as found by the National Population and Housing Census, 2014 and a total land mass of 158,800 hectares, which cannot ably sustain the ever growing population in the district, resulting in increased land conflicts, especially in the subcounties of Bbaale, Galiraya, Kayonza and Kitimbwa subcounties;

CONCERNED THAT due to the high population density in Kayunga District, land belonging to Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves have been heavily and irreversibly degraded, making the areas gazetted as forest reserves, in title with little or no tree cover to make the forest reserve viable; 

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT unless the land belonging to Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves is de-gazetted to allow human settlement, the 70,000 households currently occupying that land will continue having no security of tenure on the land and the continued land wrangles and land evictions in the district are likely to continue unabated;

COGNISANT THAT Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves can only be de-gazetted by the Government through presenting a motion for a resolution of Parliament in accordance with sections 7 and 8 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, upon satisfaction of various other requirements, including providing alternative land for the establishment of a new forest reserve as well as carrying out an environmental assessment; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this House that the Minister responsible for Water and Environment considers de-gazetting Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves in Kayunga District for human settlement and establishment of industrial parks.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Amos Lugoloobi, hon. Nsanja, hon. Silwany, hon. Patrick and hon. Sarah. Would you like to speak to your motion? Who is saying “Procedure?”

Mr rauben arinaitwe: According to the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, section 8 –

The Deputy Speaker: You are now going to the substance of the matter. 

Mr arinaitwe: When you make a resolution for de-gazetting, you have to, at the same time, make a resolution –

The Deputy Speaker: First mention your name.

Mr arinaitwe: I am Rauben Arinaitwe –

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Rauben, you are going to the substance of the motion. We have not allowed a debate on the motion. I know it is your maiden speech. 

Mr arinaitwe: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

The Deputy Speaker: Can you speak to your motion? Members, let us first finish this then I guide you. 

Mr tebandeke: Thank you, Madam Speaker –

The Deputy Speaker: And be brief.

Mr tebandeke: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to give in my justification for de-gazetting of Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves all located in Bbaale and Galiraya subcounties in Bbaale Constituency, Kayunga District, Bugerere.

I am the directly elected Member of Parliament for Bbaale Constituency who knows the challenges that the constituency is undergoing in reference to land wrangles, grabbing, forestry aspects and any would-be likelihood of such circumstances.

Kayunga District Local Government leadership; the District Council Executive of 2016-2021 on the 11th day of May 2021 - before I was elected a Member of Parliament, that is in the previous regime – under minute number 534/KDC/05/2020-2021 recommended to Parliament of Uganda to de-gazette Bajo Central Forest Reserve to settle the excess population of Bbaale and Galiraya subcounties. This was followed by the write-up of the acting chairperson of the district recommending the same to the line ministries of Water and Environment, Local Government and Lands. 

The acting chairperson of the district is with us in the gallery and his writings are here. Madam Speaker, allow me to lay the evidence.

The Deputy Speaker: What are you laying?

Mr tebandeke: On 13th – 

The Deputy Speaker: First read what you are laying on the Table.

Mr tebandeke: Madam Speaker, what I am laying is the council resolution of the last regime (2016 to 2021) recommending that Bajo Central Forest Reserve be gazette for settlement. I am also laying the recommendation letter from the acting chairperson to the line ministries of Water and Environment, Local Government and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, on 13 and 16 October 2021, the subcounty local government councils of Galiraya and Bbaale respectively held a meeting with all LC I and II chairpersons, parish councillors and the respective district councillors. That meeting resolved to urge this Parliament to subdue to the resolution of degazetting Bajo, Kiula and Wamale central forest reserves, which are only in existence by myth because by observation, they are no longer forest reserves.

Madam Speaker, in the gallery, we have the area district and parish councillors and some of the LC I and II chairpersons representing different villages. I beg that you allow them to wave to the House.

Madam Speaker, allow me to also lay the minutes of the two consecutive meetings held by the district and subcounty leaderships. 

Bajo, Wamale and Kiula central forest reserves started being encroached on as far back as 2010 by people who had been affected by the Bududa landslides. Some of these people came from Mbale in an area called Namatesi and encroached on this vacant forest reserve. They settled on it and have even formed up different trading centres like Bududa Trading Centre in Kisalizi, in Galiraya Subcounty -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you summarise?

MR TEBANDEKE: As I summarise, allow me inform the House that the three forest reserves in mention have 21 villages, which are all settled on by these people. They have seven parishes and four trading centres. These form the core reasons for tabling the Motion to degazette these central forest reserves.

The parishes in mention are Mugongo, with three villages - Mugongo A and B or Mugongo East and West; Giira, Nakitokolo Parish, with three villages and Misaanga Parish with three villages, all situated on Bajo Central Forest Reserve.

Madam Speaker, we have five more parishes, which are located on Wamale and Kiula Central Forest Reserve. These parishes include Namayuge with Baizo or Mpalabule Trading Centre, Katayigwa and Bajo.

We have Kasokwe Parish with Kirubo as an LC, Kasokwe Trading Centre, Baghdad and Kinamawanga, all situated on Wamale Central Forest Reserve.

We have Kirasa Parish in Galiraya with eight villages on Kiula Central Forest Reserve and these are: Kiula, Sobya, Kirasa, Galiraya, Kyamuletere, Kiago, Kisalizi and Nakakola villages.

Madam Speaker, it is this very land that the local residents are settled on and where agriculture activities are being done. It is the same land where roads are constructed by UNRA for example, the Dagada Road, which is approximately 33.5 Kilometres; it goes across the central forest reserve and connects up different parishes and subcounties. Some settlers and some residents are already using the same land for burial and other cultural activities.

Madam Speaker, allow me to inform you and the entire House that these central forest reserves, given the small land in the central region, can as well be used for the establishment of an industrial park. 

I call upon Members from the central region to support this Motion so that we do not miss this chance. They should welcome it so that these central forest reserves are degazzeted and we establish an industrial park there to increase and boost employment opportunities and country’s GDP, among others.

In the interest of time, allow me, Madam Speaker, to pose two guiding questions to this House: can we mobilise ourselves and you escort me to Bbaale and Galiraya to chase away all those residents that are settled in those forest reserves? Alternatively, can you turn a merciful eye and ear to help me degazette these forest reserves so that we lawfully settle our people there peacefully and amicably? I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.19
MR PATRICK NSANJA (NRM, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Ntenjeru South, which is situated in Kayunga. We have three constituencies in Kayunga District. The subject matter is situated in Bbaale Constituency as has just been presented by the area Member of Parliament.

I would like to thank hon. Tebandeke, for representing his people and presenting their issue on the Floor of Parliament. I take the honour to thank colleagues here for the usual support and mandate. 

Madam Speaker, I hold various elective positions in this House, the latest two being the team captain of Parliament of Uganda Football Club and Secretary of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus but I have always gone through all of them unopposed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations.

MR NSANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Motion before us is to urge Government to degazette these forest reserves. First, there is a procedure, which we know, as Members of Parliament but we are urging Government - I thought I would emphasise that. 

In the prayer, in the last paragraph, if I can reiterate, reads: “Now, therefore, be it resolved by this House that the Minister for Water and Environment considers degazetting Wamale, Kiula and Bajo central forest reserves in Kayunga District for human settlement and establishment of industrial parks.” 

If you can allow me take you through the discoveries in Kayunga District; the district has been in the lime light for a long period for land conflicts and because of lack of a secure tenure over the land, this has been the biggest cause of conflicts.

Madam Speaker, gazetting of Kiula, Wamale and Bajo forest reserves, which are already heavily encroached by thousands of residents for a long time without land titles, escalates the land conflicts in the district. As such, a few residents claiming rightful ownership of the same land dispute the fact that it is a forest reserve.

The act of degazetting the said forest reserve in Kayunga District will not only promote economic justice for all –(Interjections)- sorry, yes, for all of us are opposed to the injustice being promoted by the selective issuing of land titles in the said forest reserves given to a few individuals.

Chapter 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees promotion and protection of the fundamental and other human rights and freedoms for all Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, the District Local Government is limited with options, given that the area is densely populated with a rapid population growth rate. This leaves the district without land to resettle the thousands of residents, whose livelihood is now at stake.

As I summarise, the issue of degazzetting the forest reserves, is a step forward in settling both the current and the future land conflicts in the district by allowing local residents to acquire secure land ownership. Honourable members, as the people of Kayunga, it is indeed true that we are for the people. This motion is intended to fight for the people. That is why the various district local leaders are in the public gallery watching the proceedings.

I, therefore, request you to support this motion, which is urging the Government to degazzette them. I thank you very much. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.25
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been given only two minutes. I will base my submission on Paragraph 3 of the motion: 

“NOTING that land constituting Wamale Central Forest Reserve, Kiula Central Forest Reserve and Bajo Central Forest Reserve has been heavily settled on by residents, numbering about 70,000 households, resulting in the establishment of four trading centres, seven parishes and  29 villages in two sub counties”.  

Madam Speaker, I am a lover of green. When I heard about this motion, it moved my heart that anyone in their right senses, could foster the idea of degezzetting a forest reserve. I took the trouble to visit the place and see for myself what informs the mover of the motion. 

I took a four-wheel drive car and tools prepared to fight with animals in this forest reserve. I was surprised that when I got there, I did not even need a bicycle, let alone a four-wheel drive vehicle. Instead of finding trees and shrubs, I found commerce: trading centres, people going about their daily lives, places of worship, families, schools, health centres and roads, including those worked on by the Uganda National Roads Authority.

I was then at peace with the mover of the motion that what we are calling a forest reserve is only a forest reserve in document and theory, as opposed to reality on the ground. I am a graduate of Business and Human Rights. I have always loved the idea that whenever rights are competing with human beings versus other entities or agencies, the rights of people should be given priority. What is called a forest reserve should ideally have animals, if it was truly a forest reserve. 

The mover of the motion has brought the leaders of the people, who live in that place. I think it might have been on the 24th of June 2020 – I will check my records properly. A minister stood on the Floor of Parliament here and said that the people were opposed to the idea of degazzetting this forest reserve.

Madam Speaker, those people are here and are speaking for themselves through the voice of their elected leader and they are in support of the motion; they are not here to oppose it. In May 2020, a registrar from Mukono High Court visited the area and made an observation and reported; and it is on court record. He said that there were no trees to protect. 

The place in question does not have a forest, it does not have trees, it does not have shrubs, only homes, mosques and families of Ugandans.

There is no way we can support the idea that the place should remain a forest reserve in name, when in actual sense, it is a habitat for human beings. I rise on the Floor to beg my fellow elected leaders that we should always be in support of the rights of our people. These Ugandans deserve dignity and to live a life of certainty, where they know that the place they have called home for generations will be their home tomorrow and in the days to come. 

Colleagues, being a mother in Kiula Central Forest reserve, which is only a forest reserve in name, not being sure whether your children will call the same place home because there is a “monster” for lack of a better word called the National Forestry Authority, which will come and throw you out of your place that you have always called home.

It is on that basis, Madam Speaker, that I stand in support of the motion as I urge fellow elected leaders to support and approve this motion to urge the Government and further follow up to see that the Government implements the resolution of this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government to degazzette Wamale Central Forest Reserve, Kiula Central Forest Reserve and Bajo Central Forest Reserve in Kayunga District for human settlement and establishment of industrial parks. 

First, I come from Kayunga. Hon. Tebandeke who presented the motion and hon. Nsanja are my neighbours. I happen to be in the middle of the two constituencies.

We all love forests because they help us in dealing with problems related to climate change and reducing carbon emissions in the atmosphere. However, the circumstances we are dealing with border around human-related conditions. 

We have a plethora of problems relating to the population in Kayunga. First, we have many villages that were displaced by the floods from River Nile and Lake Kyoga. As we speak, many people within Galiraya and Bbaale subcounties are displaced. 

Recently, we went there with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and we saw how the lake claimed villages within this area. The people who formerly occupied those villages are now hanging anywhere, they find space. In fact, they were given a temporary shelter by a Good Samaritan within Kayunga District but that has timelines within which he can continue to accommodate them. 

Indeed, it is true we have to find a solution to this problem because the lake is not about to recede. On humanitarian grounds, we need to help this huge population. 

As hon. Zijjan explained, we have many households who are being accommodated on this land that we are talking about and in fact, there are no forests to talk about. Madam Speaker, this is not necessarily the reason we are making this recommendation. There are no trees at all. I could bet Shs 500,000, if you picked a tree from that area. All you see are settlements, grasslands, churches, roads among others. These have become villages occupied by the people of Kayunga. 

Kayunga is surrounded by many districts, including among others, Nakasongola, Kamuli. In the north, you just cross to Lake Kyoga and you are in Amolatar. So, we get an influx of people coming into Kayunga and now we experience a problem of serious land fragmentation. Therefore, if we want the population to survive, we have to be talking about an integrated arrangement, where we have people co-existing with industries. Kayunga is not very far. 

As a country, we have run out of industrial space, especially near Kampala. The next place to go to would be this one. Therefore, an integrated arrangement of having industries, where these people can seek for jobs is the best way to go. This is why I would like to strongly support this motion. We are not only settling people but we are giving them space for industries, where they can ultimately get jobs. 

As an opinion leader in Kayunga, I would like to support this motion. I would like to join my colleague in recommending that these said forest reserves be reserved for human settlements and industry. I support degazettement. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Lugoloobi. The motion is not for an outright degazettement but it is seeking the minister to consider it. That is what the motion is saying. There is a matter that has been raised on sub-judice. I will rule on that matter. For now – 

4.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, as Government, we believe this is an institution where anyone should speak for their people. So, I thank Members who raised issues regarding their people. 

I felt it would be important for this information from the Government to go on record, as you guide us on the sub-judice rule. The forest reserves in Galiraya Subcounty were given to private developers by Kayunga District Land Board without the knowledge of National Forest Authority (NFA). NFA barred the private developers from occupying the land. However, they opened a case against NFA under Case Number 102 of 2019 at Mukono. They went ahead and acquired an interim order restraining NFA from accessing the land so that they could go on and develop. 

We have many petitions as Government from communities in Gulu, Arua, Nakasongola and everywhere on the issue of having their areas degazetted. This matter has been brought to the attention of the Cabinet and the Cabinet has already tasked the minister of environment to study all these cases, prepare a Cabinet Paper and present it to the Cabinet for due consideration, on a case by case basis. 

Madam Speaker, in the case of Kayunga, I would request that you guide us. Otherwise, as the Government, we are supposed to participate in the debate but we have a case before court. Your ruling on the issue of sub-judice is welcome on our side and you will guide us on how best we can proceed. I felt that information should go on record. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Members, NFA holds land in trust of the people of Uganda. The powers are in the hands of the people, as is enshrined in the Constitution. That land is not for NFA; it is for our people. NFA is only holding it in trust. 

Honourable members, I am going to suspend the debate, as I make a ruling on the issue that hon. Nantaba raised. I will make my ruling under rule 73(5). Debate on this has been suspended. Let us go to the next item. 

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.42
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I am here for the Prime Minister’s Questions Time. I have three questions.

The first one was asked by Dr John Magolo, Member of Parliament for Bungokho County North, Mbale. His question is: “As the Ministry of Education and Sports plans to open schools in January 2022, Bufumbo Secondary School has nowhere -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, can we listen to the Prime Minister? Hon. Tebandeke, please, sit down. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I may read the question again for people to be prepared. “As the Ministry of Education and Sports plans to open schools in January 2022, Bufumbo Secondary School has nowhere to accommodate the students.” 

This is the response. The Ministry of Education and Sports has prepared a project for rehabilitation and expansion of facilities of public secondary schools across the country. Bufumbo Secondary School will be among the beneficiaries. 

The same Member asked: “Can schools be permitted to access a defined percentage of Capitation Grant to undertake the necessary renovation before eventual resumption of learning?”

The response is that the Ministry of Education and Sports guided local government accounting officers not to utilise Capitation Grants advanced to schools because the existing expenditure guidelines only provide for utilisation of the funds when the schools are operational. Many schools are closed because of COVID-19. Therefore, the guideline does not allow them to use the money when they are dormant.

On 22 September 2021, His Excellency the President informed the country about a plan for reopening of institutions of learning or schools in November 2021 and January 2022 respectively, depending on the vaccine uptake by the target population.

The Ministry of Education and Sports is aware of the state of disrepair in schools and is preparing a circular to guide local government accounting officers to permit the schools to utilise the part of the Conditional Grants advanced to them prior to their closure following the second wave of COVID-19. Further disbursement will only be made to the schools upon provision of accountability for the funds advanced.

The last question was asked by hon. Basalirwa, Member of Parliament for Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri District. The question is: “What measures is the Government putting in place to ensure that there is a smooth running and a good working relationship at the Uganda Land Commission?” “How far has the takeover of the Land Commission by the minister gone and the current status of the investigation by the CIID of the financial impropriety by the technical people at the Uganda Land Commission?”

These questions are responded to as follows;

There have been management and administrative challenges, which were brought –(Interjections)- These people are disrupting my attention, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, leave Gen. Ali to finish. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: There have been management and administrative challenges, which were brought to the attention of the Government, including accusations of inefficient and ineffective service delivery of the Uganda Land Commission and the mismanagement at the Land Fund, which falls under the Uganda Land Commission.

The Prime Minister, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development have held meetings with the Uganda Land Commission’s chairperson, commission members and the secretary of the Uganda Land Commission to resolve the poor working relationship at the Uganda Land Commission. 

The President of the Republic of Uganda was made aware of the poor working relationship. The Government took the following decisions: 

    1. The Minister will directly supervise the management and operations of Uganda Land Commission with the view to finding a permanent and lasting solution.

The status of the investigation

The Office of the Auditor-General is carrying out a comprehensive forensic audit of transactions by the Uganda Land Commission and thereafter, a report on how to streamline the management of the Land Fund will be submitted.

In addition, the Government has requested the Inspector General of Government (IGG) to carry out a comprehensive investigation into the alleged cases of abuse and misuse of the Uganda Land Commission resources and assets. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, General, for the response. Hon. Nantaba, please lay on the Table your documents that will help us make a decision on sub-judice. Just [Member rose_] Let me get the documents and then you will reply.

4.53
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament which states, “1. Subject to subrule (5) of this rule, a Member shall not refer to any particular matter which is sub-judice. 2. A matter shall be considered sub-judice if it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, the decision of such matter is likely prejudice its fair determination.” 

In section 3(c) civil proceedings-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nantaba, you had already presented that. Just lay your documents for us to -

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, I have to lay according to the rules because you had already suspended this and you are calling me back. Therefore, I have to put this on record. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

In 3(c), “Civil proceedings shall be deemed to be active when arrangements for hearing such as setting down matters for hearing have been made until the proceedings are ended by judgment or settlement or withdrawal or a member alleging that a matter is sub-judice shall provide justification to show that sub rules (2) and (3) are applicable and the Speaker shall make a ruling as to whether a matter is sub-judice or not before debate or investigations to continue.”

Madam Speaker, the motion the honourable member has just presented before Parliament was a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government to degazette Wamale Central Forest Reserve, Kiwula Central Forest Reserve and Bajjo Central Forest Reserve in Kayunga District.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a document entitled, “The Republic of Uganda in the High Court of Uganda holden at Mukono. The land cause is Civil Suit No.102/2019 National Forest Authority being the Plaintiff versus Semugga Badru, Kayunga District Land Board, and the Commissioner, Land registration as defendants. I beg to lay for the record.

I also requested you, in the small conversation that we held, that the other three documents will be provided at a time that you choose deemable. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please get them and bring them over.

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, I lay Civil Suit No.88/2017 and Civil Suit No.67/2017 in regard to the subject matter. All are at Mukono High Court.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not laid Civil Suit No.68 -

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, as I had requested, I will provide them -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t mention them now. You will mention them when you are laying. When you receive them, it will help us to make a decision.

MS NANTABA: Much obliged. Madam Speaker, allow me to say one thing. It feels so bad for Members of Parliament to deceive Parliament that the land in question is occupied by people when it is occupied by grabbers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will have a debate on that. Let us first have the documents and we make a ruling to that effect then you will pour out your heart. The good thing is you are all from Kayunga, including hon. Lugoloobi.

Members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 November, 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
