
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 19 October 2021

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. This sitting comes after a short break and I can see the impact of the break on your faces. So, I am happy. I welcome you back from the brief recess. I hope you have had some rest and you have been rejuvenated to execute your responsibilities appropriately. 

Before the break, the Executive had introduced nine Bills: The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021; The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021; The Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2021; The Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2021; The Supplementary Appropriation (No. 2) Bill, 2021; The Supplementary Appropriation (No. 3) Bill, 2021; The Public Finance Management Act (Amendment) Bill, 2021; The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021; and The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (Special Provisions) Bill, 2021. 

These Bills were referred to various committees with directives to consider them within varying timeframes. I, therefore, implore the chairpersons and members of the committees, to which these Bills were referred, to work tirelessly within the stipulated timeframes and produce quality outputs as they have always done. 

As earlier stated, I urge committees to practice evidence-based legislation as a hallmark of the 11th Parliament. 

I call on all the other chairpersons of committees to look at their committee work plans and expedite the consideration of business before them so that Parliament can process them in time. 

On a sad note, I have learnt of the demise of the following persons:

The former MP for Madi-Okollo, hon. John Drazu Arumadri. He was a Member of Parliament in the Eighth and Ninth parliaments. He passed on, on 7 October 2021 and was laid to rest on 12 October 2021. This is particularly sad because the week before, he had actually come to Parliament to see the Speaker about some outstanding matters. I have personally learnt with great shock that he is not with us anymore. 

The father of hon. Joseph Ruyonga, MP Hoima West Division. The deceased was laid to rest on 14 October 2021. 

Dr Peregrine Kibuuka, a veteran educationist and former head teacher of Namilyango College. His exemplary works are evident in the gigantic stature that Namilyango College enjoys in the education sector in Uganda. He has also gone to be with the Lord. 

I have also just learnt, as I was coming in, of the demise of Hope Kivengere. She has passed on. Just as I was coming in, I got information. I will be communicating details tomorrow. 

Honourable members, for these and those that have also gone to be with the Lord – those we know and those we do not know – let us rise and observe a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Members. 

I will be giving further guidance, after a discussion with the committee responsible for natural resources, on the Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2021. I have looked at some documents and some correspondences that have raised some concerns. I will have discussions with either the entire Committee on Physical Infrastructure or the leadership of the committee and we see how to proceed on this matter in a more holistic way. 

I have received communication from the Minister of Health, who appears on our Order Paper under Item 4(2). There is an important statement – I have a copy and I am sure you have all seen copies – that she wanted to present herself. Today, she is engaged with the President so, she will not be able to do it. We are looking at the possibility of tomorrow. As soon as she is available, she will be able to do it. She wants to be able to discuss these matters with the Members. 

I have some Members who had urgent matters to raise. The Members for Napak District, Manjiya County and Bundibugyo District have urgent matters to raise. Procedure?

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the Order Paper, under business to follow, there is item number three paragraph (b) where we expected the minister for security to give a comprehensive report to this House. 

Indeed, he committed himself and undertook to bring here a comprehensive report. It is among matters of urgent public importance that the minister ought to have responded to. 

THE SPEAKER: On item three under business to follow; yes, it is from the Ministry of Security but I see Apaa Village and Zombo District. That is what I see on the Order Paper. Item No. 3(b) is on Zombo District. 

MR NAMBESHE: Yes, Zombo. Mr Speaker, as we speak now, print and electronic media are awash with the news pertaining to the 13 suspected rebels who have been arrested, courtesy of the joint security taskforce. One is a “pastor” and another an engineer but men from Zombo – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, honourable member, we do not use back door methods to bring matters of that nature. We sat with you this afternoon. You did not tell me you were going to deal with this matter.

Please, deal with the issue you wanted to raise. It is your time now. (Laughter)

2.17
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE: (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Mr Speaker, I am raising a matter of urgent public importance. It is now common knowledge that the disaster-prone district of Bududa has had multiple landslides; about 17 in number. Almost three quarters of the subcounties have had landslides. Luckily enough, we have not had any lives claimed by these landslides but the wanainchi have lost a lot of property, crops and livestock. 

Over the weekend, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister came and I must salute her. She made a commitment that this time round, it is not about responding with food and non–food items. Otherwise, these are just mere hand-outs, which are not sustainable. There should be a resettlement package as the stakeholders had mooted. The urbanisation strategy akin to the one of   vijiji Ujamaa villages in Tanzania. I pray that it is implemented expeditiously.

Two and most importantly, the 2010 landslides claimed over 500 lives. As a result, a number of our people were relocated to Kiryandongo as Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). Currently, they are under serious harassment by the purported owners of the land, where they have been resettled. 

I have documents here. One is from Baitera GB& Maipeki Co. Advocates, who act for Bunyoro Kitara Reparation Agency. These letters were written by these advocates to the local leadership; the LCIII, LCII and LCI, claiming that these people are illegal occupants on land that belongs to Bunyoro Kitara. 

Worst of it all is that five of the IDPs have been killed in cold blood. We highly suspect that it is because of this allegation that they are land grabbers. The victims are; John Bunasambi, who was killed when he was cultivating in his farm and the body was brought to Bududa for burial. 

The second is John Natseli who was found shot dead in his farm with arrows in his body. The third is Nabwii who was attacked on his farm and he ran for refuge into some hut. However, they followed him, burnt down the hut and he died in that hut. The fourth one is James Wakooba. All the deaths occurred just last month. 

What has brought the climax of this matter is the death of Patrick Wataka. He was killed on the farm as he was working by those who had come with welding machetes. Even when the body was taken to Kiryandongo Police Station, it disappeared mysteriously. It has been three weeks since the body disappeared. The tension amongst the people of Bududa who are IDPs in Kiryandongo is high. 

My prayer is that given that the suspects who were arrested earlier were released under very unclear circumstances and now that the body of Patrick Wataka has disappeared while in the hands of the police, the body should be availed to the people of Bududa urgently so that he is accorded a decent burial.

Secondly, if the Government has failed to secure land titles to give these people security of tenure, then they should be taken back to Bududa alive. Otherwise, we do not want to see people being brought back dead. We are tired and worn out of seeing our people being killed in cold blood. One was even shot by a police officer but nothing has been done. Suspects are arrested and yet, the following day, they are released under unclear circumstances. They come bragging around to the people asking, “What will you do?” 

The other prayer is that if the Government is not giving the sub-titles to each IDP -  there are 603 households. The Government should get a block land title for that land so that these people live under a safety of tenure.

Short of the above, I have no other prayer other than requesting the Speaker to use his good office to prevail over the Government to ensure that our people are brought back safe and sound. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That will not need my authority. It is you to say that you want them back and they will consider it. So, I cannot direct the Government to take them back. Do it. Can I hear from the Government on these two issues? 

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I feel sorry for my colleague, the Opposition Chief Whip, the pain and loss that has been perpetually afflicted to his people by natural hazards.

However, this morning, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, having visited Bududa recently and other parts of the country, which have been affected by flooding and landslides, caused an inter-ministerial meeting. In that meeting, it has been agreed that tomorrow, our technical people will sit and come up with a cost memorandum that we can present to Cabinet in the next few days. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport was represented by myself and a team of my juniors. That is the same case with the ministries of Water, Agriculture, Health and Education. I am certain that after this, we shall come up with an acceptable intervention, though we may not completely stamp out disasters. This is a middle position that the Government and the people of Bududa have suggested so that we see how the Ministry of Works and Transport can handle infrastructure while the other departments of Government also do so. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What about the second aspect?

MR ECWERU: On the issue of Kiryandongo, first of all, I just want to correct my colleague. Those Ugandans are no longer IDPs; they have been settled in Kiryandongo permanently as Ugandans. 

The land they are occupying belongs to the Government. That land used to be one of the Government ranches in Kiryandongo. If there is anybody molesting them, we shall ask the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to follow keenly. 

Mr Speaker, if that is happening, then that person is doing it not because he owns the land. Otherwise, that land belongs to the Government and the Government gave a portion of it to refugees and on another portion, we settled our people. That is the position. 

As to whether it is wise for us to return them to where they survived, I implore my honourable colleague that, that is like jumping from the saucepan into the fire. I discourage that. Let us sort out the criminals who are hurting the people and ensure that we settle them permanently. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.26
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak. I rise on an urgent matter regarding flooding in some parts of Napak.

Around 18th September 2021, there was a heavy downpour in many parts of Karamoja and Napak being a low-lying land, all the water flooded and swept off many fields. It also soaked the produce that had been harvested.

I reported the matter to the minister and she said that the DDMC should write a report. The DDMC wrote a report, which was submitted to the minister and to the Office of Prime Minister a week later. I wrote another letter on the 28th of September.

Mr Speaker, to date, there has been no response. This area is the main food basket for the people of Napak; 46,000 people live there. Due to the water levels that kept high, the roads got cut off and people cannot access the nearest health facilities; not even a boda boda can cross.

Now, the food that had been harvested earlier cannot be transported to the nearest town and it is getting soaked yet there is no response for over a month now and this is the reason I am raising it.

I pray that you use your authority to instruct the relevant ministries to take action to rescue the people in those parishes of Obulin, Arengepua and Achukudu.

Mr Speaker, what hurts me most, as a leader from Napak, is the way in which these matters are responded to selectively. When an issue is raised, it does not get any response for a full month. The people of Bududa where the disaster happened just recently already got the required response. That is what hurts me and the people of Napak.

I need some answers from you, Mr Speaker, to take to them to the people. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: The response you will get from the Speaker is that all the people of this country are citizens thereto and they should be treated equally. You had made a very good submission and I normally do not like comparison. Let your case stand on its own merit like it is and as you have stated it.

Can I have a response from the Ministry of Works and Transport? Roads have been cut off for a full month and you are aware of it; yet you are also here.

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, certainly, this belongs now to the Office of the Prime Minister -

THE SPEAKER: The roads?

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I am conscious about what my sister is saying. Again it comes back - I can confess to this honourable House that a few days back, the Cabinet, in its wisdom, decided to give some little money for basic interventions, aware that an elaborate national response plan is coming. With that, we are responding not adequately because the resources are not enough though they were being worked on.

I would like to assure my sister that those areas particularly, which need works, we will direct the nearby stations to ensure that at least they are kept navigable. We may not be able to make a very firm road right now given the fact that many places are inundated but at least we can endeavour to make it passable as we plan for a very detailed and elaborate intervention that I will communicate to my team.

THE SPEAKER: Is that what you said a month ago?

MR ECWERU: It was not this same place. Some of the areas for example, I committed to going to Kumi and check what had been raised by my sister from Kumi. I am happy to report to this House that I did go there and hon. Okasai, the Member of Parliament for that area, can testify that work is ongoing. And for many other places that I committed myself to handle last week, interventions are coming in.

The only challenge is that every passing day it rains and as the Metrology Department has told us, we are likely to continue being battered by heavy rains up to the end of November and the beginning of December. That presents a challenge but we will rise to the challenge.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The challenge that we have with this kind of situation is that it was raised a month ago and nobody has gone there. Yes, we were here when the matter was raised about the floods in Napak. Speeches were made about it that some visits would be made but which have not taken place. Some actions were promised to be taken but haven’t been taken. That is why the member, despite not being very happy, made a statement to the extent that she ended it.

These matters are of great concern, honourable minister and they affect ordinary people of this country. Those are the ordinary people whom we should be helping. What do we do?  

Sending technical teams would not present - I need political presence there. Either you go with the technical people or they follow you. At least you need some presence there.

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I undertake that before Monday, I will have visited Napak and directed action.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.33
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding a disaster, which was caused by heavy rains last Thursday on 14th at around 2.00 p.m.

It affected the UPDF barracks and all the manyatas were washed away. It destroyed five homes and three market shelters for Busunga Town Council and all the shelters fell down. As I speak, the market vendors do not have anywhere to operate from and they are all scattered all over the town. 

My prayer is that the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness should intervene. If necessary, he should visit the place. Busunga Town Council, in the previous year, lost a UPDF soldier when River Lamia flooded. Therefore, it is an area, which is prone to the disasters caused by the heavy rains.

When the minister was responding about the roads, I recalled that Bundibugyo still has a lot of issues. We were promised that they would repair the bridges, which were washed away by the last days’ disaster, which also affected Bududa and Kasese at the same time, including Kilembe Hospital. However, up to now, nothing has been done. The bridges are not repaired yet and the roads are still in bad state. 

My prayer is that the minister considers Bundibugyo to also benefit from the small fund and the small interventions he is talking about, to be undertaken in other areas because we have never got any response. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it looks like you have moved everything to the ministry of works; disaster preparedness and Works; now you double for both.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I hope it doesn’t happen that way -

THE SPEAKER: No, it is because you have the history but you also have your current placement. Disasters are going towards cutting off roads and you are there. 

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I know for sure, with the former Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, we visited Bundibugyo at the time the town council was inundated. Some interventions were made, including relocating people then to safety until the situation normalised.

However, there were many commitments that I am sure we made but which do not seem to have been addressed adequately on account of a lot of challenges that we have met in the process. 

However, the good news is that this morning, my colleague, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, after our meeting in the morning is heading Kasese today to get a feel of what is there. 

What I would like to commit now is to indicate to her that she assesses the entire Rwenzori Zone. She can be in Kasese and move to Bundibugyo so that next week when we meet the technical teams, she will have had first-hand understanding of what is going on. She is headed to Kasese because she has some programmes there.

mr ssekikubo: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable minister. Listening to the minister as I sat there, he was jumping from explaining himself to seeking the indulgence to move as if – (Interruption)

mr atwijukire: Mr Speaker –

The Speaker: Let me first clear this. Point of procedure takes precedence only when they are raised at the same time. If someone rises on a point of procedure and another on a point of order, the procedure takes precedence. However, if you are already on a point of procedure and you violate the order of the House, you will be subjected to a point of order. Honourable member, proceed.

mr atwijukire: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to say that the minister is “jumping” yet the latter was honourably presenting the responses? (Laughter)

The Speaker: The point of order is whether it is in order for the honourable member to be very dramatic about his description of the minister –(Laughter)– ordinarily speaking, I did not see the honourable minister jumping. (Laughter)

Is that what you meant by saying that he was “jumping”? Please proceed. (Laughter)

mr ssekikubo: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue I was trying to bring out is the way we are handling matters of disaster in an ad hoc manner. When it is happening in Bududa, then a promise is made. When it happens to Napak, the minister proposes, “Personally, by Monday I should have gone there.” When it happens in Bundibugyo again, it is the same undertaking. 

These forecasts were made some three months ago. When there was drought, Government through the meteorological department was to prepare for these heavy rains. It is happening across the country. Some of us only wait to hear what is worse than others but all of us are invariably expecting some level or magnitude of disaster. 

Mr Speaker, are we procedurally right for the minister to single-handedly promise to talk to the minister in charge of the docket? He was trying to run away but you pressed him further to come out on the issue of works. 

As a country, do we have any comprehensive disaster response and management policy? Don’t we deserve to have it so that once it happens we do not go on a bended knee to appeal to the minister “At least come to my place”? I saw the Member of Parliament for Napak happy when the minister said, “On Monday, I assure you that I will be with you.”

Are we right as a country to proceed in this lukewarm manner and approach to a matter that is so detrimental to the people’s lives? It is affecting the country’s economy. Do we have a comprehensive approach so that we know where to run to and how to prepare? Even resources can be voted to that extent. Thank you.

The Speaker: Regarding your concern of the minister handling the matter single-handedly, I would like to nominate you to join him so that he is not single-handedly doing it. (Laughter)
 
Honourable members, you recall that a statement was made to this House by the honourable minister responsible for disaster preparedness. We debated it and a request was made by the minister that even cases that were not yet brought to his attention –(Gen. Ali walked into the Chamber)– may I welcome the General who has not been here for a while. (Applause)

He has even changed his walking style –(Laughter)– in the past, he used to walk a certain way but now he walks with a swag. Honourable member, we welcome you. Some of us know where you have been; so we thank you for being in this shape and back. We thank God for your being here. (Applause)

This statement was made and Members added to the minister’s list. What needed to be done in the respective areas - because we come from everywhere in the country. Sometimes, we know things that many people do not know - including some departments of Government. So we feed in. 

So a request was made. As to whether the statement amounted to a policy – no, it was not. It was a comprehensive statement on the state of preparation on response to disasters happening in the country. Cases were listed and others added on. 

As to whether there is a policy, I still need to be educated. Do we have a disaster response policy in this country? Do we have money and people attached to it? If so, why are we where we are?

mr ecweru: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, we do have a National Disaster Management/Response Policy. It is against the policy that this House decided to put in place a Contingency Fund, which sometimes we have not been able to fully finance to the extent that each time there is a crisis like it is now - the purpose of this inter-ministerial discussion tomorrow is to come up with a national response plan for the whole country given the fact that the Meteorological Department has guided us on what is going to happen the next so many days.

Therefore, that national response plan will be cost and that will quickly be taken to Cabinet. If it needs talking about contingency again, we will be back to you, Mr Speaker.

mr mbwatekamwa: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the minister. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister. A month back, we faced a heavy hailstorm in two subcounties in Igara West. We thank God that your state minister, hon. Anyakun Esther, responded immediately. She promised a quick response because everything was shattered - crops or houses. However, it is a month now. 

The first week when we inquired, we were told that they had taken food to the Uganda National Bureau of Standard (UNBS) for testing. After three weeks, we are told that you have not yet got some vehicles to ferry food from Kampala to Bushenyi.

Honourable minister, do you want to bring some aid when our people are dead or are you planning to bring condolences? Why can’t you intervene? 

We have been with you in the previous Parliament - Mr Speaker, I am sorry to say that hon. Ecweru is very good at giving mere speeches than actions. Thank you.

mr ecweru: Mr Speaker, I do not know where the clarification will lead us because what I know for sure is that responding to the emergencies and speaking for the Minister of Disaster Preparedness - I have been following what they are doing, even in this new docket. They started responding close to almost two months ago; not all places have been addressed but certainly, I could ask them to bring a list of the areas that they have touched and you will see that there has been a response. It is not that they are just waiting for Parliament but they have been responding, except resources may not be enough; hence, the request we are putting across tomorrow. 

2.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, the food for Igara has been dispatched today. (Interjections) Honourable colleagues, I have to tell you the truth. Did you want me to tell you it was dispatched yesterday? No, it has been sent out today. 

Mr Speaker, we are going to be distributing food to 46 districts. However, colleagues, you should check with your CAOs because what we discovered is that sometimes, we take the food and it is picked by Members of Parliament and political leaders, who distribute it. Thereafter, we get quarrels from their opponents. 

Therefore, we are sending all the food and it will be received by CAOs. They are the ones going to sign for it. Please, link up with them and you will find them receiving food, including my district of Mitooma, whose food will be dispatched tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, respond. Get in touch with your Chief Administrative Officers in the short form of CAO. I do not want it to go to any other person other than the Chief Administrative Officer. 

What is the matter, Leader of the Opposition? On what matter do you rise? 

MR MPUUGA: It is a procedural matter. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence. I have been lucky to have belonged to the Ninth, 10th and now the 11th Parliament. Somehow, for some reason, every time of the year, around this season, this is the nature of exchange in the House. If anybody did recall and replayed the discussion, the tendency will be to believe that these people have a very serious deficit in their planning component. 

The last time this matter came up, there was an order from the presiding officer for the Government to immediately constitute a disaster commission because it is not in place. Under the Public Finance Management Act, they are supposed to actualise the funds voted for disasters. It has become problematic for ministers to be the ones responding here because Members will be working with the commission or CAOs will be working with the commission. 

Wouldn’t it be proper for us to get a commitment so that this conversation reverts to an entity that is legally provided for to deal with this? This will enable Members stop bringing this matter here and deal with entities. People need food and food is food. To say that food is delayed for three weeks is to believe that people can starve for three weeks and still be alive. 

I believe in Generals. Since he is here and he can make a final commitment on when we can have the commission in place, can we get a commitment on when this commission will be in place? 

We are going into the budget cycle very soon, Mr Speaker. Article 157 provides for the contingency fund. The voting on the fund has been very flimsy, which is why, at the end of the day, you hear ministers and the Prime Minister exchanging words over relief monies. 

Wouldn’t it be proper that we get a final commitment on when this commission will be in place so that when funds are voted, we will not hear further quarrels between the Prime Minister and her ministers over disaster funds? This is because there will be a commission to technically deal with CAOs and town clerks to handle this matter in finality. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is a procedural matter. You raised the first issue so that Members do not come to Parliament to raise these matters. Well, for the Members of Parliament, this is their work station and their people need to know that they are working. Therefore, I would be reluctant to say that they should not come here with those issues. I am sure next time when you have issues, you will prefer to come here also. Let us leave that there and deal with the issue of the commission separately. 

There was also a comment made that because of the debates that have happened recently, that is why the contingency fund was created. I would like to correct that impression because the 1995 Constitution, which was promulgated on 8 October 1995, already contained that provision. The country was alive and people knew that these things would happen and so, they created a contingency fund. It is supposed to operate in a way that 0.5 per cent of the total budget automatically goes into the fund to fund these activities. For a few years, it has not been happening and this should start happening so that we know the purpose. The Constitution provides a purpose of the funds in the contingency fund but there should be some money in it because you cannot have a fund with no money in it and call it a fund. These are things that need to be corrected. 

I need someone to guide us on the issue of the commission. A commission is required to be put in place to deal with general issues. 

2.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Two weeks ago, the presiding officer guided on that the Executive should ensure it is in place within three months. We presented it to Government and we are working on that. We shall come to update the House. The Speaker already guided on that matter two weeks ago. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you coming back with a report or are you constituting a commission? 

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, these are matters with implication on very many aspects of how the Government works and so, we are trying our best to implement the Speaker’s guidance. We shall be coming back, as the Executive, to report on the implementation. 

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that the Speaker only gave the guidance based on the provisions of the law and so, it is not the Speaker’s directive. She only said that you should activate the law within three months by appointing the commission. It was not a directive from her, because the commission is already created by law. 

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, I was very cautious and I said she did not direct but she guided. On our side, the issue is just on the timelines given. That is why we have to go and see how easy it is or how possible it is to implement in three months. We shall be coming back and reporting within that period on whether we have already finished implementing or we ask for more time to implement. We are looking at that timeline given by the Speaker to ensure that we implement. 

THE SPEAKER: The Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister is here; the Leader of Government Business in the House. In this country, we know that it is going to rain and there will be floods. We know that immediately after the floods, there will be drought. It does not matter what the hydrological department says, because we know that every year, we have a cycle of floods and droughts; bounty harvests without a storage capacity and famine follows. Are we going to have a system that will deal with this matter? 

If you add the complication that comes from the Karamoja sub region and the neighbouring district, we know that each time there is drought there are activities that affect communities adversely. Are we going to live with this positively or are we going to find solutions that give some closure to these matters? 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is here in person. Please do not raise any point of order; you cannot order a General. (Applause)

2.57 
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, allow me to thank the House before I come to this question. I wanted to thank –

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, General.

GEN. ALI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the House for their prayers. Anyway, I hope those who prayed or those who did not pray since I would not know – but collectively, I would like to thank you for your prayers. I went in bad shape but I can convince you that I am still “ticking”. 

Even if I am using a walking stick to support myself, that does not mean that I am sick; that shows my age –(Laughter)– People of my age must use this walking stick. This walking stick has many purposes –(Interjection)– Maybe you would like to –(Laughter)- When I hold my walking stick like that, you cannot claim that I am pointing at you. However, if you are interested in this walking stick – I am happy and pleased that my colleagues’ prayers have been heard by God and they have brought me back among you. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Secondly, this morning, we discussed this question, which our friend has asked, with many ministers who are disaster clients. Whenever there is disaster, these are the ministers whose ministries are affected. 

However, we only know one Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees here but you can see disaster in terms of floods; it breaks bridges and that involves the Ministry of Works and Transport. When it breaks schools, that involves the Ministry of Education and Sports, among others and everybody is aware.

This morning, the Prime Minister called for a meeting with all these ministers so that we see how to handle disasters. Therefore, I would like to reiterate that we are in the process of implementing the guidance in accordance with the law. Within that limited time given to us, we would have already implemented the guidance. I do not know whether I have answered the issue or not. I have attempted, thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Please can we now move to the Order Paper - No, the procedural matter was from this side. (Laughter)

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Chairperson, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

I rise on a point of procedure. This morning, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters, Modification of Written Laws Instrument 2021). The Deputy Attorney-General was before us but unfortunately, we could not proceed because the Deputy Attorney-General informed us that his appointment was merely for the Deputy Attorney-General and not for the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Therefore, he is not holding the portfolio for the minister and yet under the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008, Section 2 defines a minister as the Minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

Therefore, as a committee, our hands were tied and we respectfully declined to continue with the matter. Our prayers are that:

A substantive Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be appointed or the portfolio be assigned to enable the work of that ministry continue. 

The committee be allocated further time, possibly an extension of two weeks although we cannot determine the time when this would happen.

That is the procedural matter that I would like to raise.

THE SPEAKER: I am actually taken aback. Do we want a particular person or the resource from a person who can give us the information that we need as a committee to take decisions? I do not know who invited the Deputy Attorney-General but the person who either invited or sent him knew he could manage the concerns of the committee in all aspects touching on what the proposal outlined in the Bill.

Honestly, I am a bit taken aback that we are even beginning to say, first appoint a minister before we proceed with these matters because there is no minister in charge of this particular Bill. I am quite not sure whether we would be proceeding properly if we start doing things this way. The person sent to you is presumed to have the knowledge to assist the committee to come to the conclusion it needs to come to; answer questions that are necessary for giving guidance on issues that might not be that clear. 

As a Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, how would you send away a Deputy Attorney-General when you are handling a Bill on fines and things? Anyway, let us leave it at that but I am actually not very pleased with these developments.

MS RWAKOOJO: Mr Speaker, the dilemma that we had – 

THE SPEAKER: No, the second part of it is that we are now asking for extension of time. We send away the Deputy Attorney-General today then we ask for extension of time and I think the extension of time includes the time within which a minister should be appointed. If the minister is not appointed and we extend the time, what are you going to do if the minister is not appointed? 

I do not want our committees to be put in a situation that becomes very difficult for Parliament to function – (Hon. Ssekikubo rose_) - I am still ruling on the procedure, unless you want me to take your guidance from Lwemiyaga so that I rule better, I will allow you. We shall then have the Leader of the Opposition. 

3.07
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It has been a practice of this House that when a matter like this arises, a communication originates from this House to the responsible entity or ministry. 

Unless they failed to present a minister, you can dismiss them when they are only technical persons. However, in some instances, a minister that is not of that very docket can come to represent the Government, accompanied by the technical team from the particular ministry. 

Matters have been considered that way and it is not strange. You can have a different minister from a different ministry standing in for a particular minister. It is even happening on the Floor of this House. A minister, who may not necessarily be a minister of that very portfolio is assigned, stands for and presides over matters. I think it was probably an oversight on the part of the committee not to have entertained the Deputy Attorney-General. 

Probably, a second leg would be to ask the Government to expedite the appointment of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, if it is causing some anxiety. This, of course, should not be the case. Particularly with our practice, business has been moving on and ministers have been known to stand in for others as you guided, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: There was the Leader of the Opposition. Have you handed over to the Member for Bugiri? By that, you lose your chance to speak on this. 

3.09
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. My Chairperson has ably presented the position of the committee. However, there are two issues that I think we need to explain. 

Number one, when you look at the office of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, it has many implications on our laws. As a matter of fact, many Government departments are stuck with publications that require the signature of that minister. The statutes are very clear and they require it. 

What happened this morning is that the learned Deputy Attorney- General came to the committee and made a presentation. In that presentation, he signed as Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs. The committee asked him whether he is formally designated to that portfolio but he was not able to answer that question. 

We found it extremely difficult as a committee – which you rightly said has some of the best legal minds in the country. We used the words “holding out”. We said “you are actually holding out.” 

Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, it is not that a minister cannot represent the Government. However, he or she should be formally designated and there must be formal information or communication to that respect. Even here, on the Floor of Parliament, a minister will stand up and say, “I am representing” or “I have been formally delegated to do x, y and z”. That has not happened. 

Going beyond this matter, there are instruments and agencies that are being affected by the absence of that portfolio. To cure it does not require an appointment per se but a designation will cure it, which in this case is absent in this matter. 

The advice that we gave to the learned Deputy Attorney-General is to seek a formal designation or even an appointment, if it can help this purpose. Otherwise, we were constrained to proceed and I thought we would put that on record for the House to appreciate. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I am still not satisfied. Are you informing the Speaker? (Mr Niwagaba stood_) Please proceed to sit down. (Laughter)

Honourable members, it is the benefit of the House to get information from whatever source. The person you were speaking to was the Deputy Attorney-General and you know him. Sometimes it is not necessary to block proceedings of committees of Parliament on this kind of ground. 

Sometimes you cause a waiver, by saying that probably, the technical people who signed the document just put it there without knowledge. You are supposed to ignore some of these things because they present no validity in the process of handling these matters. 

What you need is the information, not the person who has signed the document in the case of a presentation on a Bill. I do not even know if there is a minister of justice or a deputy minister of justice. It is of no concern to me. Is there a Government? Is it represented in all sectors? Are we functioning? Are we being supported as Parliament in doing our work as the arm of Government? 

Ours is not to begin interrogating whoever is coming. We are going to start asking for the instrument of appointment of the ministers, to verify that actually what the minister is doing now has the details contained in the instruments of appointment. 

Please, I am urging you, honourable members and that includes hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, that sometimes we need to look for the bigger purpose and serve it, than create unnecessary roadblocks in the way of this Parliament getting access and proceeding within the timelines. Now we are losing time. No, I do not need any further explanations. 

Let us just sort out this thing. They have heard what they have heard. Let them deal with it. Of course, you have asked for an extension of time. Do Members agree that we extend time? I put the question to the extension of time because they were not able to proceed since the minister that came was the wrong one. 

Honourable members, let us get serious. We are not going to entertain this and I am serious about this. Now we are going to lose two or three weeks waiting for a minister. If the minister is not appointed, will you come back here asking for an extension of time? If you decide to examine it with the same minister, how will you look? No, honourable members. Let us get serious. It does not matter whether it is a Bill or a statutory instrument. Let us get serious. 

I have seen committee chairpersons chasing ministers. Now I am even seeing committees inviting heads of agencies as if there are no ministers supervising them. We need to put our act together so that we hold the place we have as the legislature of this country. That is what we are.

You can come here and laugh and say “This man came holding out that he was the minister of state and yet we know him as the Deputy Attorney-General”. The substance you bring creates humour but you have sent the message strong and clear; that will stop this hard hocking but it should not stop the business of the House. 

Members, I beg you. Otherwise, I watch and I hear. There are concerns from people who appear before some committees. Let us put our act together. We are going to have a general meeting, later, with all the chairpersons of the committees and we see how to structure these things and move forward. (Member rose_) There is no room for listening? You have just been speaking here and I listened to you. (Laughter)

MR KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Sunday, 17 October 2021, the nation was greeted to the sad news of the passing-on of a one Aziz Bashir, who was killed by a boda boda mob in the areas of Mengo and Rubaga in Kampala. This happening is opening other wounds and more questions about something that has been with us concerning the management and operationalisation of the boda boda industry.

It is absurd that this sector, which is the biggest employer in the transport sector in the country, is not regulated. It has no clear structures of leadership and management. It is upon this background that I rise to give a notice of an intention to move a motion that will help in the management, regulation and operationalisation of boda boda industry. I seek your way. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Besides having Item 4 (VI) on the Order Paper, I think some of you watched what happened to some person who had a small accident. He then tried to chase the person who caused the accident, who happened to be a boda boda rider. In the process, the driver knocked another boda boda rider. Unfortunately, he got killed by the people who came there. 

I think that is the concern of the Member – that this is not an isolated case. It is happening. I do not know how to handle it. It is a heavy policy matter because we have a substantive item under Item 4(VI). I do not know whether we can put it under there so that the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs can come and deal with this matter as one of the aspects that they need to deal with. Would that be fair? That way, we will deal with this issue properly. 

Let us leave it for a substantive matter on the Order Paper and then we handle it from there. Thank you. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) (NO. 2) BILL, 2021

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2021” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it a Bill? What are the other instruments that are supposed to accompany it? Are they there? 

MR MUSASIZI: We have already submitted the Certificate of Financial Implications to the office of the Clerk. 

THE SPEAKER: Outside this House? We need the certificate on this Table, Sir.

MR MUSASIZI: I would like to formally lay the Certificate of Financial Implications accompanying the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: We like the formal way. We do not like the mailing. Is that okay now?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I can repeat. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2021” be read for the first time. In compliance with the rules, the Bill is accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications, which I beg to lay on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. The Bill stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle it expeditiously and come and advise the House on how we proceed with this matter. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL DAY OF THE GIRL CHILD MARKED ON 11 OCTOBER 2021

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement was supposed to be presented before the commemoration of the day on 11 October 2021 but since Parliament was on recess, the ministry could not do it. 

This is a statement to Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on the Commemoration of the International Day of the Girl Child on 11 October 2021, which was held at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds.

First of all, I thank this Parliament and welcome back all the Members from recess. This day was celebrated on 11 October 2021. The purpose of the statement to Parliament is to provide information regarding this year’s International Day of the Girl Child. This day was recognised by the United Nations General Assembly and adopted under the Resolution 66/17O that declared 11 October as the International Day of the Girl Child.

The International Day of the Girl Child provides an excellent opportunity to all state and non-state parties to reflect on the recognition of girl’s rights and the unique challenges girls face around the world. Equally important, the day enables all relevant stakeholders to reflect on existing policies, programmes and strategic investments for the holistic empowering of young women and girls.

The theme for this year’s International Day of the Girl Child was “Digital Generation, Our Generation”. The theme calls for a key moment of strategic repositioning of the girl child during the era of digital migration. 

The International Day of the Girl Child is, indeed, a moment for engagement and an opportunity to hear the voices of a new generation of girls and gender advocates. It is a chance to unite towards bold and collective solutions that enhance girls and young women to fully participate in the digital revolution. 

The quality of our girls in Uganda will, in a way, be dependent upon the girls’ readiness to embrace technological innovations and inventions. We must all strive to ensure inclusive and equitable quality transfer of skills in a digitalised global environment to our girls and young women inclusive, since accessibility and global technology transfer are critical in achieving the sustainable development goals and for this country to move to a middle-income status.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the need to keep within the SOPs, this activity was held in the Kololo Ceremonial Grounds and it just had a few members. We had hon. Janet Kataaha Museveni as our guest of honour and she presided over the function very well.

Before the D-day, we also had activities that were held and these included meetings, round-table discussions, Television and Radio talk shows and social media interactions on the issues of the girl-child.

In conclusion and on behalf of the ministry, I would like to thank all the Government partners for the success of this day. I say all this for God and my country. Thank you. Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. This is a statement for information on an event which has passed. Many of you were invited and I hope many of you attended. It was at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. 

If there are short comments, we can - It is not a typical ministerial statement that requires a debate. (Member rose_) Is it clarification on the date or?  We will have a short engagement and then we go to the next statement, which I think is a fairly substantial matter. Can I have a Member for youth to start the debate?

3.28
MS AGNES KIRABO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister of State for Disability Affairs who has stood in for the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for the presentation she has made about the celebration of the International Day of the Girl Child.

Mr Speaker, allow me to comment on the status of the girl-child, not only in the central region - for the young people I represent - but also for the entire Uganda. We all know that we have been hit by the COVID-19 pandemic where we have had two lockdowns and we have registered many teenage pregnancies. I have not heard the minister address that.

Yes, I appreciate the digitisation of the girl-child and the young women/mothers. However, we have a very big challenge where children are raising fellow children and it is saddening that in my district, Luweero, they registered 1,400 teenage pregnancies in Luweero Regional Referral Hospital. There are many cases that are not registered yet. 

I would like to call upon the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to do something. We even fear to face these young mothers because whenever they see us as their representatives, they cry out to us; they contact us almost every day because they need help - they do not have beddings, shelter and even simple necessities like soap. They lack so many things including sanitary towels yet I hear that condoms are given for free. Therefore, let us do something.

Mr Speaker, through you, we need help as young girls and young mothers. We need to sensitise this group because they are affected and are going through a lot. I thank you.

3.31
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement and for marking the day of the girl child. However, I am contemplating on the theme that our country chose on that day in the wake of the teenage pregnancies in the country with the challenge of COVID-19. And we chose “Digital Generation, Our Generation.”  

Mr Speaker, as a country Uganda, at this time in point, I do not think this was the best for us to reflect on. Rather, we should reflect on what we can do about the teenage pregnancies that we are faced with. 

We would have launched something to take the country forward in protecting the girl child. I am disappointed. No wonder, we have children who are going to international schools going to school and our children are seated at home, yet the Government is not bothered. 

As Parliament and leaders, we need to come up and look at the pain of the least Ugandan and we think for them and get the solutions to the challenges that they face. I beg to submit. (Applause) 

3.34
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to debate on this. I am happy about the theme if they can live up to their expectations.

Mr Speaker, this year’s theme of “Digital generation, our generation” - I am surprised if the minister or the ministry brought it in good faith. How many girls are accessing the internet or how many girls can afford internet if we are to go by this theme? (Applause) 

We have been facing the COVID-19 pandemic and we very well know that most of the students from well-to-do families are accessing their lessons via Zoom. Therefore, considering the “digital generation, our generation”, what have you done as our Government to make sure that our people can access not only cheap but free internet and everywhere?

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I am surprised by the theme. It is good you decided to choose this theme but I think it was a global theme. However, as Government of Uganda, did you also go to Kololo to sit and celebrate and knew that your theme was going to be achieved? Do you find it being realistic? 

Otherwise, I plead that we make sure that our girls can access free internet any time though that is not to say that when they are around Kampala in places where there are some hot spots, then they can access it.

Lastly, children or girls from well to do families have not missed classes. Children studying from international schools have been promoted year after year but our children down in the villages are seated and getting pregnant. The minister is –(Member timed out.)

3.37
mr Anthony esenu (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for what she submitted on the Floor of Parliament. 

However, on behalf of the people of Kapelebyong and the girl-child, I would like to say that we do not identify with that theme. We have no electricity in the entire district before we can think of going digital. 

Secondly, Wi-fi does not exist. When my district wants to send me a message on WhatsApp or internet, they have to first drive to hon. Musa Ecweru’s constituency, which is Amuria. 

Therefore, when you talk about digitising, in Kapelebyong I wonder whether we are still in Uganda or another part of the world. 

In the statement made by the minister, I am hoping that there is going to be significant effort to identify and help districts of that nature so that they can access internet, power and Wi-fi.

Talking about computers, Mr Speaker, you will be shocked to hear that Kapelebyong has only three computers in the whole district. Therefore, I ask Government to become serious when they make some of these statements.

On the matter of the girl-child, I would like to raise two points. The first is to do with the young girls we are seeing on the streets of Kampala begging every day for food to eat. 

I do not know whether Government is going to rescue these girls who come from one part of the country, get them out of the streets and help them have a future, which we can be proud of. It is not only the girl-child but also the boy-child.

On the issue of the young girls who are becoming pregnant while out of school, whenever I hear statements being made, I feel we do good analysis of the problems but when it comes to solutions, we always seem to go the opposite side. 

I would like to request Government that when they talk about helping the girl-child to be sensitised against early pregnancy, they should come up with a programme to also sensitise the men to help them take responsibility after impregnating –

The Speaker: Would you like to conclude?

mr esenu: Thank you. In conclusion, I am saying that Government should come up with a plan to address the issue of pregnancy among the young girls and the men to help us deal with this problem in a comprehensive manner. Thank you.

The Speaker: I hear a cry for a motion. Can I listen to it?

3.41
ms sarah opendi (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Honourable minister indicated that this day already passed though the subject we are discussing is very serious. 

I stand, under rule 59, to move that we close debate on this particular subject and you allow me to come up with a substantive motion, which we will debate, as a House, regarding the girl-child and the boy-child and/or the children of this country. We can then be able, thereafter, to make clear recommendations to Government. Otherwise, this is a statement of an activity that has already passed and we may not do it justice. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Members of Parliament from Kazo and Rakai. Honourable members, let me explain something. 

Honourable members, this House never debates in vain. It is a complete waste of parliamentary time. If we debate without decision, we would have used the time improperly.

The housing of this very small information paper about a date that has passed but touching on a crucial subject cannot be the proper vehicle for carrying this debate. In the end when you are done with the debate, what do you do? Do we just go home? 

We do not want to go home without taking decisions on important matters of this nature. 

The shadow minister wanted to say something but your matter has already been overtaken by this particular motion. The rules are clear. When a motion for closure has been proposed, the Speaker should not even spend a minute - I have been spending minutes – and proceeds to put the question. 

The purpose of this is for us to have a more comprehensive engagement and discussion on the motion. The minister will now come in a different way with more data. However, do not lose sight of the digital generation because that seems to be the crux of the debate. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I put the motion that debate on this matter be closed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: Honourable member, that serves as notice received for that motion. Please proceed to prepare the motion urgently. I would be delighted if we handled it this week.

ms opendi: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will handle it expeditiously.


MINISTERial STATEMENTS ON THE STATUS OF ROADS IN THE COUNTRY

3.44
The Minister of state for Works and Transport (works) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I am in possession of a report that was supposed to be presented by my senior colleague but because of other engagements he is out of office right now. I do not know whether it was uploaded so that my colleagues –

The Speaker: Honourable minister, just proceed until you are stopped.

mr ecweru: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report is quite thick but I am sure colleagues must have looked at it. I am presenting this statement on the status of roads in the country to the Parliament. 

Honourable members, over the last five years, Government of Uganda has prioritised investment in the infrastructure necessary to support the development of the economy and transformation of our country. 

Roads are key infrastructure assets, which have been prioritised by the Government to support the development of productive sectors such as; agriculture, industry, oil and gas, and tourism. 

Road transport is the dominant mode of transport accounting for over 80 per cent of cargo freight and passenger's movement.

Mr Speaker, let me classify the type of roads that we have and handle here. Uganda has a total road network of 159,529 kilometres. This comprises of the national roads, district roads, KCCA roads, urban roads and community access roads as detailed in the graph that you will see.  

The above roads network is largely unpaved with only about 5.5 per cent of the total road network. 

Mr Speaker, in terms of management, National District Roads, KCCA Roads, Urban Roads and Community Access Roads are managed by Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), District Local Governments, KCCA, Urban Councils and subcounties respectively.

For the national roads, the national roads network is divided into the following functional classes: 

Class A: International Trunk roads, which connect to Uganda’s major borders and provides access to sea.  

Class B: National Trunk roads, which connect major regions within Uganda and also connect large towns and cities to each other; 

Class C: Intra regional roads, which provide access within regions and connect the communities to the regional towns or cities.

Honourable members, over the period from Financial Year 2014/20l5 to Financial Year 2019/2020, the Government of Uganda allocated Shs 16.8 trillion to the development and maintenance of the national roads network in the country. As a result of the increased investment, the paved roads have increased from 4,157 km in 2015 to 5,528 km in June 2021. The details of the road projects substantially completed in the last five years are included in the attached Annex 1. 

As of June 2021, all the Class A roads in Uganda were paved. This makes it possible for travel on tarmac from any major border crossing, which improves our connectivity within regional markets and sources of inputs. For example; Malaba-Kampala-Katuna (650km), Kampala-Fort Portal-Mpondwe (425km) and Malaba-Kamdini-Elegu (500km). In the same period, 40 per cent of the national trunk roads (Class B) were paved and about 8 per cent of the Intra Regional (Class C) roads were paved. 

Honourable Members, this investment has had the following impact: 

The improvement of connectivity to major border points has improved our access to regional countries, where there is market for Uganda’s exports and also eased importation. This has increased Uganda's competitiveness within the region. 

It has improved trade with other countries and other economic activities among the different regions within the country. 

It has improved access to tourism sites, industrial parks and sources of agricultural produce. 

It has improved delivery of social and administrative services. 

It has also contributed to the consolidation of security gains over the years. 

Government plans to continue the paving of the different classes of national roads in a phased manner based on the economic and social needs across the country and availability of resources to achieve the Vision 2040 target of paved roads density of 100km per every 1000 square km.

On-going national road project 

In addition to the completed projects, the Government of Uganda embarked on the construction of new roads during the five-year period from 2015 to 2020 and a number of the projects are on-going. During this period, the Government prioritised the upgrading of roads critical to supporting the development of the oil and gas sector. The projects were aimed at providing adequate transport infrastructure for the oil and gas sector to move from the exploration into the development and production phase. The status of these roads is shown in the table that I invite Members to look at. 

Procurement is in the final stages for the Contractor for the Lusalira - Nkonge - Lumegere - Sembabule Road, which is part of the critical oil roads programme. These roads were identified in collaboration with private partners in the oil and gas sector. It is expected that the construction of the critical oil roads will ease the process of developing these resources. 

The Government also commenced projects that are aimed at reducing the congestion in Kampala and the surrounding districts. The on-going decongestion projects include: 
The Kampala Flyover project; 

Upgrading of Kira - Matugga Road; 

Upgrading of Najjanankumbi - Busabala Road; 

Kampala Northern Bypass Phase II; and 

Busega - Mpigi Expressway.

The Government also planned for the construction of the Kampala - Southern Bypass completing the inner ring as part of the efforts to ease the congestion in Kampala and the surrounding districts. 

Other projects aimed at easing congestion in the city include the Matugga–Kisubi, Kampala-Nakasero and the Kampala–Bombo Expressway. 

The Government is in the phase of developing a comprehensive expressway master plan for the development of expressway networks in the whole country in the next 30 years.
Mr Speaker, in addition to the interventions to support the oil and gas sector and the roads to ease congestion, the Government has invested in the following road projects across the country in support again of tourism, agriculture, trade and infrastructure. The roads are: Kapchorwa-Suam, Moroto-Lokitanyala, Masaka, Tirinyi, Muyembe, Rwekunye-Apac and Atiak-Laropi.

Planned projects for the NDPIII period

Mr Speaker, a number of national roads projects are planned by the Government of Uganda as part of the third National Development Plan (NDPIII). The projects were selected to support development of the key priority sectors within the available resources and also promote equitable development, an aspiration of the Vision 2040.

The Ministry of Works and Transport, through the Uganda National Roads Authority, carries out technical needs assessment and traffic situation on the national roads network every year. The assessment determines the required interventions on the network. 

Based on the technical needs analysis undertaken in 2020, approximately 8,811 kilometre of unpaved roads, required upgrading to paved standards over a five year period. This was estimated to cost approximately Shs 32 trillion, which was far above the available resources in the five year planning period for the NDP III. The roads were therefore, prioritised to fit within the available resources in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). 

The prioritised roads are classified as follows

3,602 kilometres are meant for road upgrading; 
Construction of six strategic bridges; and 
The capacity improvement of 32 kilometres of roads in Kampala and the surrounding districts.

The details of these road projects are shown in Annex 2.

Mr Speaker, the above are the development projects that have been undertaken and are planned on the National Roads network. In addition to the development projects, the Government is also making efforts in maintaining and rehabilitating the existing road infrastructure in the country.

Rehabilitation and maintenance of the national roads network

Honourable members, in the five years from 2015 to 2020, the Government of Uganda has invested in the rehabilitation of the following roads: If you look at that Nakalena, Fort Portal-Hoima, Ishaka, rehabilitation of Masaka town roads and Mityana-Mubende road is ongoing.

During the NDPIII, 477 kilometres of paved national roads require rehabilitation are as shown in Annex 3.

Mr Speaker, there is a growing backlog of maintenance on the paved roads due to inadequate allocation of resources for timely maintenance interventions. There is need to balance the allocation of resources between development and maintenance activities to preserve the developed road assets.

Challenges faced in the maintenance and development of national roads:

Mr Speaker, the road sector has faced a number of challenges in providing the best roads to support the development of the country.

There has been a recurring issue of inadequate financing to meet the high demands for road development in the country. The roads prioritised in the NDPIII to support the development of key sectors total approximately 5,000 kilometres. However, the resources available during the period are only adequate for upgrading 3,532 kilometres. This inadequacy of resources makes it impossible to meet the high demand for paved roads and has forced the Government to prioritise investment in areas with the highest return on investment as the availability of resources increases with the growth of the economy. 

The prevailing pandemic has further exacerbated this problem by further reducing the resources available for investment in the development and maintenance of road infrastructure.

Mr Speaker, the second challenge faced by the roads is the changing climate. Like we discussed here today, the last five years have seen increased rainfall and flooding, which damages the road infrastructure in many places. With predictions that the global climate is set to change further, the roads built today, will not live the lifespan that we expected. 

There has also been an ongoing problem of low participation of local contractors and consultants in the industry, especially for complex high value projects. The Government of Uganda has prioritised the development of the private sector in the NDPIII period under the Private Sector Development Programme. The Ministry of Works and Transport will make sure that all its interventions take into account this national objective. Some progress has been made in this area. By the end of Financial Year 2020/2021, 38.8 per cent of signed contracts worth Shs 1.3 trillion had been awarded to local providers: Ambitious Construction Company Ltd, Dynaco Limited, Spider Construction Limited, Prome Consultants Limited and KKATT Consult Ltd.

Also, in 2015 PPDA issued guidelines on reservation schemes to procure local contracts in public procurement. It was to apply to procurements by threshold to benefit national and resident providers for; supplies of up to Shs 1 billion, road works of up to Shs 45 billion, and other public works of up to Shs 1.1 billion, consultancy services of up to Shs 1 billion and non-consultancy services of up to Shs 200 million.

District, Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR)

We have achievements to the last five financial years, that is, 2019/2020 and 2021/2022. These achievements relate to projects and activities executed by the ministry - UNRA and district local governments - using funds appropriated by this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, in the last two financial years, Parliament appropriated a total of Shs 326.6 billion and Shs 359.16 billion for the maintenance and rehabilitation of the district, urban and community access roads, respectively. 

However, Shs 32l.6 billion and Shs 270.75 billion was disbursed for maintenance and rehabilitation, respectively.

With the above funding, the ministry registered the following achievements:

It maintained 18,482km of DUCA Roads under routine manual maintenance.

Maintained 3,479km of DUCA Roads under routine mechanised maintenance.

Maintained 330.72km of DUCA Roads under periodic maintenance.

It also rehabilitated 729km of district roads using Force Account (use of own equipment and staff).

Rehabilitated 86.5km of community access roads.

Rehabilitated and tarmacked 13.9km of urban roads.

Tarmacked 58.4km of low volume roads using low cost sealing technology; and

It constructed the following bridges, swamp crossings and box culverts on the DUCAR network. Bridge: Kisaigi in Kyankwanzi. Then there is 5km swamp crossings at Bwambala in Kakumiro, Kabindula in Kyankwanzi, Kangai in Dokolo, Wangobo-Nsokwe-Namunyumya in Bugiri/Bugweri, and Kabuhuuna in Kibaale District. Then there are box culverts Buhindagye in Ibanda and Ojonai in Amuria District.

Mr Speaker, with the above interventions the proportion of the DUCAR network in fair-to-good condition increased from 55 per cent in the Financial Year 2018/2019 to 60 per cent in Financial Year 2020/2021.

Also the percentage of bridges on the DUCAR network in fair-to-good condition increased slightly from 50 per cent in Financial Year 2018/2019 to 52 per cent in Financial Year 2020/2021.

Road Construction Equipment

In 2011, Government made a policy shift from the use of contracting for road maintenance of district roads to use of own staff and equipment - that is what we call Force Account.

Following the policy shift, in 2012, Government procured 1,405 items of road construction equipment from the People's Republic of China. The equipment was mainly distributed to the district local governments, urban councils, district roads rehabilitation units, and the urban roads resealing units.
However, implementation of Force Account using the road equipment from China presented some challenges as highlighted below:

The districts did not receive a full road unit comprising of a motor grader, wheel loader, roller, water bowser and a tipper.

The model of motor grader (Changlin) that was procured for the districts was meant for light grading work and yet, most of the roads in the districts had deteriorated to a level where heavy grading and rehabilitation was required.

Lack of well-trained and skilled equipment operators in the local governments resulting in frequent equipment breakdown and poor quality work. 

Lack of effective and efficient after sales services and maintenance for the Chinese equipment.

Mr Speaker, in 2017, the ministry coordinated the procurement of additional 1,150 items of road construction equipment from the Government of Japan. The road equipment was delivered in 2018 and distributed to the 122 district local governments, including other agencies like KCCA, UNRA, NEC, and the Ministry of Works and Transport itself for force account centres. 

Each of the 122 districts received one motor grader, one wheel loader, one roller, one water bowser, and one tipper truck.

To effectively maintain the road construction equipment from Japan, the ministry signed framework contracts with three local equipment dealers to provide after sales maintenance for the manufacturers during the warranty period. These include:

M/S Victoria Equipment Ltd - KOMATSU dealer, to maintain the motor graders, bulldozers, hydraulic excavators, and wheel loaders. 

M/S Spear Motors Ltd – MITSUBISHI/FUSO dealer, to maintain tippers, crane trucks, self-loaders, low loaders and water bowsers, and 

M/S Afrique Technical Services - SAKAI dealer, to maintain vibro-rol1ers, pneumatic rollers, pedestrian rollers, tampers and rammers.

For the period commencing from 2018, the 122 districts were able to carry out all the necessary road maintenance works without any major challenges.

However, most of this equipment has now started deteriorating and thus requires timely maintenance. The budget allocation for road equipment maintenance is now Shs 16 billion against a maintenance requirement of Shs 44.6 billion. 

This situation has resulted into the following: 

Increased outstanding debt with the local maintenance service providers. The ministry now owes the service providers Shs 597 billion. Some service providers have told the ministry that they will not offer additional services until the debt is cleared. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what was the figure?

MR ECWERU: The ministry now owes the service providers Shs 1.397 billion. I beg your pardon. Some service providers have told the ministry that they will not offer additional services until the debt is cleared; 

Reduction in availability of mainly the motor graders and the tipper due to worn out tyres that cannot be replaced due to lack of funds. A total of Shs 4.36 billion is required to purchase these tyres;

Increased repair backlog as the equipment awaits availability of funds before they can be repaired; 

Rising number of Chinese equipment getting grounded due to lack of a maintenance budget and spare parts; and 

Poor funds absorption by the district local governments and Urban Councils especially those whose equipment is not operational. 

My ministry is procuring additional road construction equipment for 15 new districts, which were created between 2019 and 2020. These districts include: Nabilatuk, Bugweri, Kasanda, Kwania, Kapelebyong, Kikuube, Obongi, Kazo, Rwampara, Kitagwenda, Madi-Okollo, Karenga, Lusot, Rukiga and Terego. After the delivery, each district will be expected to get one motor grader, one wheel loader, one vibro roller, one water bowser and two tipper trucks. This is estimated to cost Shs 55 billion. 

Whereas the procurement for the above equipment is on-going, the required funds are not available in the ministry's budget. This is an issue that requires our collective effort to allocate funding for this much needed equipment. 

Regional Mechanical Workshops and Zonal Equipment Centres 

There are currently three RMWs in the country, located in the districts of Mbarara, Jinja and Gulu. The ministry is in the final stages of establishing the fourth Regional Mechanical Workshop in Kampala. The Regional Mechanical Workshops were established in the 1990s mainly to carry out maintenance and repair for district roads construction equipment. 

The RMWs have ensured an annual average equipment availability in the districts at over 70 per cent. However, as explained above, the RMWs are heavily underfunded with an allocation of Shs 16 billion against an annual budget requirement of Shs 44.6 billion. 

In addition, my ministry is in the process of establishing nine zonal equipment centres to support local governments with specialised road construction equipment, which is not available in the districts. The zonal centers will be pools of specialised road construction equipment available for districts in the region to borrow on a rotational basis. The recommended locations of the zonal centres are: Kampala, Mbarara, Jinja, Gulu, Luwero, Hoima, Arua, Moroto and Mbale. We are also debating whether Soroti will be part of this list. That discussion is still on-going. 

My ministry will need Shs 12 billion to kick-start the establishment of zonal equipment centres. 

Mount Elgon Labour Based Training Center (MELTC) 

The MELTC is the training arm of the ministry located in present day Sironko District. It was established in 1995 with a vision to be a centre of excellence for training and capacity building in the roads sector, both nationally and in the region. It was established with the assistance of DANIDA. 

The core of the training conducted at this institute is focused on programmes aimed at poverty reduction through tapping into the employment opportunities for the disadvantaged groups such as women, unemployed youths, the elderly and the disabled. 

Over the years, the centre has trained a number of professionals from the district local governments, contractors, UNRA and from neighbouring countries; that is Kenya, Somalia and Malawi in labour-based road and bridge construction and maintenance and innovative approaches to road and bridge construction (low cost sealing, arch bridges and et cetera) and Road Asset Management, among other courses. 

This institute's annual budget has, until this financial year, been Shs 4 billion but was increased to Shs 6 billion, which is sufficient to run classroom training and practical demonstrations. However, it is inadequate for construction of trial sections by the trainees. The centre will need an annual budget increment of Shs 4 billion in the medium term to construct a modern hostel, acquire more training facilities and equipment and improve on the practical training, particularly the construction of trial sections. 

Challenges with Management of the District, Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR) Network 

The key challenges experienced with the management of the DUCAR network include the following: 

Limited budget for rehabilitation of the DUCAR network; 
Limited budget to reduce the bottlenecks on the DUCAR network;
Inadequate funding to roll out low cost sealing to different parts of the country; 
Lack of adequate equipment to enable effective execution of the Force Account works; and 
Inadequate funding for road maintenance
The absence of a contingency fund, which sometimes does not touch the issue of works. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure you and all the honourable members that the Government has prioritised the development and maintenance of the road network to support economic development and socio-economic transformation. 

There have been several successes registered after the increased investment in the roads network, including the achievement of having all Class A international roads upgraded to paved standard.

The Ministry of Works and Transport, through the Uganda National Roads Authority, has planned several projects within the NDP III period which will further improve the condition of the roads. I know that yesterday some Members saw some of the roads and we are receiving questions as to why some have been left out. We are going to explain that also.

The Government of Uganda will continue to prioritise phased investment in road infrastructure through the National Development Plans to achieve the target in Vision 2040 of the paved roads density of 100km of paved roads per every 1000 sq km, up from 30km of paved roads for every 1000 sq km and;

The Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Works and Transport, will continue to invest in maintenance of public roads to ensure that the proportion of roads in fair to good condition is maintained at a minimum of 80 per cent throughout the NDP III period.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, my ministry is committed to improve the roads network by ensuring timely and effective maintenance of public roads and construct the priority projects identified in the National Development Plan III to facilitate delivery of public services, economic activities and ensure the highest returns on investment. I beg to submit. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. You will recall that this was part of the reports that should have been done tomorrow on the request of the senior minister. However, when we consulted with him, he told us that the minister who is present can present but he would like to participate in the debate on the questions and matters being raised by the Members of Parliament. He is not available today but will be available tomorrow. 

Therefore, if we are to debate this ministerial statement to which the rules allow a debate of one hour, we would miss the engagement with the senior minister and the minister of state. That is the request from the senior minister and also confirmed by the minister of state who has just presented the report.

Therefore, would it be a proper way for us to come tomorrow when both General and hon. Ecweru are here and then we have the debate? Is that okay? [Members: “Yes”] Okay, we will defer debate on this item to tomorrow when both ministers are here then we can see how to handle it. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A few hours ago, you said that the House should not debate in vain and you are absolutely right. When you look at the Front Bench, you do not see the Ministry of Finance and yet whatever we discuss here has financial implications.

Is it procedurally proper that we should always have issues here - You have referred the matter for tomorrow and yet the Minister of Finance comes for a few minutes and then goes away. Can we have a designated Minister of Finance permanently here so that we do not discuss in vain?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes because of the sitting requirement of the House at the moment, Members wait in the lobbies and each time there is space, they come in. Therefore, mere out of sight may not necessarily mean out of territory.

Just like when you started raising the concern, the minister walked in because he was just sitting outside there. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE KAMPALA INSTITUTIONAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS (KIIDP) II

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kabuye Kyofatogabye):  Mr Speaker, this is a statement of the status of the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP II). The Rt Hon. Prime Minister presented business for the succeeding week that required a response from the Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs on the status Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP II) and I wish to submit as follows.

Members have gone through the introduction but let me say that the project started way back in 2003 up to 2013 and KIIDP II is a succeeding project, which is implemented by the Kampala Capital City Authority and funded by the World Bank. 

It was approved by the Parliament of Uganda on 9 December 2014 and it became effective in May 2015 with the development objective of enhancing infrastructure and institutional capacity for KCCA to improve urban mobility in Kampala. It is in line with both the second and third National Development Plans and the city strategic 10-year plan.

Mr Speaker, allow me to go straight to the components. It has two major components: one on road infrastructure where it targeted to do the dualling of 113.64 km of roads and a target of reconstruction and widening of 75.86 km of roads and in addition to upgrading of 77.5 km of gravel roads to bitumen standard, signalisation of 15 standalone and 16 incidental junctions.

Mr Speaker, the project is also focusing on the design of Batch II roads and not forgetting drainage improvement especially engineering of two primary drainage channels and associated secondary and tertiary channels.

It had a component of institutional and systems development, which was geared at supporting the directorates of planning, revenue and engineering to just improve their functions. 

Mr Speaker, the project’s financial package is a total of US$183.75 million of which US$175 million was coming from the International Development Association of the World Bank and counterpart financing of US$ 8.7 million.

Allow me to go straight to the achievements, which are also broken into two parts:

financial achievements and
Physical progress. 

In terms of finances to date, the bank has disbursed $158,292,655.28. On counterpart funding, Government of Uganda has dispersed $11,535,414.63.

Mr Speaker, I will interest the Members to go through that table detailing what I have just said and the second table, which analyses the cash flows. Allow me to go to the physical progress.

In terms of roads duelling, reconstruction and upgrading, the project has so far completed improvement of batch one roads totalling to 26.25 kilometres. The details are there. We have duelled Kira Road, Mabule Road and Makerere Hill Road. I call upon the Members to go through the list. It is a bit lengthy but for purposes of time, allow me to stop there.

In terms of signalisation of the 12 junctions, the junction at Fairway was completed; four junctions along Makerere Hill Road, three along Kira Road, one along Bwaise-Mambule Road and three along Hoima Road, Bakuli-Nakulabye section.

On the improvement of batch two roads totalling to 31.4 kilometres, there has been an upgrade of Kulambiro Ring Road, reconstruction and duelling of John Babiha, which is commonly known as Acacia Avenue – the list is lengthy.

In terms of signalisation of the 16 junctions, five junctions along John Babiha (Acacia Avenue) have been completed, five along Nakawa-Ntinda Road, two along Lukuli, one at Kasubi and three along Kabusu-Bunamwaya-Lweza Road.

Mr Speaker, some work is still ongoing on the construction of drainages focused mainly on the construction of 2.58 kilometres of Lubigi Drainage Channel and construction of 3.28 kilometres of Nakamiro secondary drainage channel.

The pictorial evidence is attached. I will interest Members to go through.

In terms of institutional development, 373,826 property in the five Divisions of Kampala have been assigned household numbers. The detail in the table is as follows:

Nakawa – 75,662 has been achieved
Central – 13,075. The list goes by in that table. I would interest honourable members to go through it.

There has been also assignment of household numbers. Most importantly, 12,547 house number plates have been installed as a pilot and 3,350 sites have been installed with road signage. 7,111 unnamed roads have been named. The GIS support system services have been enhanced in the city.

Mr Speaker, you can now easily locate a place where you are just by dropping a pin on your phone.

In terms of computer-aided mass valuation of property, commonly known as CAMV, the general valuation risks for five divisions have been completed. The supplementary valuations lists also came in, which came as a result of re-valuation of property in all the five divisions. 
The table below shows the achievements in terms of valuation of property. Of course, this is geared towards property rate realisation.

Achievements realised under the undertaken designs and studies: So far, batch one and two roads have been designed and advertised. The design review adapted of Nalukolongo Channel was also completed. 

There was conduct of diagnostic assessment of underground water flow in Kampala Central Business District. This involved the detailed design for the expansion and rehabilitation of Nakivubo Channel, which is nearing completion.

Updating of the Kampala drainage master plan was also completed and is now operational, not forgetting the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area multi-model transport master plan, which was also completed.

The design for the traffic control centre building was also completed and asset register is nearing completion, which we call the i-roads.

The table below is the result framework from the logical framework. I will interest the Members to go through it carefully and look at those variable indicators.

The project also faced some challenges, notably, the COVID-19 pandemic, and associated travel restrictions. This has impacted the project progress and it is affecting our extended time of completion and threatening the 30th day of November 2021 where the project KIIDP II must have come to a conclusion.

There has also been a challenge of land acquisition especially for batch two roads, junctions and drainage especially for the Lubigi section and downstream of Kawaala Bridge to Hoima Road.

There was also delayed mobilisation of equipment and personnel for the batch two, lot one and lot two roads and drainage contractors.

Mr Speaker, since this is road constructions and earthworks, it was also affected by heavy rains, which were experienced in the second half of 2019 calendar year up to February 2020.

In conclusion, KIIDP II has registered remarkable progress in implementation of the various interventions and achieving its objectives amidst a number of challenges encountered during its implementation.

I wish to take this opportunity to appreciate the role played by different stakeholders especially Parliament that has contributed to the achievements so far realised. I beg to submit.

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable members, as you can see, that is one statement out of the three; Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project II. There is one on the resurfacing of the old taxi park. Then, there is the third one, which I said should be looked at again so as to incorporate the issue of the boda boda situation in the city so that it is more comprehensive and touches those key issues.

Honourable members, usually this attracts a debate. Should we proceed with a debate or should we also take the one of – honourable minister, are you ready with resurfacing of the old taxi park? For this statement in response to a question, how do you make a ministerial statement to Parliament on resurfacing a taxi park? Proceed then we do the debate jointly if necessary.

STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF RESURFACING OF THE OLD KAMPALA TAXI PARK

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): The Rt Hon. Prime Minister presented business for the succeeding week that required a response from the Minister of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs on the status of resurfacing of the Old Taxi Park. I wish to submit as follows:

Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) is responsible for, among other things, the development and maintenance of the city’s roads, infrastructure, thus, has been responsible for the management of the Old Taxi Park, which is one of the public transport terminals within the central business district. 

The majority of the taxis and buses for both long distance and city services start their journey here. It is estimated that over 200,000 people transit through this park daily for their different destinations and the park provides work spaces for over 25,000 people. These include the taxi drivers, conductors, vendors and other associated businesses, which have got a multiplier effect within the park. 

Over the years, the old taxi park carpet had been eroded and the park had become very crowded with inadequate facilities and difficulties to access. The taxis would waste a lot of productive time in the queue on entry and exit to the park. This affected the productivity of the downtown area. The private sector, which also owns part of the land around the park, are desirous of developing their real estate. 

Mr Speaker, the existing status is as follows:

The park was in a deplorable state requiring urgent rehabilitation. The KCCA had been doing minor repairs by punching and sectional reconstruction of specific areas within the carpet area but this had repeatedly failed due to inadequate drainage. 

During the first COVID-19 lockdown, KCCA got an opportunity to work on the carpet area of the park without interference from the taxis. The plan was both short and long term. 

In view of the above, KCCA engaged contractors to reconstruct the park carpet area and beautification of the embankments, reconstruction of the walkways and drainage on both Burton and Ben Kiwanuka Streets. 

Mr Speaker, the scope of work involved: 

Drainage improvements 

This involved constructing and stalling underground drainage pipe culverts covering the entire carpet area to drain both the surface water and storm water runoffs. 

Pavement and reconstruction 

This involved reconstructing the pavement areas in the carpet area by improving the subgrade using rock fill and crushed stone base. The wiring of the carpet area comprised 50 millimetres of Asphalt Concrete. It was estimated to cost about Shs 10 billion. 

However, in the process, some additional work came in, which was envisaged to enable successful completion of the work in accordance to approved designs. These included;

construction of 120 metre of additional 900 millimetre diameter culverts to connect the storm drain along Ben Kiwanuka Street; 

installation of additional concrete curbs for channelisation of islands and waiting areas within the park;

construction of one concrete staircase off Burton Street and embankment protection using reinforced concrete; 

additional excavation in soft material to spoil and then backfill using imported material. It was discovered that it was mainly clay beneath the surface.  

additional crushed stone base for islands and paving of frontage parking in-front of the existing buildings and the periphery of the park. 

additional improved subgrade using rock-fill; and 

additional paving of the frontage parking area adjacent to the park.

However, in this Financial Year 2021/2022, KCCA budgeted for funds towards finalisation of the following critical works, prior to opening of the old taxi park. These were;

Installation of street lighting outside the park; 
Painting of all kerbs within the park; 
Renovation of the KCCA Park Administration office;
Demarcation of stages to operate within the park; 
Sensitisation of stage readers and operators; 
Construction of a health facility within the park; 
Renovation and expansion of toilet facilities in addition to installation of security cameras and lights within the park.

However, some challenges were faced. Of course, the notable one was heavy rains, which also affected the progress of the work. And there were also limitations during the COVID-19 curfews.

Plan for opening of the park 

The KCCA plans to open the old taxi park after completing the outstanding works, which include the ones I have just mentioned. Notably, the renovation of the office; the construction of a health facility or a clinic and construction and expansion of the old toilet in the park. 

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank all the stakeholders for their patience as we get ready for the reopening of the old taxi park. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister for these two statements. Honourable members, like I said, and you know the genesis of this, these were questions to the Prime Minister, which she transferred to the minister. Hence, they are not typical ministerial statements. 

If there are issues you wanted to raise, I will allow them now on the two papers. Make short inquiries because the question was already asked and responded to. If there are gaps - I will start with the Member for Bugiri. 

MR BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. There is the issue of allocation of stages in the old taxi park. I would like to seek clarification from the minister used to allocate stages. I am aware that there are people who travel upcountry who do not have stages in the park and those who travel to nearby places have stages. 

Finally, the minister talked about revenue from properties. I was a Chairman of the Property Court in KCCA for some time and there were concerns that the monies from the property rent were being used for other activities, as opposed to drainage and road construction. From your statement, are you in position to clarify how much money from the property rates has actually gone to road construction, as required by the law? I thank you.     

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.54
MR YUSUF NSIBAMBI (FDC, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister has given a statement about the renovation of the Old Taxi Park and I have two concerns. 

One, the land that houses the Old Taxi Park was given to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) by the District Land Board, for that specific purpose. Later, KCCA leased the entire land, virtually to private developers, who have titles and they are supposed to build malls. They also have a court order, saying the land belongs to them. Under what law and arrangement are you committing public resources, including allocating stages and even promising to build a hospital when the land was leased by you to private developers?

THE SPEAKER: Is that Kole?

4.57
MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the presentation and the statement on the infrastructural projects in Kampala as well as the Old Taxi Park. I would like to seek clarification on two issues. 

We have observed, several times, a lot of infrastructural developments put in place and even developments on the road reserves. However, immediately after these developments, we see telecom companies digging up all the places to put in optical fibre networks and cables. Therefore, we would like to know: do we have provisions in these infrastructural projects to cater for spaces where they can install these without destroying what has been constructed? Where there are no provisions, do we have a policy in place to ensure that where these have been disrupted, they are restored?

Secondly, on the traffic control lights, we have seen several times the traffic control lights put in place but we see the traffic policemen replacing the traffic control lights and taking over them to direct traffic. Do we have a mechanism in place to ensure that these traffic control lights will be the ones that will be functional and not, again, the traffic policemen to disrupt them? Thank you. 

4.57
MS SHAMIM MALENDE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is in respect to the legal status of the Old Taxi Park. I would like to seek clarification from the minister, on behalf of the people operating in that area, in regard to the place which has been designated as a public transport area in view of the fact that from the presentation, it appears that the Old Taxi Park has already been leased out to different private persons. In brief, I would like to know who actually owns the Old Taxi Park; who are these investors?

Secondly, if we get to know the legal status of the Old Taxi Park, backed with proof, then we can easily plan where the public transport is going to operate from because KCCA is supposed to provide the space for our people to operate.
 
Mr Speaker, as we speak, the taxi operators and the conductors are very desperate. They have been promised that the Old Taxi Park is going to be opened soon. Therefore, listening to these stories is really disheartening. We need clarification and the way forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.59
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a concern. When the minister was reading the report on the Old Taxi Park, he mentioned additional project costs. 

However, I have observed that several times when ministerial statements are read here, we usually find variations in projected costs of most Government projects. The other day, we had somebody giving a report on Kabaale Airport and there was also a report on the expansion of the airport and in most of those projects, they were telling us about additional costs. 

Mr Speaker, I would like you to guide us on who can help us to carry out an assessment of these additional costs on these Government projects. This is because for these Government projects, we do designs, approvals and assessments of what we are going to do but in most cases, you find that variations in these costs are beyond imagination. Could there be a problem that we need to really investigate and find out whether we are losing money in these additional costs or somebody is trying to go around our procurement systems? You find that somebody is given a contract at a cheaper cost at the time of approving the procurement and later, variations are made. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance on which ministry can help us. I do not think that even the Auditor-General can help us here. I do not know whether it is the IGG or the ministries themselves or the ministers here to guide us on how best we can understand this problem on Government projects. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.02
MS SYLVIA NAYEBARE (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the well-detailed report. 

Indeed, if you move around Kampala, you either find new construction of roads or rehabilitation, which is very good. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is that I would like to know whether when they are carrying out these different developments, especially on the roads, they ever consult with the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. 

This is because during the rainy season, it is evident, practically, that in two-thirds of Kampala – it is either intentionally or unintentionally – sewage is released into the city. You find that most of the roads are either blocked by sewage or sewage is flowing yet sometimes these roads are new, some are rehabilitated and others are really in good condition. 

I would like to know from the minister and in case they do not involve National Water and Sewerage Corporation during their developments, we can adopt that for the future so that we do not have sewage flowing on the newly-constructed or rehabilitated roads so as to have a clean city. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.03
MS FLORENCE ASIIMWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the presentation. I stand on the issue of the chronic flooding of the city. Why has that problem persisted over the years? Every time it rains, we get worried about where we are going to pass. 

What plans are in place to address the issue of drainage and flooding in Kampala? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.04
MR ISAAC MODOI (NRM, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent the people of Lutseshe where the landslides originate. 

Thank you, honourable minister. My concern is, there are so many authorities in city council, call them stakeholders. My fears need to be rested. Has that report – what you have presented – been researched widely or is it originating from one source?

This is because when you make a statement, another authority will claim not to be aware. We have partners in Kampala City Council. We thought that in Kampala, the authorities like the divisions, the mayor and even the business people should be consulted. In any case, they are the beneficiaries and at the same time, they could be very good partners to implement our programmes. Thank you. 

5.06
MS RITA ATUKWASA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mbarara City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I applaud the minister for the statement that he has given. My concern goes to the toilet facilities; not all public places in Uganda but particularly the park that is due to be opened. Could you see to it that persons with disabilities have an excellent access for them to be able to answer nature’s call? 

Secondly, could you ensure that those toilet facilities befit the women of Uganda in their special needs when required? The worst misfortune to happen to any woman is to visit KCC toilets, not only in the former park but in all markets. They are deplorable. 

Now that you have had this renovation, make sure there is water. Make sure there are not only condoms in the male toilets but also sanitary towels in the female toilets because we have been cheated for long. 

More so, can you imagine that in this city, you cannot go anywhere in case you are in need and you do not have Shs 500 in your pocket? What do we want Ugandans to do? The women and men who hawk in the park spend their money to visit toilets. I do not think this is the Kampala we want to see. 

Could you not make those services for hire? Could the service providers of the taxis and the shop owners meet that cost? We pay for transport but you also want us to pay for places of convenience. I think the time has come for that to be addressed. 

Finally, when you go through that park – I think most of us have, when we were students going back home – the level of gender-based violence in that park is appalling. You actually think twice as a woman before you enter there. 

I have seen that you have earmarked sensitisations for leaders and stage administration. This is very timely. In my other engagements, before I came here, I took time to train KCCA. Their gender office and CDOs should do work to train those men to stop extending their hands in taxis. 

When you sit in a taxi, before you know it, somebody is engulfing you with their hands; somebody is encroaching on your body uninvited. Could that be an opportunity to make safer cities? This is not only an SDG but it is our right as women to move freely in all these cities. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.09
MS NANCY ACORA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. On this same note, people have a plea. For us who come from northern region, we are welcomed to the Northern By-pass with dirty and stinky water. 

I do not know what your office and the ministry is going to do for us. It is my humble appeal that you work on that dirty water. For so many years, that place has been stinky and very dirty. 

On the same note, I would like to add that some of us who do shopping in Nakawa market – if you do not have a strong heart, you cannot eat food bought from Nakawa market. There is need to improve on the waste management of Nakawa market. It is very dirty. I beg to submit. 

5.10
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues to thank hon. Kyafa for this statement. I will begin by informing the honourable colleague from Mbarara that you are expecting too much from KCCA to supply sanitary towels in toilets for passersby when we have failed to supply sanitary towels to girls that are missing school because of their monthly periods. We are expecting too much. If we were able, we would have begun with the girls. 

Having said that, let me look at the statement of the minister. You have said that the park had become very crowded. I have not seen your statement addressing the crowds. You are talking about provision of toilets and medical facilities but the crowd was not as a result of people only. It is about cars and unlimited taxis coming into these taxi parks unregulated. You do not know who calls the taxis to come and how they come in. Does KCCA have a relationship with the body that administers taxis that join these taxi parks? 

Secondly, you have said that the private sector also owns part of the land. We are interested in knowing how much land the private sector owns, because you said they own part of the land. How much land does the private sector own and how much is owned by Government? 

You added that the private sector is desirous of developing their real estate. Having said that, you should have said something in your statement. They are desirous, so what? What is prohibiting them? Your statement is completely silent on that. 

Can you tell us what is prohibiting the private sector from developing their real estate and tell us how much we have and what is left for the private sector. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the shadow minister from this side in charge of Kampala? 

5.13
MR ABUBAKER KAWALYA (NUP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to also thank the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. I would like to inform this House that today, we had the first engagement as Members of Parliament from Kampala. I did not know that the minister was going to come on the Floor of Parliament today. 

As far as I am concerned, this report still has a lot of loopholes that we need to agree on as leaders of Kampala. It has accountability issues that we need to address. 

It is my humble request to this House that this report be forwarded to the relevant committee in charge of Kampala affairs so that the critical issues that have not been addressed in this report, both the road network and the drainage system, together with the issues of the old taxi park, can be addressed. 

Therefore Mr Speaker, I request to move a motion and I request my colleagues to pass this motion that this report be forwarded to the relevant committee in charge of Kampala and Metropolitan Affairs. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you going to respond to the issues? Proceed.

MR KYOFATOGABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just as it has been put by the Shadow Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority, engagements have been held right away from the inception, that is, in 2007 and 2016. This was testified to in our meeting today by some Members of Parliament from Kampala, who attended.

We also started, on that page, to enhance the engagement. So, I do not think the report can go further to the committee because we have fora, where we discuss these issues intensively and we shall furnish the House.

Usafi Taxi Park is meant to decongest the Old Taxi Park and some of the stages will go there. 

On the issue of land available for Government and the private sector, allow me to return on that issue when I get the facts. I always adhere to your advice of having facts on our fingers. (Laughter)

It is true that hygiene is an issue. Indeed, because hygiene is an issue, we still have a lot of work to be done. As I stepped in today, we had a meeting, again, on the management of markets. I believe we shall also come back, at an appropriate time, to address this. 

We said we are constructing the Lubigi Channel along that area, which welcomes people from northern Uganda but we still have an impediment around the Kawaala Bridge, where the issue of land acquisition has come up and stalled some bits of work. So, water is a bit stagnant. It does not flow as required.

To my sister from Mbarara, let us be calm. It is okay. We are now walking towards addressing certain issues. However, I will take this suggestion to the Gender Directorate and tell them about this new observation. I believe we shall address it. The toilet, however, is being constructed while bearing in mind the requirements of especially people with disabilities and the ladies. Mr Speaker, allow me to forward the rest of the suggestions to the directorate for further management. 

On consultation, I have said that we have engaged and we are still engaging. Actually, we have come up with a resolution: we might have monthly or quarterly meetings with different leaders. Most of these projects you saw, which we presented under KIIDP II, came up as a result of participatory planning by engaging the various division leaders and so on. The only problem is that we are all new leaders. Most of the old leaders went. The January 2021 elections swept them away. As a result, we have to re-invent and go back to the engagement activities so that we bring on board all the new leaders, including us, the ministers. 

The honourable Doctor talked about the chronic flooding. It is true Kampala floods and it saddens everyone, including me. So far, I have noted two problems and one of them is the dumping of plastics, which has almost covered every culvert and all these water channels. There is also a blessing in disguise: we are constructing a flyover, which has affected the flow of water especially from Queen’s Way up to Jinja Road. However, let us have hope. Soon or later, the problem will be addressed if we implement all those activities I have told you. 

On the cost – honourable member from Kabula – I need to consult on the costs. 

Hon. Malende raised an issue on the legal status of the taxi park. Part of it is owned by us. However, allow me to come back with the exact acreage of how much is owned by KCCA and how much was leased out to the various developers, who happen to be about 12. I will then be in position to give accurate figures. However, the Old Taxi Park is still under the ownership of Government and KCCA, which has the mandate to operate it –(Interjections)– I am saying it is under our ownership. KCCA is part of Government – it is doing work on behalf of the Government.

There was the issue of other development activities, which take place when a road has been done – construction of water channels, cable lines and other things. Indeed, it pains me too. I do not know what to do. For a beautiful road like Acacia Avenue, tomorrow, you will see someone cutting it. The moment you cut it, however much you replace the cut, it cannot be replaced. This is already a scar created. I need your advice on this.

However, -(Interjections)– no, the installation of telephone lines and water lines do not require a camera. These are things, which are done in broad daylight. Of course, they are meant for the good of us but we need to marry the two and address the system. 

On the traffic control lights, yes, those lights work well. However, we have an issue. The day traffic policemen decide to go off this road by just half a day or 30 minutes, there is again a menace in these junctions. Therefore, we need to sit down again. When we come back with that paper under traffic control, we will submit a lot of information and address this. 

Mr Speaker, I request hon. Nsibambi to pay me a visit and we discuss his matter further. This is because he is the grandfather of these issues in Kampala, especially when it comes to land. (Laughter) He has more experience than I do. So, please, kindly visit me. 

My senior, hon. Basalirwa, who happened to be my president who did not pay me while we were in Makerere University –(Laughter)- the criterion of allocation of stages has been discussed. On revenues from these property – yes, I will need to study this law. I believe you have more expertise and experience on this. Please, I request you to pay me a visit and we discuss this law further because you are the guru on the law. You will make me understand the property rates, from your experience.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, my job is just to see that the rules are being followed as we process important business for the people of this country. Each time they are not being followed, even when I am sleeping, I will wake up –(Laughter)– because it is wired in my system that we need to go by the rules because that is the only way we can manage it. This is part of the problem. 

Let me explain it to you. The rule on Prime Minister’s question time was amended. Now we are having a debate and there is Prime Minister’s question time every Thursday. However, today, we have had an extension of the Prime Minister’s question time being debated for more hours yet there is other business. These are questions to the Prime Minister. Just see how long it is taking us and advise me on whether we are using our parliamentary time properly.

Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project was a question to the Prime Minister. I think the Prime Minister decided to transfer it to the minister and take note; these questions are written and submitted to the Prime Minister in advance, under the new rules.

Therefore, today, we are here for two hours extending the Prime Minister’s question time. On Thursday, another hour will be for Prime Minister’s question time and thereafter, extend further, Prime Minister’s question time on questions asked during Prime Minister’s question time.

I think we need to get a better system and even the minister had the courage to say he would like to come back with other answers on this same issue. The minister is coming with further statements on this same issue. Are we not in trouble? Let us go back to the rules as they are and they used to work very well for us. We are about to nominate this committee to review this so that we are more spot on when we transact business.
 
Regarding the issue of the boda boda, for example, I remember the President gave a directive at one point that there should be no boda bodas on pavements and instead of the policy people and the technical people stepping down this particular directive into an implementable – a legally based implementation programme, they just deployed police on the streets.  

The President did not say, “Remove the boda bodas from the streets”. He only talked about finding ways within the law and the Government policy to, overtime, get boda bodas off the pavement. That is the policy directive that the President gave. He did not ask the police to go to the streets and start beating people, getting them off the streets. 

Therefore, ordinarily where these policies are stepped down properly by the technical people, what should have happened would have been for them to convene a meeting and deliberate on how to implement this directive by the President. 

They would have drawn riding lanes for bicycles and boda bodas and enforced that because you now have an option. Otherwise, chasing boda bodas off the pavement or sending them off the streets, they may end up either in hospital or dead yet when you keep them on the pavement, they knock pedestrians.

The solution should have been creating lanes for boda bodas. If it requires widening the roads, do so to get a permanent solution to the issue of the riders; that is what the President said.

When we started beating everybody on the pavements, everybody forgot about it and it became so bad that they stopped it because the implementation was completely against everybody who understood anything. So, now, we have forgotten; look at what is happening. 

Therefore, because we do not interpret directives properly and implement them in accordance with the law, we make lots of mistakes in the process of implementation. Now we are going to have a full debate on boda boda when the minister comes back.

It is becoming more urgent now - I am still speaking, madam whoever is raising a procedural matter - (Laughter)- and in order that we restructure these things to produce the results as a Parliament, we can benefit from, it would be better that we do this.

Even if it was the Prime Minister’s reference for the next business, it should have been a full statement on Kampala Capital City Authority; a debatable statement. Now, we are doing piecemeal on KIIDP II, resurfacing old taxi park for an hour, improvement of traffic control in Kampala for an hour; really, honourable members, don’t we have time for other important matters to take us three hours rather than discuss for three hours KIIDP II, resurfacing old taxi park and improvement of traffic controls for three hours? That is what the law says and yet we have people in the villages who are suffering. We need to review these rules.
 
MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek your procedural guidance on the issue of the Prime Minister’s question time. It is not the first time that we are getting problems with this change on our Rules of Procedure concerning the Prime Minister’s question time.

First of all, the time is so boring because we sit here for one hour and it is only one person talking and even if one had issues, they cannot ask for further explanation.
Therefore, the procedural guidance I am seeking is whether it is not the right time for you to direct the committee in charge of our rules to urgently review what we passed in the Tenth Parliament?
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As far as the rules are as they are now, we are proceeding very well because that is what they say. We enforce rules as they are and not as they ought to be. [Member rose_] Anything talking about further procedure is not in the rules –(Mr Ekanya rose_)- for accessing the microphone before being invited, you will not talk on that matter. (Laughter)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I recall in some of your communication, you guided and expressed the need to make further review of our Rules of Procedure to provide clarity on many issues that are not clear but also on procedural inconsistencies that sometimes arise out of the way we conduct business here.

Mr Speaker, when you gave that guidance, we thought that the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges had taken it up. I am trying to count the 45 days or so yet it seems nothing is happening because I am a Member of that committee.

The procedural guidance I seek from you is whether the rules committee should not begin on this work earnestly so that –(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: On procedure? 

MR OSHABE: On the same matter.

THE SPEAKER: He rose on a procedural matter; are you raising information on procedure?

MR OSHABE: I want to give him information.

THE SPEAKER: No, please.

MR OSHABE: Much obliged.

MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA: Mr Speaker, the urgency with which we need to address a review of our rules becomes very prominent when we find ourselves in situations of this nature; “further procedure, further guidance”, issues that are not aptly provided for under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda but have become part of business. 

I have said it here before that Members of Parliament have now learnt how to present their issues depending on the presiding officer in the seat. If so and so is in the seat, I will raise a point of further guidance. If so and so is not here, I will keep quiet. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I seek your procedural guidance. Isn’t it time we dealt with this issue once and for all? When is the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline beginning with this process so that it is dealt with conclusively? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, what we are doing at the moment is the identification. I see hon. Katuntu is rising but I do not know on which point he is raising. At this stage, we are doing identification of the problematic areas so that when we make reference to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, we give them good guidance. Otherwise, we are not going to start from rule one to the last. It will be a lot of work. We know the problem areas and so, we are going to identify them so that by the time we make a formal reference to the committee, they will be properly guided on the things they need to look at.

We have some difficult situations that have been presented by reviews over time. I gave an example of the voting. We were chatting with hon. Abdu Katuntu when he raised an objection to a constitutional amendment matter. The rules said that the doors should be shut. I was not in the House; I was somewhere but following. Hon. Katuntu raised a serious procedural matter saying “Madam Speaker, are we proceeding properly, when the doors are not shut?”

The rules say the doors should be shut but the number of Members of Parliament – yet you are going to vote by roll call and tally. In fact, when you start with Members whose names start with “A” with about 400 Members, like hon. Ababiku, I can drive from Gulu and still be able to vote as “O”- Oulanyah. There is a lot of time and I know all the issues. By the time they come to my name, I should be there so I can come in and vote.
 
However, you want all Members here including hon. Ababiku Jesca who voted first to sit for five hours waiting for hon. Zijjan or hon. Zaake to vote. Are we being fair to ourselves and is it reasonable? 

Over time, we have reviewed the rules but we have introduced processes that have complicated our own way of handling business. Therefore, we need to do an identification of these problem areas and then we make proper reference to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

5.38
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that there are few matters that were referred by this House to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and we have already deliberated and the report is ready. We have directed our clerk to write to the Clerk so that we are put on the Order Paper and we present the report. They are ready even if it were done tomorrow.

However, as you note from the functions of the rules committee, we cannot on our own initiate changes within those rules. They have to be referred to us by this House. It has a little bit put us in a difficult position because we have identified areas, which we think are a challenge. 

Mr Speaker, as you realise, the numbers we have today is 520 plus and this cannot be managed properly by the rules as they are now. We have to revisit some aspects of those rules such that we can transact Parliamentary business better. However, until we have a directive from the House - maybe we can now look at all aspects of the rules that we think are a challenge and we make proposals to this House. Otherwise, as of now, we have to wait until the House directs.

It also makes the committee a little bit idle. I do not mind the other aspects of it. I wish the whole of my time I do not sit as a disciplinary committee; that is the best I would wish. 

About the rules, if we are not directed or the House has not asked us to look at particular aspects, we cannot do it on our own motion. Therefore, I would request that the House gives us that direction and we shall sit and look at those aspects. That is our job. We do not have much to do, anyway because it is not a committee that would be sitting everyday like a sectoral committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is right because we wanted to identify all the problem areas and make a formal reference to the committee so that they can handle this matter. Honourable member for Adjumani, are you rising because I mentioned your name?

5.40
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): No. Mr Speaker, allow me to give my opinion on what is happening.

I feel coordination has to be enhanced between the committees and what happens here. I was here the week before we adjourned but I got perplexed because what was referred to our committee was again being discussed here.

Today, what the minister has presented is also partly what we are investigating. We found out that Shs 7 billion was lost because of land issues. It brought a lot of cases.

My prayer is that you help us to enhance the coordination between the committees and what happens here at plenary. Also, enhance the facilitation of the committees. We want to do a lot of work but what can Shs 30 million do for committee work? (Applause)

I am sorry but I love doing work and all of us came here to do the work. Help the committees to do a better job and we shall have fruitful deliberations here. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Some matters are important here and we talk about them but some others are administrative. For example, the issue you have just raised last has been bothering the Commission for a long time. We have another meeting coming up and we will be looking at that again because there are some challenges that we need to fix. 

We will fix them by the next Commission meeting and the proposals that will come. There are matters we will be proposing to the Government to handle from our side. We will have these matters fixed. So, let them not worry you. That is a temporary interference in the network. We will be able to solve this matter properly.

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Mr Speaker, I think the issues Members are raising here are very serious. We need to be guided. I will give an example that the same issue can be discussed in several committees. As a minister, you are invited to five different committees at the same time. At 10.00 a.m., you have to be here. We are wondering how we should proceed. 

If you arrive late to another committee they ask, “Why are you late?” I think we need order. How can we have the same matter being discussed by five or six committees as if there is no other business to address? 

Honourable colleagues, I think we are moving in a zigzag format. At the end of the day, you even wonder who will be substantively reporting on a particular matter on the Floor of this House. Who is responsible? Others are saying, “Let us go to the hotel and discuss this,” while others say they should be found in a certain room. We need guidance on this, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: That guidance will come firmly.  

5.44
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In relation to the concerns you have raised on the rules and also the response from hon. Katuntu – the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules – would it be against our procedures here if we said, for example, hon. Katuntu’s committee should do a general review of all our rules? This is in order for us to not pick out on certain matters, which some people might feel are matters of concern? I do not know who determines that this matter is of concern.

When we were coming, I thought each Parliament should have its own Rules of Procedure. That would give us an opportunity to study the rules comprehensively since they have enough time. Then they make proposals and the House adopts them. I do not know whether that would be okay. Mr Speaker, you could guide us. Thank you, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the issue of each Parliament having its own rules was resolved by the Chief Justice then, Benjamin Odoki. I think the date was 19 May 2011. He gave guidance that rules are rules; Rules of Procedure for Parliament are Rules of Procedure for Parliament. They should not be segmented to each Parliament but each Parliament can review what is not applicable anymore and add what might be new. 

For example, we passed these rules before 2011. There was no COVID-19 then. The numbers were not this. There are very many changes that have occurred that require us to review the rules, keeping the standard ones. There are standard ones based on those five principles that I keep talking about on establishing the rights. We are not going to change the past rules that would alter the rights of a Member of Parliament in Parliament. You cannot do that. 

There are specific procedural things that need to be reviewed. That has completely clogged our system. We need to review them. For example, there is this issue of doing things by lots – through picking papers. What thinking has gone into casting lots? We should be thinking about what is urgent and what is not, instead of leaving it to chance. 

These are areas that we need to look at again. I tasked some Members here to help look through and then, we do a comprehensive identification. They should make a formal reference to the Committee on Rules and then, we have a good debate. I think they are ready on most of these issues. 

As we progress with the rules, I first looked at the Rules of Procedure of Parliament in 2001. My own view is that those rules were more comprehensive and practical than the ones we have now. I will invite you to look at the rules that Parliament used for the Seventh Parliament – because that is the first time I joined Parliament. You had clarity on almost everything. 

Even sectoral committees were clear about what their roles were; the mandates were clear. Now they are just listed and they just mention what each will handle. For example, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs will handle the Inspectorate of Government. That is all. There is no clarity on the specific functions that the Committee on Legal – in the process, we lost which committee should handle statutory instruments that are required to be approved by Parliament. We now do not know and do not have it and yet, it was there. That was the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that would sit and look at it; is it in conformity with the laws that have been passed by Parliament or not? Those were there. 

Somebody was proposing that we should have a whole committee on statutory instruments – subsidiary legislation. What work will they have? How many statutory instruments are for Parliament’s consideration? In this Parliament, we do not have any yet. In the last Parliament, I think we passed about three or four laws that required instruments to be approved by Parliament, whichever way. 

Let us do the identification properly and then, we do a formal reference to the committee. I think you stay what you have now. Let us now add you more and then, you build on it so that you are comprehensive in what you are going to do, chairman for the Committee on Rules. 

5.50 
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is quite an urgent one. I have been approached by many colleagues complaining about committee meetings. Each and every chairperson of a committee is literally calling a committee meeting every day and Members are running from one committee to the other; dividing their time by spending 30 minutes in one and an hour in another. These are the same Members. 

As we work on the comprehensive review of our committees, Mr Speaker, I think you need an administrative initiation where the chairpersons of committees should sit and try to harmonise. Otherwise, Members are facing problems. You meet them and it is like they are at a conference. They spend 30 minutes in one committee and 20 minutes in another. It is utter confusion. 

As we wait for the formalisation of what we can do, I request you, Mr Speaker, to meet the chairpersons and give them some administrative guidelines so that we have an orderly way of working. Calling the same people at the same time does not look good, colleagues. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think we will pause that there and make it more formal. (Hon. Lugoloobi rose_) Honourable minister, do you have something to say on this same matter or are you going to your issue now? 

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, I have something to say almost on the same matter because it affects ministers as well and our operations at the various ministries when we are required to report to various committees. That seriously affects us in terms of the space and time we have to deal with other Government business. 

The matter hon. Katuntu is raising is very important because it affects the whole Government – Parliament here and the Executive. It affects us all. 

Secondly, allow me to address the matter pertaining to the Order Paper. Take an example of today’s Order Paper; you have three pages. It is now coming to 6.00 p.m. and I think we have not even done one page of this Order Paper. I think that we should assign time to the items comprised on this Order Paper so that we know what time those items will take. The total amount of time we have that particular day would tell us the number of items we would be able to deal with. 

Sometimes, we come here after knowing that the particular matter I am handling is on the Order Paper. In addition, we have limited space on the Frontbench; we cannot all be here. We are guided by the Order Paper.

I think that these are serious matters that the Rules of Procedure should address. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, you are actually on the spot but these are the issues we have to deal with. As you may recall, from the time we came here, we have been focusing mainly on the Order Paper and the Order Paper is loaded with the kind of business I am critical of; real substantive business for today should have been: Bills first reading, laying of papers and the motions. If I was to be strict as some people accuse me of being very strict, we would not have dealt with these other ones.

I am now also trying not to be too strict but in the process, we have the situations because ordinarily, the whole of item No.4 should not have been a substantive item with the exception of the information paper from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the day of the girl child. 

We would have just had item No. 1 – Is the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development here? (Laughter)– We should have had items No. 1, 2, 3 and go to item No.5 and I am not sure of item No. 6: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government to establish a blood bank in Bunyoro region.”

Does that require a substantive motion for the debate of this House or would it just require an administrative directive from the Prime Minister that all things be done; and that should have been Prime Minister’s Time. The Prime Minister should have said, well, we have put in place mechanisms to have the blood bank in Bunyoro. I do not know in which city; it could have been in Hoima or any other city in the Bunyoro sub region. 

Would anybody oppose the setting up of a blood bank in Bunyoro?[Members: “No”.]Is it a debatable matter? Now, it is a full item on the Order Paper. 

I am going to start doing some vigorous clean ups so that we deal with ministers’ responses to urgent questions. How do you have responses five weeks later on urgent matters? It simply means they were not urgent in the first place. Like this one, “…over the adverse effects of the prolonged electric power outage in …” this one has been there. I think I was the one who first – and it was responded to, therefore, why is it here? I am sure they have restored electricity and it is still on the Order Paper. It was answered long time ago but it looks like a Member said my issue has not been answered so, put it there.

You have from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the directive of His Excellency the President to the Executive Director, Uganda National Roads Authority about something. On the poor management of the Uganda Revenue Authority of something, those are statements. On the stalled construction of the Rwenkunye-Apac-Ibuje-Lira road, this should have been dealt with then but now, we have them loaded on the Order Paper for no particular reason because when the honourable member from the region raised this question about the rock that had injunctions so the contractor could not have access to – that was long time ago but it is still here. 

We are going to agree that we follow the procedure strictly and stop referring to the Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, as “very strict” when he is trying to do what is right for this Parliament because that is what exactly I am going to start doing. All the other business to follow is around these things.

Honourable members, let us clean up these things. This Order Paper was actually very lean and we should be receiving one of the important items now. We will now go to item No.5 and we conclude this business today.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE THE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED TO BORROW UP TO US$15 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first seek your guidance whether to move a motion or lay the paper.

THE SPEAKER: What would you prefer? (Laughter)

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I prefer to move a motion.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is what is required of you, honourable minister.

MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Sir. Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to guarantee the Uganda Development Bank Limited to borrow US$15 million from the European Investment Bank.  This motion is moved under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS on 1 April 2021, the Government of Uganda, in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, 20l5 laid before Parliament a request to guarantee the Uganda Development Bank Limited to borrow €15 million from the European Investment Bank; 

AWARE that on 21 April 2021, Parliament authorised Government to guarantee the Uganda Development Bank to borrow US$l5 million from the European Investment Bank; 

NOTING, however, that during the authorisation process, the US currency was incorrectly used instead of Euros as hitherto indicated in the request laid before Parliament thereby creating a discrepancy with the currency used under the guarantee agreement;

REALISING, therefore, that there is urgent need to correct the inconsistency in the currency;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves to amend its resolution dated 2l April 2021 as follows:
The Government of Uganda is hereby authorised to guarantee the Uganda Development Bank to borrow €15 million from the European Investment Bank.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? I see the honourable members who supported it in Cabinet are the ones seconding it here. I have Adjumani, Aringa, and Moyo West. Honourable members, does the motion require you to speak to it? Is it a matter that has already been dealt with? 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, as I stated, this matter was handled in April 2021 –(Interruption) 

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I am at difficulty understanding, under normal procedure, what is obtaining in the House? If you go to rule 31 about the laying of papers, a Member shall be required to lay a paper on Table. 

In case of virtual – it is in subrule (2) – that: “Notwithstanding subrule (1), a Member may, with leave of the Speaker, lay a paper on a Virtual Table designated by the Speaker and accessible to all Members.” 

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance here because you are the custodian of these rules. If the heading is about “laying of papers” has it mutated into something else? What is happening is virtually different from what is provided for in our Rules of Procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a good saying that do not judge a book from the cover. If you look at the substance of the motion, it basically has nothing to do with laying of papers. It is actually invoking rule 222 because this matter was already concluded by Parliament. It was finished. 

Now, they have discovered that there is a problem with what they made Parliament decide then. I am sure Parliament did not act on its own figures. I am sure the figures you presented are the ones they approved. Now, you have discovered that you made a mistake. So, you are showing up to see if Parliament can reconsider. 

That should have been housed under rule 222, especially subrule (2), to be able to allow us reconsider the decision already made by Parliament and to correct possible errors that could have occurred in the previous decision. So, would that be by motion? Yes. Rule 222 says it is by motion. 

So, the minister has proceeded well by presenting this motion. The question is: is it a sustainable motion? That is what we should speak about. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. 

We are seeking to correct an error, which occurred at the point when this motion was moved in April this year. The error was on the currency used. We used the United States Dollar currency instead of the Euro. 

We are, therefore, seeking that Parliament corrects this error by replacing the US Dollar currency with the Euro. 

I would like to lay a copy of the motion on Table, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the record capture the motion. Honourable members, rule 222 allows this motion for reconsideration as long as it is not in the same session. If it is in the same session, then we have a problem. 

Now, the rules give us a leeway to correct an error. The figure remains the same but instead of one currency – we passed another currency, on their advice and not on our own. 

Now, they are asking if we can help them fix it to go back to the original currency which was in the loan documents and not the currency which they led us to pass. That is the substance of the motion. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I have no problem with the motion and I do not think it will even attract any debate. My concern is that the minister should have formally requested for withdrawal of the other motion so that we replace it with this one. 

This is because the other one is still on record. I need your guidance on that. It means that, now, on our record, we have the motion of $15,000 and this motion. You have to read them together in order to understand where you are coming from and where you are going. 

My concern is that we should have formally withdrawn the earlier motion, which was passed by Parliament, in order to substitute with this one. That normally happens when we have problems with the Bill and we have chosen to withdraw the Bill in order to bring another one in case there are some issues to be resolved. 

I just need guidance on that. Otherwise, my opinion is that we do not even debate. We do not need to waste our time because it was already debated and approved. All I want to know is whether we are procedurally correct to leave the other debate on record as if it has not been affected. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. That is why we are reconsidering it. There was a motion that was presented and a decision taken on the basis of that motion. That decision carried this small problem – instead of a particular currency, we passed another currency. The decision was already taken and, so, you cannot withdraw a motion upon which a decision is taken. That is why the motion, now, is to reconsider that decision and make an amendment to that decision. That is why we are now proceeding under this particular rule, to reconsider it. That is exactly what the motion is stating. 

Let us reconsider this and when we open it up, we substitute for dollars, something else or substitute for Euros something else. That is all. We are okay. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I entirely agree with us correcting the error that was not detected then, the guarantee was already approved in April and that was the 10th Parliament. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the honourable minister to move an extra mile – even if it is in two minutes – to tell us this guarantee of the borrowing from the European Development Bank by the Uganda Development Bank? What is the purpose of this money? Is it for capitalisation? This is such that if a lay person from Gulu, Iganga or Arua asks me what the purpose of this money is, I am able – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that would be changing the thrust of the debate and the rules allow us to be relevant. What is the debate which is being proposed at the Table? To change from dollars to Euros: period! It is not purpose or anything else because the purpose was already handled.

It turns out that this is the report of the committee. In fact, it was you, honourable minister – no, this was national economy. Please, keep your mask on. We can still hear you. 

So, the change was in the report of the committee. How it escaped the scrutiny of the minister who had presented the original matter is what I do not know. Are you suggesting that the initial motion you presented had another currency?

MR MUSASIZI: I think I need to clarify to the House. The motion, which we laid in the House had captured €15 million and the committee report, if you may refer to it, was consistent with our motion. The error came in the processing by Parliament. The report, which came from the House changed the Euro to U.S Dollar. This is the only error we are seeking to correct. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it the report that came from the extraction of the minutes? 

MR MUSASIZI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: That cannot be for the House. That is a clerical mistake and the rules allow, under clerical corrections, for other people to do it and not us. What is the rule on clerical matters? Here, the committee report is also saying €15 million. I am hoping that is what Parliament passed. Please, be clear on that so that we can proceed. 

Honourable members, it is not even a clerical mistake. The presiding officer then put the question to the U.S. Dollar and not Euro. The committee reported on Euro both in its introduction and prayer. 

“The committee recommends that the request for the Government to guarantee Uganda Development Bank lines of credit of €15 million from the European Investment Bank and other monies should be approved.”

That is what the committee recommended. In the process of putting the question, it was done in relation to the U.S. Dollar. The final vote that was taken was in relation to the U.S. Dollar, not Euro and yet the debate, recommendation and everything else was in Euro. The presiding officer, however, in the process of putting the question, put the question for $15 million. That is what is captured in the Hansard.

Therefore, it is not a clerical mistake on the extraction. It is a substantive mistake and the procedure we are using now would be the proper one because at the decision point, as Parliament, we decided on the U.S. Dollar rather than the Euro. That is why we are here now. Are we clear? Is this one of those things that would require us to make further consultation? It is our own issue. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I just want to suggest that since the mistake is from Parliament and there was nothing concerning presentation of the ministry, the committee but the error is the transmission of the decision of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: The error is in the question that was put to Parliament. It is not transmission. The error is in the question that was put to Parliament by the presiding officer. The Chairperson was the one who put the question on the U.S. Dollar instead of the Euro. It is not secretarial. 

When the House pronounced itself, it did so on the U.S. Dollar and not the Euro and yet, the entire debate, the motion and the report of the committee were on the Euro. It could have been – sometimes we think in terms of the U.S. Dollar and we put the question accordingly. That is the mistake. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue is: as you know, we operate a committee system in this Parliament. It is prudent that our committee performs the task instead of the ministers bombarding your table with a document at such a critical time. This is because the committee goes into details. 

Whenever a loan is approved or a guarantee is issued, the Clerk issues a certificate, which is sent to the donors or development partners. At this time, we even do not know whether our Clerk has issued the seal in U.S. Dollar. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the Clerk has issued the seal in U.S. Dollar. 

MR EKANYA: Then that seal must be withdrawn because – 

THE SPEAKER: Since that seal was issued on the basis of the Hansard and the decision of the Parliament, the only way it can be withdrawn is by Parliament taking another decision. Please, why are we complicating an uncomplicated thing? The Clerk did not act on her own. The Clerk took this page of the Hansard, where the presiding officer said “…I now put the question that this House do approve the proposals to authorise Government to guarantee the Uganda Development Bank Limited to borrow:

$15 million from the European Investment Bank –”

That was the question that was put to the House. So, you cannot pass it to the Clerk and you cannot pass it back to the committee. The committee took its decision on the Euro. There was nothing wrong with the committee’s decision. I do not think Parliament was sleeping. It was the minister because he should have corrected the House. The minister should have said “No, Rt Hon. Speaker, it is Euro and not U.S. Dollar”. 

Honourable members, I would like to ask you. Can we finalise this matter and get it done? I had proposed the question for formality for debate of this motion. I now put the question to the motion for reconsideration and correction of the record of Parliament to fit within the original motion, the report of the committee and the final decision reflecting the discussion. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS OGWAL: The minister should apologise. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe by the time the question was being put, the minister was not even in the House. Honourable members, it is beyond the time we normally do business, especially when there is no urgency. Tomorrow, you will have this motion. Let me give you advance notice. The motion by hon. Nsaba Buturo and hon. Opendi, which is in the Business to Follow, item six is: a motion for a resolution of Parliament to highlight the decline in the ethical and moral values in the country and proposed solutions for reversing the destructive decline. 

That motion will be debated tomorrow. Honourable members, reflect on these issues and we see what guidance we can give on this rather disturbing matter as the Parliament of Uganda. 

For now, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o'clock and thank you.

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 October 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 