
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 21 October, 2021

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We do not intend to take long today. Yesterday, we took very long. Therefore, today we will see how to handle the business quicker.

The substantive matter we have is the motion for leave. I hope the Members are ready to present their issues so that we can take a decision. Today is also when we have the Prime Minister’s Question Time and, as you are aware, Thursday is normally a day designated for Private Member’s issues. Therefore, let us see how we move with this matter. Let us go to the Order Paper.

I have not got all the information but I should have communicated. Honourable members, you are being called upon to talk to the people in your respective places about the vaccines for COVID-19. The response from the communities is not good.  Therefore, we are being called upon to send messages or make phone calls on radios so that we can reach as many people as possible so that the coverage for this vaccination is wider so that we do not run the risk of them overstaying outside the human body.

Please, take this up and pass on the messages. Wherever there is a call for people to be vaccinated, let them go there in big numbers. I would rather there be a shortage than the vaccines getting spoilt. Therefore, I haven’t got the complete information but I thought I should give you this. Since we are going into the weekend; we could pass this message to our people. Thank you very much.

STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 26TH TO 28TH OCTOBER, 2021

2.05
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MR THOMAS TAYEBWA): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a statement of business by the Leader of Government Business for the succeeding week.

Introducing for first reading the following Bills:

    1. The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2021
    2. The Public Health (Amendment) Bill, 202l.

It is signed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We expect those items to come up next week – we are now alerted. However, they are only for first reading. Therefore, there is not much for the House on those matters.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF TRAFFIC CONTROL IN KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY

2.06
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MR THOMAS TAYEBWA): Mr Speaker, the minister for Kampala, in about five minutes, will be here. Sorry, the traffic jam got him on the way but he is coming.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us take the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO HEDGE €100 MILLION (EURO ONE HUNDRED MILLION) LOAN PROCURED FROM STANBIC BANK (U) LTD TO FINANCE THE BUDGET DEFICIT FOR FY 2019/2020

2.07
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MR THOMAS TAYEBWA): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning, I beg to lay on Table the proposal to hedge €100 million loan procured from Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited to finance the budget deficit for Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. I am sure the attendant documents are… This particular request stands referred to our Committee on National Economy to examine and advise us.

Can we skip the next item because it is not yet time for that?

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE MARKETS BILL, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rwabushaija isn’t here yet. Okay, next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE FREE DRUGS TO UGANDANS SUFFERING FROM DIABETES AND HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE IN UGANDA

2.08
MS PATIENCE NKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging the Government to provide free drugs to Ugandans suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure in Uganda. It is moved under Articles 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Mr Speaker,

“WHEREAS National Objective 20 under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires the state to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

AND WHEREAS the Government of Uganda has already put in place similar interventions, specifically a national policy on antiretroviral therapy which was developed and subsequently resulted in the provision of free antiretroviral drugs to people living with HIV/AIDS; 

AWARE that the World Health Organisation describes diabetes as a chronic disease that occurs either when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin or when the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces;

FURTHER AWARE that insulin is a hormone that regulates blood sugar and as such blood sugar is a common effect of uncontrolled diabetes and over time leads to serious damage to many of the body’s systems, especially the nerves and blood vessels;

NOTING that in Uganda, the burden of non-communicable diseases is steadily rising amidst a high prevalence of communicable diseases stretching the healthcare system and that one-third of non-communicable diseases mortalities globally have been attributed to cardiovascular diseases with about 80 per cent of the cardiovascular diseases-related deaths occurring in low- and middle-income countries and more than half of these deaths are a result of complications of hypertension and diabetes;

FURTHER NOTING that the burden of disease is expected to double for both diabetes and high blood pressure by 2025 and 2035 respectively and that as such, the increase in prevalence of diabetes is especially rapid in Uganda, where the number of people with Diabetes Mellitus is predicted to increase by 166.9 per cent between 2013 and 2035, outpacing most other countries; 

COGNISANT of the fact that 40 per cent of Uganda’s health centres do not stock drugs to treat chronic diseases and that currently the drugs for diabetes and high blood pressure are too expensive for the average Ugandan;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that the Government provides: 

i) 	Free screening and treatment for retinopathy (which causes blindness), free blood lipid control (to regulate cholesterol levels) and provides screening for early signs of diabetes-related kidney disease and treatment; 

ii) 	Free drugs to Ugandans suffering for diabetes and high blood pressure.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Member of Parliament for Tororo Municipality, hon. Museveni, Member of Parliament for Kagadi, Member of Parliament for Ngora, Member of Parliament for Gweri, the representative for Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and the workers representative, hon. Bakkabulindi. 

Honourable member, would you like to speak briefly to your motion? 

Ms nkunda: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this country, if one does not have a relative, friend or neighbour in their village suffering from diabetes, they may not know the existence of these medical conditions.

Medical services in this country are not sufficient especially in the hard-to-reach areas. A number of people in this country are relinquishing to diabetes especially in villages. The rate of infection is even higher than that of HIV. Today, someone suffering from HIV/AIDS can live a better life than the one suffering from diabetes or high blood pressure.

Last weekend, I was in Kanungu and gave an old woman a ride to a burial ceremony. Immediately we reached, she suffered from high blood pressure yet she could not afford medication. She had to suffer and live that kind of life.

The medication is very expensive to the extent that many people in our villages cannot afford it. Most people are low income earners. So, the kind of medication required to be taken every day while one is suffering from diabetes or the insulin is very expensive.

This is why I urge the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Health, to help Ugandans get free drugs and early screening to save them from dying.

Many people in the country today are dying of diabetes. The death rate is higher than that of people suffering from HIV/AIDS. Therefore, I appeal to this Government to help the poor Ugandans.

If you asked everyone in this Chamber about this disease, you would realise that most of the honourable members have relatives, neighbours and people they know are suffering from diabetes. Diabetes sometimes goes hand in hand with high blood pressure and ends up giving people cardiovascular disease. Some people are also going blind because of this disease.

Mr Speaker, it will be very nice if this Government gave Ugandans free screening and diabetic medication. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Apollo Yeri, who is seconding the motion and would you like to speak to it at this moment?

2.15
Mr Apollo yeri (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second this motion. Generally, we have not trained the health workers on how to treat patients suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure. If Government can give free treatment and the Ministry of Health trains more health workers, handling this complicated disease would be easy. Therefore, if this motion is taken, it will help the wanainchi.

There are issues of costs. These drugs are costly yet not available. When the Ministry of Health takes over, they will make the National Medical Stores to avail these medicines easily to the population and that will help the population to easily access them. Otherwise, right now some people go for witchcraft, which does not work.

They should bring a modern machine to test and know what one may be suffering from. It may not cure but it can reduce – one can take some time before the disease takes their life and that is very important.

Mr Speaker, I call upon my colleagues to support this motion because we have to now live with this disease and so, we have to reduce and/or help our people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to provide free drugs to Ugandans suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure in Uganda. Debate starts now.

2.18
Mr asuman basalirwa (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and the honourable colleague, for presenting the motion. 

There are many ailments in this country that require attention from Government. Certainly, diabetes and high blood pressure are just some of those. So, I think that we should be looking at all such ailments in the country from a broader perspective for us to provide free health care or insurance for that matter. 

The danger of particularising ailments is that tomorrow, we are likely to come up with another ailment and require a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to provide free drugs to it. Therefore, I think that as a country, we need to look at diseases and the health sector, in a broader perspective.

Finally, in 2019 while we were in Burundi with the parliamentary sports club, we found a very good culture there. Every morning, everybody would run as physical exercise. Some of these non-communicable diseases can be avoided either through proper nutrition or good and regular exercises.

Therefore, as we call on Government to provide free medical care, we should also be urging ourselves to develop a culture of eating well and exercising regularly. Right now, the parliamentary sports club is preparing to go to Arusha for the East African Parliamentary Games but members of Parliament are not training. We have made calls for people to come and train but they are not coming. Even if eventually you will not make the list, at least it is good for your health. We will be the ones to again complain about these diseases.

For some of these issues, as we urge Government, we also need to sensitise ourselves and the public on the need to live healthy lives and lifestyles. Thank you.

2.21 
Mr Charles bakkabulindi (NRM, Workers): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion and thank my sister for tabling it. 
It may sound a simple solution but there are certain diseases that do not warn. If we asked a survey question amongst ourselves here on, “How many of you have high blood pressure?” I am sure some us would say, “I don’t have it” yet if all of us took a test, many of us would get to discover that they have either reached high levels or are in dangerous levels and some may not be having it. The same is with diabetes. When we are providing the drugs, the intent is not to only provide the drugs but to also sensitise the public. 

I agree with my colleague. We talked about sports - I am the founder of the Parliamentary Football Club here. However, I also had some members that were hypertensive. That is not enough solution but it is a supplement. When we say, “Let Government provide drugs”, Government will not stop at only buying the drugs but will also sensitise the population on how to avoid high blood pressure or diabetes. 

Mr Speaker, in the 1950s and 1960s, these diseases were meant for old people, rich people and high class people but now you find even a village kid of less than 15 years with high blood pressure or diabetes. What do we do? I think this is the right motion that we need to support so that at the end of the day, we do not regret. 

When high blood pressure reaches a certain level, then the repercussion is damage to other organs. If this is done, I really support this motion. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think we also need to deal with the question raised by the Member for Bugiri. Do we leave it at “suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure” or should we get a broader term so that we do not have risk listing? The words would be “non-communicable diseases.”  It might be more general than two – if they are identified. 

2.23
DR ANTHONY OKULLU (NRM, Lamwo County, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank my colleague for moving the motion on diabetes. 

I am a practising medical doctor. This is a very important topic. Diabetes has indeed ravaged the country, especially people of age or about to go into their retirement. It is a non-communicable and yet preventable disease. I think this House should resolve to take a holistic view of not only curing or treating diabetes but tackling it from the root, which is prevention. 

We can go further to even include it in the syllabus so that the awareness on diabetes and other non-communicable diseases is in the head of every child that grows up from school. 

I thank you, this House and the mover of the motion as well as the supporters. I will be glad if this House supports the motion and something is done, particularly in a holistic manner. Thank you very much.

2.25   
MS ESTHER MBAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable colleague for the motion and just like you have, we should look at non-communicable diseases vis-a-vis the diabetes and high blood pressure alone. 

I would like to join my colleague, hon. Basalirwa, to emphasise that many Ugandans are dying more from non-communicable diseases than communicable diseases. This is probably because of failure by Government to do what it is supposed to do. I will not put it on Government alone but it is a concerted effort. 

We have moved around to various communities as the Committee on Health but we found out that in most communities, there is lack of equipment to test and detect the early appearance of the non-communicable diseases. 

It is also upon us to sensitise the community and tell our people the dangers of the non-communicable diseases and then probably urge them to continue going for checkups. In most cases, somebody realises that he has diabetes or high blood pressure after a long time when it is too late. The earlier we do it the better. Let us not only look at diabetes but all non-communicable diseases in entirety. I thank you. 

2.27
MR TOM EKUDO (FDC, Gweri County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to support the mover of the motion because I am also a victim. When you are in a family and your mother has diabetes, this means you are also a victim. 

I am aware that for you to get medicines for diabetes, you have to be in an association where you pay money so that when the medicine comes through that association, you can easily get it. 

The doctors say that it is only the old that get these diseases but there is a girl of 12 years who also suffers from this disease in Soroti. I happened to be one of those who took her for medication but there were no drugs. I thank you. 

2.29 
MS STELLA ISODO (FDC, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is my maiden speech. I appreciate the honourable colleague for raising this matter but I stand to support the voices that say that we should not limit it to diabetes and high blood pressure. 

The rate of alarm of the non-communicable diseases, including but not limited to cancer and epilepsy and by this, I would also like to extend to the neglected diseases like leprosy and elephantiasis. The alarm is in such a way that it mostly afflicts the poorest of the poor. 

Therefore, I stand to support the motion that we should encourage free screening and treatment. I suggest that the free screening and treatment must be at the lowest level like health centres III because this is where the poorest people can reach. When we put them at health centres III they will be encouraged to go for checkups. Right now, our health situation in the country is appalling and so I stand to support the motion. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

2.31 
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to essentially support the motion but at the same time to also agree with my colleagues that it should be widened to include other non-communicable diseases. 

Just like my colleagues stated, I agree with the fact that our people need to be educated on some of these diseases and it is supposed to be done better when we start from childhood. For instance, my mother has high blood pressure but she does not have diabetes. She only takes the medicine when she is not feeling well. We know that the medication for high blood pressure is supposed to be taken for the rest of your life but she stops taking the drugs immediately she starts feeling well because she believes that it is AIDS drugs which are supposed to be taken for life. 

Mr Speaker, this motion brings into light what we have been grappling with as a country for years; the issue of the health insurance policy for the whole country. I wonder where we are on that because I would imagine, under that policy, that such people would be covered without us having to discuss it here; it would be automatic that people are supported. It is time for us to call whoever is responsible to make sure that we introduce that as a country. I know that some people may still not want to support it but it is very important. Today, it may not be you, but next time, it could be your relative. 

If we were in a pool, having a source where everybody can draw from, maybe some of the problems would be made easier. Therefore, I still feel that we need to go back, look at the health insurance policy and have it for our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.33
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My dear colleagues, I am here to support the motion. We always say, “Prevention is better than cure and that health is wealth.” I want to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for being exemplary. He jogs every morning and does press-ups. In doing this, he is fighting non-communicable diseases, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, hypertension, stroke, and so on. 

Honourable members, as one of the coordinators for the Parliamentary Sports Club and athletics, I request you to jog or do some sports so that we avoid some of these cardiovascular diseases. 

How can we prevent this honourable members? We can do this by having a balanced diet, avoiding too much intake of alcohol and change of lifestyle. Otherwise, I thank the mover of the motion. We are going to support you and the Government should come in to help those who are already affected. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.35
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. In the rural setting, many times, people die of high blood pressure but they think they have been bewitched or you just hear - I think the word in Luganda is kikutuko (he just collapsed). Therefore, you find people unsure about what has happened. 

Hon. Tom mentioned part of what I had wanted to say; that prevention is better than cure. Apart from what he mentioned about exercise, we need to reduce our sodium intake. Many times, we are told not to eat raw salt but we ignore it, drink less alcohol, eat more potassium free foods, cut on caffeine, learn to manage stress and lose weight - I do not know whether I should be the one talking about that. (Laughter) 

However, you can still be healthy even when you are overweight like this. Therefore, I would like to encourage Members to, rather than manage the high blood pressure as it comes on. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.37
MS PASKA MENYA (Independent, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this important motion. Diabetes is a complicated disease just as pressure. We have very many diseases that are affecting Ugandans and we do not know where they originated from. 

Mr Speaker, I also support Members who said we should not only focus on zero diabetes and pressure; that rather, we extend it to other diseases. We have a very peculiar disease called nodding disease in Northern Uganda, which is equally serious and it tortures very many Ugandans. I urge the Government to focus and see this with serious concern because we have children and parents who are really suffering. 

Mr Speaker, diabetes is expensive to treat. I do not know whether it is a coincidence that every time you go to the Government facility, you will be told to go and buy the drugs from the private clinics. I support the motion that we support Ugandans to get treatment for these diseases, so that we save life. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.39
MR WILLIAM MUSEVENI (Independent, Buwekula South County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand in support of the motion. In Uganda, so many people are dying and in most cases, you find them claiming that it is witchcraft yet it is such diseases. Mr Speaker, we should introduce compulsory testing especially for diabetes; at least it is being done for blood pressure. 

I think we should also introduce a national policy on the physical fitness like other countries are doing. As said, prevention is better than cure –(Interruption)

MR AZA: Thank you, honourable member for giving me time for information. Mr Speaker, in 2017, the President physically went to Kololo Airstrip and launched sports activities so that we can avoid these diseases. Thank you very much, that is information I wanted to give you.

MR MUSEVENI: Thank you, hon. Aza. Mr Speaker, that would be my prayer to this House; if we can introduce a national policy on physical fitness and we the top leaders being exemplary and do what we are preaching. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Can I now have hon. Col Dr Nekesa -

COL VICTOR NEKESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to let me say something on procedure. We are speaking as individuals and as a House about our levels of fitness, and admiring our Head of State for fitness. The motion talks about using funds that may not be enough to cater for free treatment in some of the NCDs if not all. Wouldn't it be right that we as the House we think about having policies that would go and trickle down to the lowest and upper communities?

We need a well-led way of doing this in terms of a diet written down and recorded as well as fitness as part of our norms. This would be better than looking into the pockets of the country that may not achieve everything that we may require in this NCD issue. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable. Can I have PWD northern before I come to hon. Wakabi?

2.42
MS JOYCE ACAN (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion because we are all candidates for diabetes and pressure. As we age, we are all prone to these diseases.

My only concern is that we need to come up with a resolution that is not open-ended because other people suffering from other ailments will abuse the service. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.43
MR PIUS WAKABI (NRM, Bugahya County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that many Ugandans are dying as a result of diabetes. That is why I would like to encourage all Ugandans, irrespective of the age; whether young or old, to test for diabetes. During campaigns, I visited many hospitals but I did not suspect that I had diabetes. They tested me for malaria, among other things but I did not test for diabetes and I almost died. I discovered later that I had diabetes. They would tell me that it is because of campaigns and fatigue. Therefore, I encourage Ugandans to go for tests.

Mr Speaker, I think that the National Drug Authority is not doing its work well. We have many fake local drugs on the market. I appeal to the Government to really fight fake drugs on the market. I also encourage the Government to do more research on the causes of diabetes because it is not clear. Some people say it is lack of physical exercise but I am a footballer and I was diagnosed with diabetes. What is the cause? My parents do not have diabetes. 

I encourage the Government to do more research on the causes of diabetes. Is it the increased use of herbicides? Otherwise, I encourage all Ugandans to test, irrespective of their age. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I am still this side, which does not include the Member of Kigulu.   

2.45
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (Independent, Chua East County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion with the reason that as many people have said here, diabetes and high blood pressure move together. When we check people who are always suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure, they are always elderly persons who may not be able to have the money for treatment. I would like to request the Ministry of Health to stock medicines for diabetes and high blood pressure. 

I was a head teacher in one of the schools in Karamoja in 2004. A 13-year-old girl fell sick and when she was taken to the hospital - this is where I go by what my immediate colleague has said. When this girl was taken to the hospital, they put her on drip. Unfortunately, the girl passed on. Later on, it was discovered that she had diabetes.

I support the motion and would like to say that diabetes does not only affect the elderly and it is not hereditary from the parents. Some people who are young are suffering from diabetes. 

Therefore, I would like to urge the Government of Uganda to take it as key such that everyone who goes to the hospital is checked and given the right treatment. I beg to submit. Thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.48
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to join colleagues in thanking the mover of this motion. I want to start by saying that we need a national programme for non-communicable diseases. When you look at these non-communicable diseases, according to what I was reading online, most of them are lifestyle diseases and they are preventable. 

This means that if we have a national programme, which really spells out how we can deal with these diseases and which spells out the awareness creation, we shall be able to address this problem from all over the country and from all categories of people who are affected by this illness. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to bring to the attention of this House that in most of our health facilities, we do not have standby specialists to meet the demand, which is out there. I was looking at the motion and it is expected that the disease will increase by 166.9 between 2013 and 2035. This is alarming and as a country, we need to do something not only to look at diabetes and hypertension but all the non-communicable diseases in totality.

Finally, I would like to support the motion by saying that some of these diseases are very expensive and it affects especially the elderly. The Government must come and provide free drugs, including the necessary equipment, which are needed. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

2.50
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion on the Floor. When we were moving as the Parliamentary Taskforce on COVID-19, one of the key findings/revelations in the field was that most of the deaths that occurred in most of the health centres or hospitals had a record of diabetes and high blood pressure.

It is against this background that we should interest ourselves as Parliament and as Government that the motion moved by the Member is in good faith and we need to support it wholeheartedly.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to request you, as the head of this institution, to capture this on our yearly programme. As Parliament, we put a lot of attention on cancer as a Parliament. We have participated in activities like the cancer run. Even during the Parliament Health Week, we always look at HIV/AIDS. Could we also interest ourselves in popularising how to manage, treat and prevent these diseases? More so, having a nationwide campaign to sensitise our voters. If whoever held a microphone in our constituencies talked about diabetes and high blood pressure, it would make a difference.

Last year, out of ignorance, we lost a citizen who was in transit from Kampala to Mbale. His blood sugar got low and so, they parked along Tirinyi Road, at a junction called Nakalama asking for some sugar to boost the sugar levels. However, the mother of the children who were providing the sugar slapped the children and told them they would be arrested for killing someone. She stopped the children from giving out the sugar. Eventually, this person died before getting immediate attention because of ignorance. 

It is my humble prayer that we do a lot of sensitisation, mobilisation and popularise how best we can prevent some of these. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. 

2.53
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker and mover of the motion. I support the motion. In the past, diseases like high blood pressure, cancer, hepatitis, sickle cell were very rarely heard of. 

However, these days, there is a rapid increase. You ask yourself: what could be the cause of all these? One could be environmental factors, which many of us are talking about. In Northern Uganda where I come from, especially the Luo Community, men would live for a very long time. Now, there is another disease, which is rapidly increasing - prostate cancer - yet very few people take interest in it. 

In this motion, we urge Members to include prostate cancer, especially for men who are above 60 years of age. They say that when you are 40 years, as a man, you are likely to develop an enlargement of the prostate gland. This means that one needs to keep going for checkups. I normally do these checkups. Therefore, it is important for you, honourable members, to go and checkup. It is also graver for the people who are above 60 years. We have lost very many people to prostate cancer. 

In an ideal situation, all the Government facilities are supposed to be free. One is supposed to get medication and all the services freely. We are now advocating so that we can have free drugs for hypertension, diabetes and any other disease which is on board. 

We need to strengthen our health facilities more and bring services, which are not at the health centres III and II so that our people can access them. We should talk about accessibility and availability of those drugs and services. If we can do that, including the exercises that we are advocating for, we are going to reduce these NCDs. 

I support this motion but when you consider the environmental factors, stress is one of the things that causes these diseases. When you are poor – the poverty levels are now getting higher and people will be stressed out –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I have not limited time. So, you have just switched yourself off. We have not yet agreed on time. The Member just switched himself off. Let us go to Erute.

2.56
MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. We need to take preventive measures. They say ignorance is a disease. Remember, we had what we call primary health care and we used to educate people on that but currently, it is not happening. 

I happen to be one of the victims. During my campaigns, I suffered low blood pressure because I was not taking enough water. I would get very tired whenever I moved but I was encouraged to take enough fluids and now, I am not on any medication. I am, therefore, urging fellow Members of Parliament to take enough fluids. It is better to prevent rather than going for cure. 

Concerning high blood pressure, my relative died of it. This high blood pressure causes kidney failure and my relative died due to kidney failure. Therefore, we need to sensitise the community about the dangers of these non-communicable diseases. 

Mr Speaker, currently, it is expensive for the rural people to get medication. We, in the urban centres can buy. Therefore, I urge that we guard against self-medication. 

One of the challenges of self-medication is caused by some of these clinics. In the region where I come from, the standard of the clinics cannot be compared to the ones in the central. The people at the clinics call themselves doctors yet they are not qualified doctors. They prescribe medications that they are not supposed to do. I, therefore, urge the Ministry of Health to monitor some of those clinics so that we prevent our people from dying of these diseases. I beg to submit. 

2.58
MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand in support of the motion raised by my honourable colleague. 

It is sad that we have taken this long, as Parliament, to recognise the challenges we are facing. If we do not act now, NCDs will create a very big burden on our healthcare system, which is already overstretched. 

Diseases like diabetes and high blood pressure are preventable and in other places, the numbers of people dying from those diseases are not many because governments have equipped the health centre. You find people with diabetes in other countries have equipment and they are trained to measure their own blood sugar levels. 

We have the VHTs; we have two VHTs in every village in Uganda. Why can’t we utilise these people to detect these challenges in the earliest stage? 

As a member of the health committee of this Parliament, I am happy that two weeks ago, we attended the NCD conference organised by the Ministry of Health in Entebbe and most of these challenges were raised. We can detect these diseases in the earliest stages. 

One of the most forgotten NCD that we are not talking about today is the Sickle Cell disease. As I moved during my campaign, I was faced by parents with children suffering from this disease. The health centres near them have no blood banks and there is nothing we are doing for them. Let us recognise these NCDs like Sickle Cell and help these parents who have nothing to do for their children, apart from watching them. 

I stand here today to support this motion wholeheartedly. I pray that this Parliament takes this challenge of NCDs as an important one. I beg to submit. 

2.58
MR ANTHONY ESENU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to proceed with my submission. First of all, I stand to support the motion to urge Government to allocate more resources to curb high blood pressure and/or diabetes.

Secondly, I support the views of the Members that we should expand this motion to include the various NCDs, which do not get attention adequately as they should, by the Government and the Ministry of Health.

Thirdly, I suggest that our approach be comprehensive – let us combine prevention and curative measures because just one of them is not enough. As Members urge Government to do this, let us have a comprehensive approach on how we fight such diseases.

My fourth point is to wonder whether our argument or motion is a little bit on the wrong side of the equation. The last time I checked, we were supposed to get free medical services and drugs from our health facilities. Now, if we ask for further allocation or stocking of free drugs, we should go beyond that by asking why we do not have these drugs in our health facilities.

One of thing that I discovered is about the allocation of little funds for health or drugs to the districts yet they are forced on which drugs they should order from National Medical Stores. Because a bigger population is suffering from communicable diseases, they tend to prioritise those and because of that, the resources are forced to focus on those ones.

Therefore, as Parliament urges Government to allocate or stock more drugs, we should address the underlying causes of inadequate provision of funds to the health sector. I remember last time we all complained about our health facilities in our constituencies not having enough drugs.

For example, in Kapelebyong, three sub counties out of four do not even have a health center II; basic infrastructure is not available. We also have a staffing challenge in health facilities. I know that when I talk about Kapelebyong, there are many areas in this country, which can identify with us on that. 

You may go to a health centre III and find about five or six qualified medical workers available and only one available at health centre II. Therefore, we need to address the underlying causes of inadequate service delivery by the Ministry of Health to the public out there. 

Over and above that is the question of referral mechanisms. When an issue is identified at the lowest level, how do they manage referrals to either a health centre IV or a hospital? 

We are having a challenge with ambulances especially in terms of fuel. In my constituency, if the patient cannot raise Shs 300,000 to fuel an ambulance and get transported to the hospital, they die in the village. Therefore, I request that as we address the question of availability of drugs in those health facilities, we need to ask what the underlying causes are. 

Another point I would like to raise is that when the drugs are delivered by NMS, within a period of two, three to five days, if you go to almost every health facility in this country, they will tell you that the drugs have run out of stock. The question is: where are the drugs going?

Therefore, as Parliament, I pray that we should be getting to the bottom of these issues for us to find proper and long lasting solutions to health problems.

Before I sit down, Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. I am sorry I came a bit late. I was caught up trying to coordinate some urgent interventions in my constituency. Anyhow, there has been a huge deluge of rainfall supported by the rains over the last few weeks. As we talk, about 5,000 people have been displaced from their houses. About 3,180 or more homes have either collapsed or are at levels of collapsing and/or are inhabitable.

The latrines have been filled with water and all the contents are now out. So –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you know the rules but those who have heard should take some action. The honourable member wants to amend - let us first have the debate; I will come back to you to do your proposed amendment. 

3.07
MS ANNET KATUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and I would like to thank my colleague for moving it. The illnesses we are talking about are so chronic in nature that when one contracts diabetes or high blood pressure, they have to be on medication for the rest of their life. In my district, some people have opted to leave medication because the drugs are very expensive.

Mr Speaker, during my interaction with the officials in my district at health centres III and IV, I ascertained that the National Medical Stores distributes drugs for two months but in actual sense, those drugs last for only two weeks.

A case in point is where I would like to agree with hon. Basalirwa that we cannot only talk about diabetes and high blood pressure. There is this drug called an anesthetic. It is given to mothers due to undergo the caesarean section. That drug usually gets finished within two weeks. That means a woman who comes to give birth but needs this drug and it is not there is referred to other hospitals to get services.

Mr Speaker, this has caused congestion or even caused deaths because mothers sometimes cannot make it to the referral points on time. I support the motion and I ask the Ministry of Health, through you, Mr Speaker, to talk to the National Medical Stores to supply medicine that will last for two months. I beg to submit.

3.09
MR GEOFFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and I support it because first of all, diabetes and hypertension mainly affect our elderly people who have retired and are in the villages. 

However, the distances they move from the villages to access health facilities have a very big bearing on them besides the costs involved. So, if they reach there and do not have the medicine for treatment, it is another burden. This is why I think the mover has brought this very timely motion.

In some of our villages where you heard of mob justice, sometimes the victims have died of pressure yet people think this could have been something else and then they go and attack a suspect; it is happening. 


When we reduce the cost of treating diabetes and blood pressure, we will be doing the country a service and we will also be able to improve a lot of facilities to help treat our people well.

The village Health Teams (VHTs) who play very key roles in the health sector - Parliament needs to begin to look into the welfare of the VHTs because they do a lot of work. For every health exercise that should succeed – when you are distributing nets or giving drugs in the villages – if you do not involve the VHTs, many times it does not succeed. This Parliament should consider helping the VHTs in improving the health services. Thank you.

3.11
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (NRM, Bushigai County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion –(Interjections)– this is what we have been talking about: masks and pressure. You warned us in your speech before we started talking. 

Now, I would like to bring up an example of something I have handled in my life: aviation medicine. I was recruited as a pilot and I went through all the medical checkups required. Together with all my friends, we went through all those but medicine was not emphasised: behaviour was heavier than the medicine. 

They were giving us all the electrocardiogram (ECG) tests. If you reached 40 years, you would go back to be checked. After 40, the check would last only three months and you go back for another medical checkup. People remained normal. I am now 72 but normal. (Applause)

What happens now is that even for the medicine, which the mover of the motion urged people to do - the other day they were giving HIV medicines to people in my place, Bududa. One of them, being a senior person in the system, said: “I want the strongest.” They gave that person the strongest dose. Now, he cannot look at you straight. He has to look up, to see you. 

Therefore, this sensitisation on how you treat people is very important. Somebody talked about water. If you do not have water at a certain level – if you did not take the amount required and reached the airport and your water pressure was at a certain level, they would say: “No flight for you. You are a pilot; go back home, rest and take so many bottles of water.” After checking later, they would not find any disease. So, the behaviour is very important.

I propose to the mover of the motion to also include that system where people are checked. Checking here, as the honourable member said, is very expensive but we must follow it and see how we keep moving the way we are. Thank you.

3.15
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing us to learn on the job because the induction we got was probably not sufficient. 

I rise under rule 61. I have a mother who is diabetic and because of that, I am trying to do good research in the area of diabetes. I have read – and still continue to read that book – that diabetes has nothing to do with diet, genetics or exercises.

I have a cancer patient that was almost condemned by the cancer institute. We have decided to take alternative methods of treating this person and he is now improving. Having listened to colleagues, there are many other diseases we would think we need to take care of, like colleagues have said: the non-communicable diseases. 

For that matter, Mr Speaker, allow me to propose the amendment. I thank hon. Nkunda for proposing this motion. I propose that we urge the Government to prioritise investment in non-communicable diseases so as to provide free drugs to Ugandans suffering from them and to do research in those areas in order to find local solutions. 

Mr Speaker, whereas we are patients, we are also customers and clients to some pharmaceuticals somewhere. It is important that we do research in these areas. There are many Ugandans who are willing to do research in these areas and provide solutions but probably, have not been supported enough. As we urge the Government to give free drugs – a matter that I support – I also propose that we add doing extensive research in those areas so that we can eventually find local solutions to those problems. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Would the presumption be that Government departments are not doing research in this matter? I do not think it would be a proper presumption because there are whole research departments of Government dealing with these things on a daily basis. However, we can put it there.

MS KABANDA: Mr Speaker, the word I used is “prioritise”. I did not say they do not do enough but we urge the Government to prioritise investment in that area.

THE SPEAKER: I am just trying to assist here. Honourable members, that is a proposal for the amendment – that the subject of the motion be altered a little to accommodate broader concepts and also emphasise research in finding solutions to this. 

Is that proposal seconded? It is seconded by: Member of Parliament for Sheema – Prof. Mushemeza; Hon. Col Dr Nekesa; Member for Buhweju; Member for Manjiya; Member for Bugiri Municipality; Member for Ngora; Workers Representative; Member for Butaleja; Member for Zombo, and; Member for Ssembabule – the pastor. (Laughter)

Does this motion require a speech? No, I think it is straightforward. The discussions have indicated that we do not need to restrict it to diabetes and blood pressure because there are things around them that are similar, that you might need to pay attention to. 

Mover of the motion, are you comfortable with this? You have to be on the record, Madam. I can see you are agreeing but you need to confirm on the record that you agree to this proposed amendment.

MS NKUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, I agree that the Government can prioritise doing more research about it to find solutions –

THE SPEAKER: And to widen it – not just diabetes and high blood pressure but also non-communicable diseases generally.

MS NKUNDA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I agree.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. That is the amendment proposed and the mover of the motion has no problem with it. Can I propose this amendment now for your decision and then we move on to the subject of the motion in the terms proposed by the Member of Parliament for Butambala District. I put a question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Debate continues. Now, you are debating the amended motion. 

3.20
MS FLORENCE ASIIMWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I stood as a sociologist and today, I stand as a Rotarian. I thank the mover of the motion and the person who amended it because health is wealth. We want every Ugandan to be healthy. 

I wish to raise the issue of awareness. As a Rotarian, we used to have health camps. Unfortunately, because of COVID-19 - but we are hopefully moving out of it - they used to help a lot in creating awareness on a number of issues. Indeed, many people used to turn up. We would have different sections for awareness and treatment.

I wish to thank this Parliament for the support they have given to the Rotary Club. We recently had our President here. Thank you for the warm welcome you accorded him. Health camps should be encouraged under the guidance of the Ministry of Health. 

Mr Speaker, we always go to our radio stations to talk about many things. The RDCs have been informed and I was also informed that they have free airtime on all radio stations. This airtime is supposed to be shared with some of us. If it is not enough, we ask that more airtime is given. The Minister in charge of ICT should help us with that. 

What am I trying to drive at?  It is raising awareness. Let us have a number of these technical people in the studios; medical officers, the DHOs. We should go together and choose the particular diseases to talk about, so that our people are aware of the dangers of these diseases. 

I would also like to propose that the Government provides some of these simple machines for testing pressure and diabetes. I do not know how much they cost. If they are very expensive, the Members of Parliament can try to help because the issue is that we do not know that we are suffering from pressure or diabetes. 

The Ministry of Health is on the Order Paper today. I think the minister should come to tell us about the situation on health. I remember you telling us that she will be coming so we shall raise some of these issues when she comes. Therefore, I stand to support the motion which has already been amended, and I still insist that we should go to the radios to talk about health because health is wealth. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member for Masindi District. Honourable members, today there is a motion that is not reflected on the Order Paper. It was supposed to have been presented by hon. Martin Ojara Mapenduzi but we did not receive the text of the motion in time so we could not put it on the Order Paper. 

The subject matter of this motion attracts the attention of two young people; Mr Moses Ogwang Adonyo and Mr Patrick Abila. They are here to observe the proceedings but what they expected was to listen to a discussion on the motion to deal with the campaign to abolish nuclear weapons in the world.  

Mr Moses Ogwang Adonyo is the Country Coordinator for the United Nations International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons and Mr Patrick Abila is the Director, Operations at Makerere University, Private Sector Forum. These two are interested in this matter so they were here but I think we will now handle this motion next week when the text is made available. You are very welcome to follow the discussions on these other matters and then next week, we might have your matter on the Order Paper. Thank you very much. 

3.26
THE 	MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Member of Kanungu District for moving this motion. The motion is urging Government to provide free medicine to people who are suffering from non-communicable diseases, as now amended by the honourable member on the Opposition side of the House.

Ideally, the Government supports this motion because these are the issues affecting our people in our constituencies so this is a value adding motion and we do support it. 

I would also like to thank the Members who have talked about the other side of the motion. Treatment normally comes at the tail end but the big work that we have, as Members of Parliament and leaders in this country, is prevention. Prevention, as many Members have said, starts with us as leaders, by giving examples. 

We have done a very fantastic job in this fight against COVID-19 because every Member of Parliament has gone out – every leader beginning with President Yoweri Museveni – to talk about the dangers of COVID-19. 

The honourable Member from Masindi and hon. Muwuma talked about the radios. We have a free hour every week, as the Government, available to talk about Government programmes and any other issue. 

Despite your political parties, if Members can use this hour with our system of RDCs to talk about non-communicable diseases and their dangers, we can make a difference everywhere we are in the constituency. 

We have been talking about COVID-19. We can use every opportunity to talk about non-communicable diseases, especially the preventive side of it, which is what you eat and what you think about.

Mr Speaker, this morning, part of the Thursday fellowship talked about worries, including ourselves here. There could be some Members who are already worried about the next term. It is four years from now but you are worried. This causes pressure and stress. Others are worried about the fifth term when they are in the first term. I think being exemplary is very important.  

We can talk about these issues in our constituencies and make it a habit; be determined to talk about them. I know every time leaders get involved in fighting a disease, we win. I think the cost of non-communicable diseases is increasing every year. It is a danger to our families and country and as leaders, we must join hands together to fight non-communicable diseases. One part of the story is medicine. The big part is prevention and it starts with us. 

Mr Speaker, I stood as a Member of the Executive to say that the honourable member and Members of this House are preaching to the converted. We welcome the urge and we will follow up and make sure that these views that we have received here inform our policy formulation, as the Executive. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: After that speech, I was getting very tempted to close the debate but since there are Members who still want to express themselves, I will let them. I will have the Member from Manjiya, Maj. Dr Alanyo, honourable Member for Buhweju, the honourable member from Manjiya, hon. Maj. Dr Alanyo and hon. Francis Mwijukye. 

3.31
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this crucial motion, including the amendment. I went through the health care reports, including those of the World Health Organisation; 74 per cent of the disease burden we have in Uganda is preventable, including diabetes and high blood pressure.

Mr Speaker, some genius said that many a human being dig their grave using teeth - discuss. Indeed, it is true if you dissected that phrase; many of us eat junk foods like chips, cookies and drink sodas. 

Mr Speaker, during campaigns, I was a victim of one of the drinks - we have to be very careful Members. Even if you carefully looked at the labels of those drinks, facts are hidden. They do not tell you the ingredients that are in the drink. Some of the drinks - I do not want to mention the names of some of these drinks but you end up taking Viagra of sorts, you only realise at night that you are not behaving in the usual. It may anyway engage you in the exercises, which may also help you to tone down -

THE SPEAKER: For the future readers of the Hansard, would you like to be clearer on what you are saying please?

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I am talking about new drinks on the market. We have drinks like Rock Boom and many others like Mukamanayamba - (Laughter) 

If you read the label, it bears very deceptive statements like “it is very nutritious” and you will think that you are having - they even put there that it is “a diet drink” - that you are having a complete diet yet it is actually Viagra. 

Mr Speaker, the food we choose is very important. I concur with my sister from Butambala who said that in her research, she realised that diabetes is not caused by the foods we eat. However, if you read further in some scientific journals, if you were to manage your sugar levels - if it is high, you are advised to not eat foods that are rich in sugars and if it is low, it is the opposite. These are all scientific observations that require further research. 

Mr Speaker, the foods we buy from supermarkets these days, you have to know the ingredients that are in those packaged foods or else you end up with junk foods, which will increase your sugar levels or even blood pressure. 

What is very important is also to exercise. We might not necessarily – like hon. Basalirwa says - go to the football pitches or run along the streets. There are also good indoor exercises including sex. (Laughter) I am a biology teacher and so, I see no vulgarity in this - I am not being obscene; this is a fact. As Members, who may be active in that area, you should not abdicate your responsibility because it is killing two birds with one stone. As you fulfill your conjugal rights, you are also exercising to prevent some of these non-communicable diseases.

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order. 

MR ESENU: Mr Speaker, we are aware that the activities of this House are public and we are on air in all the sitting rooms of most homes in this country. We have children who are seated watching us discussing what is happening at this level. 

Is it in order for the previous speaker to use the kind of language that he has used, that leaves our children wondering what we are discussing without providing the right context to explain what he is trying to communicate? 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, each time we discuss matters in this House and the kind of words that we use, we should always remember that this is the august Assembly and it is televised live. 

Yesterday, we had a motion on some of these issues and it was debated widely. It is not a biology conference and it is not a scientific symposium either; it is a sitting of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause) Let us accord it that respect. You can go and use some of those words in your private meetings, which are unrestricted. Okay, please.

MR NAMBESHE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. But in our curriculum, you will appreciate that one of the subjects -

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR NAMBESHE: As I proceed, much as we urge Government to provide free health care services and drugs to patients of diabetes and the high blood pressure, we should also urge Government to give free airtime to health workers or leaders to promote or increase levels of awareness through preventive, palliative and curative -

THE SPEAKER: Are you talking about airtime on phones or media?

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, on electronic media. It would be good; it should not be a preserve of the RDCs but this should be an exercise conducted by technical officers like health care workers. As I conclude, in my research - I am actually deep into research - you need enough sleep because sleep is also a therapy of sorts. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we should prepare to close with the following Members speaking: I had already picked hon. Maj. Dr Alanyo, hon. Mwijukye and then I will conclude with the Member for Lira and close so that we prepare for Prime Minister's Time. 
However, I wanted to see if I could handle the motion for leave - which would be a short motion for Members to allow the Member to proceed to prepare a Private Member's Bill.

3.39
MAJ. DR JENNIFER ALANYO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate you upon your victory and all the Members of Parliament who made it here. This being my maiden contribution, allow me support the motion of Government to provide free diabetic and hypertensive drugs to Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, services or provision of free testing of diabetes and blood pressure has been going on in many Government hospitals, right from Heath Centres II and above. Sometimes, there are breakages of machines here and there and inadequate supplies that have been a problem. In that vein, we require the Government to improve on the supplies, funding and above all, create awareness through the forums and sensitisation, just like they have been doing for Hepatitis B.

Many people flock to hospitals to come and test for other things including Hepatitis B. We should include that so that - the test for blood pressure is very simple. It takes less than 20 minutes and in 20 minutes, you know your glucose and pressure levels.

Many of my colleagues have talked about diabetes affecting young people. Mr Speaker, there are many types of diabetes. There are those that affect the young; those below 40 years. One of my colleagues said she saw a child who was 12 years but the youngest patient I have ever treated was seven years. You can imagine the gravity of cost starting to treat a child of seven years on insulin for life. Indeed, this is where the Government should come and reinforce the health sector system and provide free drugs.

Diabetes has a lot of complications. From the medical perspective, high blood pressure is one of the complications of diabetes. This is why every time you go to the hospital to check your glucose level, request for your high blood pressure to be checked as well. 

It is not only limited to high blood as a complication. There is also kidney failure, blindness, among others. Therefore, every time we talk about provision of drugs, what about the complications? They are enormous. All these should be encompassed as management and treatment of diabetes and hypertension. 

In conclusion, testing kits should be reinforced in many health centres as it has always been; they need to beef up. Also there should be an increase of funds. Mr Speaker, drugs have always been there except not enough because the numbers of patients have gone up. However, as a practicing medical doctor, while out of Parliament, the number of patients have really gone up. We, therefore, urge the Government to increase the supplies, including funds. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: You are very welcome.
     
3.44
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will not speak as a doctor, as insinuated by hon. Okupa.

THE SPEAKER: Are you?

MR MWIJUKYE: I am going to speak as a representative of the people of Buhweju. (Laughter) I support the motion. 

As an interested person, every time a person goes to Nsika Health Centre IV or any health centre in Buhweju and there is no medicine, they will call me to provide medicine or transport to go where they can access medicine. I support this motion so that the burden on me is reduced.

Secondly, I have become like an in charge of health centres. I am a doctor and a minister of health because if everything concerning health is not there, then they have to look for me. Therefore, a motion where my burden is going to be reduced, I have no option but to support. (Applause)

I would like to thank colleagues for the spirit that is developing in this House; where a motion is brought by a member from the other side and it is supported across the board. I see it coming and I would like to support you but I also want to thank the other side for supporting the amendment of our colleague from Butambala. 

I would like to thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now that medicine is going to be availed, the people of Buhweju are going to be very happy.

3.46
MS LINDA AUMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion as amended for the free service that will be given to our people, especially the diabetic patients, including those with high blood pressure.

As colleagues were giving their submission, I made some observations since there is an increase in these illnesses. My observation is on the preventive measures, especially the signs and symptoms of these illnesses, which should be a serious emphasis through creation of awareness by the leaders and medical personnel.

Most of the people who get these illnesses realise them when it is too late. Others, upon realising, would be at their death point because of the ignorance on the signs and symptoms. Yet, these sicknesses show signs and symptoms but they do not know. I think that even if we are giving free medicine to these victims, we should help them to know the signs and symptoms earlier so that they can go for treatment early.

I have many people who realised that they had pressure at an early stage and they followed what the doctor told them and they are now free from the sickness. If we do this, it will help our people because COVID-19 has caused a lot of impact; people are stressed and depressed. The number of the people who will have these sicknesses will increase and it will overwhelm the Government. Therefore, it is better we prevent it earlier. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.   

3.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start from the point raised by the Chief Opposition Whip, where research shows that 75 per cent of the people in hospitals seeking treatment in Uganda are suffering from diseases, which are preventable. This means that out of 100 people, 75 should not be there. We have focused so much on treatment than prevention. For such diseases, you find that even if you are to get treatment, you have a burden to be on treatment for the rest of your life.

I would like to thank hon. Nkunda for raising this matter and hon. Aisha Kabanda, for allowing us to discuss it in a broader manner, which can help us to focus on research and prevention. Sometimes we can do much more. Hon. Nambeshe raised a very important point although he put in a lot of Lugisu culture but it is a very big problem even in our villages. 

During my campaigns, I would tell people that you go and drink Waragi from morning to evening yet you have just gotten a new bride and then you say “Mukama Nayamba”. It really cannot work. We have to teach our people to be preventive – 

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, you know that the language of this House is English. (Laughter)

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: God will help me. That is what Mukama nayamba means. You do whatever you can and God will help with the rest. 

Mr Speaker, regarding the issue of misleading adverts, I used to listen to some misleading adverts saying that Mirinda Fruity gives you blood. I think the Uganda Communications Commission and Government need to come in and look at these misleading adverts and we become clear on them. They are misleading many people into consuming very dangerous substances. I will communicate to the minister in charge of ICT and we ensure that we follow it up. 

Government allocates only Shs 2 billion for drugs for these dangerous diseases annually. Colleagues, we participate in the budgeting process. Let us also look at it. Colleagues on the Committee on Health and on the Committee on Budget, let us look at it and see what we can do. 

As of now, we provide free insulin and free checkups but the Shs 2 billion is for the whole country and each district gets a portion of it. You can imagine how much is given to each of the 146 districts in the whole country. It is an issue we have to look at when we are budgeting. 

As I conclude, this is a matter to which we must give serious attention. I have seen on the list of business to follow, the Minister of Health has a statement on the state of healthcare service delivery in Uganda and budgetary implications. I am going to talk to her so that she can update and include responses to issues raised here so that once that statement is presented, issues of NCDs are clearly captured. 

I will also urge her to take this matter to Cabinet so that Cabinet can start looking at NCDs as one of the areas we should focus on, as Government, to help our people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think what you should give to the minister is the motion as decided. The debate might not help much but the decision of the House would help. 

Honourable members, we will put this to a close now. In a few minutes, we shall start the Prime Minister’s Time and we see how to continue with other matters after that. 

The question that I now put for your decision is for a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to prioritise investment in research and treatment of non-communicable diseases and provide free drugs for treatment of the NCD patients. That is the motion for your decision. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable member for Kanungu. You picked the right subject and you got the right support. Thank you. 

We have a motion to support – today is private member’s time – we have a motion for a resolution of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Markets Bill”. The honourable member for workers will be presenting this. We, however, cannot start now because in just a few minutes – or can we give it a shot? 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE MARKETS BILL, 2021”

3.55
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My motion, as has already been stated, is seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Markets Bill”. It is moved under Article 94(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 121(1) and rule 122(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and rule l2l(l) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament grant a Member of Parliament the right to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE that Article 237(1) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda vests land in the citizens of Uganda and Article 40(2) grants every person a right to practice his or her profession and to carry on any lawful occupation, trade or business;

NOTING that the current Markets Act, Cap. 94 places the establishment, administration and maintenance of markets in Uganda solely in the hands of district administration, municipal council and town council within their area of jurisdiction;

RECALLING that at the time the Markets Act was enacted in 1942, Uganda was operating a planned economy where all elements of the economy were determined centrally by the Government;

CONSIDERING that with the advent of the liberalised economy, buttressed with the enactment of the 1995 Constitution, Ugandans were granted the right to practice their professions and carry on lawful occupation, thereby rendering the restrictions under the current Markets Act in relation to ownership, establishment and administration of the markets obsolete;

APPRECIAIING that overtime, marker vendors, private individuals and companies have joined the market business to establish and manage markets;

CONVINCED that there is need to repeal and replace the Markets Act, Cap. 94 to provide for a comprehensive legal framework that is well aligned to the legal and economic reforms that have evolved over time and ultimately strengthen the regulation, management and administration of markets;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, "The Markets Bill, 2021", a draft of which is hereto attached.”

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) it is seconded by hon. Bakkabulindi, hon. Museveni, Member for Kigulu South, Member for Kagadi, Member for Adjumani East, Member for West Moyo, hon. Nangoli and Member for Kapelebyong.

I will propose the question just to mark the stage but if the Prime Minister was going to allow us – Let us finish the Prime Minister’s Question Time and then we return to this. I will propose the question and we will proceed properly when the Member has the time to justify her motion. 

Can we pause it there? Motion received, seconded and you will speak to your motion as soon as we finish with the Prime Minister. 

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Defects in the existing law. The Markets Act, Cap. 94 – 

THE SPEAKER: No, I said you will do the justification after. Let us finish with this. Thank you very much. 

PRIME MINISTER’S TIME

4.00
THE PRIME MINISTERS AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, good afternoon.

THE SPEAKER: We have already handled the business for next week; therefore, go straight to your presentation.

MS NABBANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Christine Kaaya Nakimwero, Woman Member of Parliament for Kiboga, gave a very long preamble, which I will not go through in the interest of time. Anyhow, she had a number of questions but question No.1 was that what is the progress of Government’s promise of offsetting the Compensation Bill as promised through the use of the Luweero Triangle Budget for the financial years 2016/2017, 2017/ 2018.

My response is that my office has been handling the payment of a one-off gratuity (akasiimo), as it is commonly known, to civilian veterans. As of today, Shs 497,500,000 has already been disbursed to 182 veterans in Kasejere War Zone and a sum of Shs 185,500,000 will be included in the Financial Year 2022/2023 for the remaining 84 veterans because this financial year’s budget has been affected by the Covid-19 pandemic.

The second question was: what is the Government's plan of resettling the veterans to their original areas while considering the COVID-l9 testing and equipment for those people including the basic essentials they would use in their long vacated areas? 

My response is that the Government has, on previous occasions, extended support towards the veterans. As of 10 May 2016, all veterans who assembled at Kitagenda Primary School in Kiboga District returned to their homes after Government interventions.

There are reports that 25 individuals were mobilised by some leaders who have again assembled in Lwamata Town Council in Kiboga District. I have directed the Minister for Luweero-Rwenzori Triangle to organise a meeting with the assembled group in conjunction with the district leadership to ascertain their claims. If they are found to be true, the Government will come in and intervene. 

In regard to the COVID-l9 testing, Kiboga District, as of today, has received a total 13,750 vaccines and there is a vaccination Centre at Lwamata Health Centre III. I urge all the veterans to go to the above facility for vaccination.

Mr Speaker, the third question is: how can the Government advise the district leadership on the actionable practices and position of Government on the political, social and economic challenges in the area? 

Mr Speaker, in 2016, Government constituted a committee that worked with Kiboga District Local Government and representatives of the people of Kasejere Zone and come up with priorities in the delivery of social services to the people of Kasejere Zone. In that regard, the NRM Government has completed the first phase of the Lwamata water project and our colleague is already aware of that.

The second phase is scheduled to start in the 4th quarter of this financial year. Surveys have been completed to construct a seed secondary school in Lwamata under the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Program Phase III and the construction of the Kitengenda-Lwamata Road is
underway.

Mr Speaker, the Government is committed to extending services to the people in the entire country, Kiboga inclusive.

The last question was: what is the Government's plan of ensuring that the rights of these innocent Ugandans are fulfilled since many shades of leadership exhausted the efforts and have now decided to look on as far as fulfilling the l7 March, 2017 Presidential pledges to the veterans as concerned.

I wish to categorically clarify that during the 17 March 2017 meeting, H.E, the President did not make any pledges to the leaders of the people who had assembled at Kasejere. Mr Speaker, as usual the NRM Government will continue to meet its obligations with regard to the payment of akasiimo
to civilian veterans including those in Kiboga District.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Those were the questions that were raised to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the responses thereto. The rules allow the Leader of the Opposition to make - are you here in this position? Anyway, I will waive that requirement. Proceed, please.

4.07
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa) (for the Leader of the Opposition):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the responses. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, regarding compensation, I concur with you that it is being processed. However, in this question that she raised, there was that grave concern of the violence and brutality that was occasioned on these veterans by the police. They were detained without trial for over 48 hours and these unlawful actions ought to be equally compensated. You have not talked about the compensation in regard to these unlawful actions by the police.

Then in the other response, you made contradictory statements especially when you said that all veterans who assembled at Kitagenda Primary School in Kiboga returned to their homes after the Government’s interventions yet in the second paragraph, you say that there are reports that 25 of them are still in the town council and that you have directed the Minister of Luweero-Rwenzori to convene a meeting, which means there are still issues. There is more to it than meets the eye.

Lastly, in this last response, I do not know who is being conservative with the truth. Is the member who asked the question not coming out clear when you say that His Excellency, the President, on 17 March 2017 never made any pledges to the leaders and it is actually the salient question that is being raised by the Member? 

The President committed himself and pledged but he has not honoured the pledges. So, which of the two is being conservative with the truth? I leave it to you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. One of you must be telling the truth and the other is being conservative.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Leader of the Opposition, do you realise that what you have just done would have extended this debate because you have asked fresh questions to the Prime Minister to which she should have responded. 

The purpose of your response - and that is why there is a time given - is for you to restate a few things and tell this House what you would have done differently but not asking questions. We assume you are a Government in waiting but from the way you are proceeding, it looks like you enjoy being in the Opposition very much. (Laughter)

We now have sufficient time to go back to the other matter. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister for these questions. Next time, I am going to ask you to be able to take one or two comments from Members and then you engage with them but not today. Can we go back to the motion?

Ms rwabushaija: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to start with the policy and principles. The object of the Bill is:

    i) To reform the law relating to the establishment and control of the markets in Uganda,
    ii) To provide for the establishment and management of public and private markets,
    iii) To provide for licensing of the private markets,
    iv) To provide for registration of markets and vendors,
    v) To provide for levying and collecting of market fees,
    vi) To repeal the markets Act, Cap. 94 and for related matters.

The defects in the existing law

The Markets Act, Cap. 94 does not address the current needs of market development, management and administration that have evolved over time. The current Markets Act, places the establishment under administration of markets solely in the hands of Government. 

Section 1 of the Markets Act, for example, prohibits any other person or Authority other than district administration, a Municipal Council and Town Council within their jurisdiction from establishing and maintaining a market. 

This legal regime was based on the economic structure at the time during which period Uganda operated a planned economy where all elements of the economy were determined centrally by the Government. However with the advent of the legalised economy buttressed with the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Ugandans were granted the right to practise their professions and to carry on lawful occupation, trade or Business. As a result of the economic and legal reforms that have evolved over time, there is need to align the regulation of markets. 

Section 2 of the Markets Act empowers the minister to make rules and by-laws for carrying into effect the purposes of the Act. The Act, however, does not define or specify the responsible minister. 

When the Markets Act was enacted in 1942, Uganda had a centralised system of governance. It was therefore, presumably the Minister responsible for Trade who was responsible for handling matters relating to markets. 

However, when the decentralised system of governance was introduced, the Minister responsible for Local Governments took over the governance of Local Governments affairs under which the markets operations fall, hence, the need to align the law to the changes in policy. 

The Kampala Capital City Act, 20l0 mandates Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) to establish markets within the Capital City and devolve the administration of markets to Division Urban Councils. Given that the Capital City has a separate ministry responsible for its affairs, different from that of Local Governments, there is need to cater for the administrative uniqueness of KCCA and facilitate collaboration of the two ministries to ensure coordinated implementation of markets regulation. 

The Markets Act does not provide for the management of vendors, including the involvement of vendors in the affairs of markets and vendors’ registration. In addition, the Act does not make provision for determination of market fees and revenue collection. 

The absence of regularised modalities on management of vendors, revenue determination and collection has resulted in unending conflict between market operators and vendors. There is, therefore, the need for a law that will facilitate streamlined market operations. 

Overtime, there have been changes in the administrative structures of Local Governments, which were not envisaged in the current law. The elevation of some districts to cities, for example, necessitates a legislation that will facilitate the establishment of well-regulated organised modern markets that match the intended level of modernisation and development of the cities.

Remedies proposed by the Bill

The Bill seeks to provide for a comprehensive legal framework to strengthen the regulation, management and administration of markets and to repeal and replace the Markets Act, Cap. 94 to address the gaps and limitations that have been identified in the current law.
Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of the Bill. 

The Speaker: Let the records capture that. Thank you, honourable member. I will ask for secondment and propose a question for debate. What we need to bear in mind is that it is within the Member’s right, under the Constitution, to propose a Private Member’s Bill. We created this procedure to help us ventilate the proposals and make sure that the proposals being made do not violate other provisions of the Constitution or cause conflict.

One such provision is Article 93. We say, a Private Member is not allowed to propose laws or motions that will impose a charge on the Fund without the consent of Government. That is specific to private Members.
 
Then, there are general restrictions for everyone who wants to propose a law, including Government, to try and legalise things that are part of the rights that you cannot derogate from the Constitution. You cannot propose a law that will create a one party state. Everybody is prohibited from making such attempts.

Those are the only restrictions on the right of a Member to propose a Private Member’s Bill. Usually, we consider this a formality that we just look at the proposal and see if it does not violate anything. Normally, we grant Members the leave to proceed with their proposals until they are processed and finalised.

Therefore, the purpose of this debate is not the substance of the Bill but the need for it in a sense that there are gaps that the Member says have been identified and looks like the Government Chief Whip and his team have not had time to reflect on this matter and look at it as an urgent matter. A private Member now wants to deal with those gaps that are created.

Are we together on this?

Hon. Members: Yes.

The Speaker: The question that I now propose for your debate and thereafter the seconders will speak is that the hon. Rwabushaija Margaret, Workers Representative, be granted leave of this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Markets Bill.” That is the motion for your debate and debate will start from the listed people who are supposed to be seconding the Bill and we proceed from there. 

I have another Workers Member of Parliament, hon. Kunihira Agnes, to give her first speech then we go to the other seconders. Please, let us limit the time such that if it is necessary, other Members can also participate in the debate.

4.19
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Markets Bill, 2021.” 

As you have heard from the mover of the motion, the current Market Act was established in 1942. It is over 80 years since it was introduced and there have been a lot of changes. One of them is population growth and the new developments. 

Currently, individuals have established markets yet in the current law, a private individual is not supposed to run a market. The new law will help individuals who are investing in markets to be able to operate legally. 

The current law does not provide for vendors; the individuals operating the markets, the companies that carry out management and control of markets, those providing services such as security and revenue collection. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that the Government has put in place a number of public markets. The Markets Act needs to be harmonised with the Local Government Act to ensure that these markets are well managed and everything runs smoothly. 

You are also aware that there are a lot of fights between the urban centres like Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) with individuals who have already been leased markets like Nakasero and Owino. It is important that the law is put in place to repeal the 1942 law. Like you guided sometime back, if you are going to amend a law and it takes more than 50 per cent, then, it must be repealed. This is what my colleague is trying to do. 

Mr Speaker, what my colleague did not mention is that the Markets Bill was among the businesses that lapsed. Fortunately, the mover of the motion had been able to secure the certificate of financial implication. I am sure the Ministry of Local Government is going to support her again because this law is been long overdue. 

The most important thing is to appeal to Members to support the honourable colleague to be able to present a Private Members’ Bill. She is seeking our support so that she can take leave of Parliament and come back and present the Bill. 

We are also looking forward to what is going to come out of what she is going to present to us. We are lucky that we have looked through the draft and I am sure the new Members are going to improve that draft so that she comes up with a better law. I beg to support. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The second seconder is the Member for Oyam District. 

4.24 
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would like to thank you for giving us space to present this motion before the House. 

I would like to say that the current Market Act was enacted in 1942. This is a very long period of time and very many things have changed. For example, when this Act was enacted, it was housed under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. However, with the devolution of power, we now have the Ministry of Local Government in place. Therefore, there is a need for the House to allow the private member to come up with this Bill to address some of those changes. 

As we know, there are a number of challenges facing markets in this country. One, there are very many existing conflicts in the management and administration of markets. The vendors are struggling with the market owners, service providers and market authorities. When you look at the current Act, the vendors are nowhere to be given a rightful position and the majority of the vendors are women. 

Our economy is largely run by the private sector and the informal sector. This request comes at the right time to address some of these challenges. 

There are various fees being paid yet they are not backed by the right laws. As a result, it provides space for market authorities to exploit vendors. This is why we are probably seeing very many conflicts in the markets. Therefore, I urge this House to support the private member to take leave and introduce this Bill. 

Finally, there is the issue of the contribution of the markets, more especially the women, as far as the informal sector is concerned. Most times, we pass here loans and money to recapitalise Uganda Development Bank (UDB) but who are the beneficiaries of these monies? It is the businessmen and women who are at the apex of business. What about the women and men down there operating as market vendors?

I would like to believe that when we come up with a comprehensive legal framework, it will address some of these challenges. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, and urge colleagues to support this motion so that we grant the private member leave to introduce the Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Market Bill, 2021.” I thank you. 

4.27 
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues who have supported the motion and I support our colleague for bringing this Private Members’ Bill. As it has been rightly mentioned, if it was not for the collapse of this permission of the 10th Parliament, all the restrictions would have already been taken care of. 

If you do not work in the market or have a stall in the market, you, at least, have a relative that has a stall in the market. When we talk about today’s markets, we are not talking about the markets of 1942 or the 1960s or 1970s. We are talking about supermarkets, shopping malls, mobile markets and hence, sources of employment to our citizens.

You know very well that the number of graduates in this country cannot be accommodated. The markets of the 50s and 60s were for the old people and the young ones that have failed to go to the schools while today’s markets include the graduates. Therefore, these markets that we are saying should be regulated have people contributing to the economy of this country enormously. 

My Speaker, as my colleagues are talking, I believe they want to bring social services closer to the people. The nature of the social services that we are going to get from these markets are not the same as the markets we were referring to in 1942. Take an example, when the COVID-19 pandemic just started. The methodologies we were using to get food items and others were different. Using the market people to deliver to our colleagues and homesteads could not apply in the old fashion. 

Therefore, when we talk about empowering and coming up with new modalities in the new Bill concerning markets, we are already seeing ahead what the nature of markets we are talking about. We want a law that can even empower our people to own business and be part and parcel of the administration. This is what my colleague is seeking for.

Mr Speaker, when I talk about sanity - some of you stay in Kampala, although you represent different constituencies upcountry. Of recent, you saw what took place in St Balikuddembe – where a person enters the market well-guarded and bulldozes and after a few months, the same person is removed from office with guns because of lack of the law; Kampala Capital City Authority comes in but does not know the rightful owner – whether it is the Government or the people. People are leased but not leased - I think it is high time we brought sanity not only in the city but all over the country.

When we talk about this new law, we are not talking about Nakasero and St Balikuddembe and the rest in Kampala; we are talking about markets in the whole country. None of us here can say markets in our districts are not contributing to the employment of our people - they are doing so and they are well-off. 

What they need is to be guided on how they operate because they are contributing a lot to the economy. We are here because the markets are going on well. That is why you find that senior citizens and rich people are involved in markets. It is because there is business there.

Therefore, it is high time – and I think it is right – that we regulated. Look at the year – 1942: what sort of law can govern the current society of 2021? I was telling my colleagues, as Workers Representative, that when I just got a job, the Managing Director (MD) of Uganda Breweries had a driver, secretary, tea girl and copy typist. 

The current MD in the corporate world is alone in the office. He uses a computer, sends messages and drives himself. The former messenger of the MD was a Primary Seven leaver but now even a Senior Four leaver cannot be a messenger. That is how modern we are moving.

Therefore, when we are talking about markets and not just the word “market” alone. As I said, there are supermarkets, mobile markets now – some people have even resorted to using their vans as markets. Therefore, we need to regulate who should run what and how they should be protected. They are not protected and if they are not protected, they are going to be a danger to the society.

Mr Speaker, without talking much, I encourage my colleagues that all the hurdles concerning the permission had already been cleared; we are now formalising. We just need your support so that workers of this country can move with their heads up, knowing that whatever they are doing, they are being guarded by current laws and are being regulated. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, usually in a debate of this nature, we do not go as if we are beginning to debate the principles of the Bill itself because we, still, do not have a Bill. The mover and the seconders did very well. What we are supposed to be doing is: this proposal from the Private Member, does it cure any problem? If we grant the Member leave, will the proposal cure anything that is a problem now? 

So, the debate would be, “yes, there are gaps – the current law has gaps”. Like the honourable member said, “the gaps are so many that if we are to just amend, it will overwhelm the original law, so, we might have to take it out and put a new one”. That is the line of the debate. 

It is not about the age of the law. I know of a law that was enacted thousands of years ago: the Ten Commandments. I also know of a law that was introduced by a man called Jesus Christ in the New Testament over 2,000 years ago but up to now, we have not had occasion to amend any of those laws. (Laughter)

Therefore, really, it is not about the age of the law, hon. Bakkabulindi. Let us just speak to the substance that yes, these gaps will be cured if we allow the honourable member to present this Bill and, two, it does not violate the Constitution. So, let us grant the Member the right to do so. 

Therefore, if I am going to allow the debate, please, do not start debating the principles of the Bill that is not yet here. So, are we going to have a short debate or should we conclude this matter, grant the Member the right and move on?

The right for a Private Member to move a private Member’s Bill is a constitutional right. Are we in agreement on that? [Members: “Yes.”] The question is: has a Member established sufficient evidence to show that there are gaps that need to be fixed? [Members: “Yes.”] Are we persuaded that her proposal will not offend any provision of the Constitution? [Members: “Yes.”] If we are agreed on these, what are we going to debate? Can I put the question, honourable members? 

Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your decision is that hon. Margaret Rwabushaija, Workers MP, be granted leave of this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Markets’ Bill”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have the right to proceed. (Applause) Clerk, you know what to do; it is no longer the duty of the Member to proceed with the drafting, you take over. The support of Government is required, under the Constitution, to support the Member in the drafting and finalisation of this law for further management by this House, when it is done.

Honourable members, this House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.37 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 October 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

