Wednesday, 1 October 2014

Parliament met at 3.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I do apologise for the late start. There were too many activities this morning but please join me in welcoming children from Kings Kids Primary School in Soroti. Stand up. They are represented by hon. Osegge and hon. Peter Omolo. You are welcome. 

Secondly, honourable members, I wanted to remind you about the annual parliamentary prayer breakfast, which we normally have on 8th October. I would like you to free your diaries so that we come and praise God as we do every year. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

UGANDA LAW REFORM COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT 2013

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite Commissioner Akol to come and lay the papers?

MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the Uganda Law Reform Commission Annual Report 2013. I beg to lay.

PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL AND PUBLIC ASSETS AUTHORITY (PPDA) ANNUAL REPORT PERFORMANCE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) Annual Report performance for financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.

THE REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE 40-MONTH PERIOD ENDING 31ST DECEMBER 2011 FOR MAKERERE UNIVERSITY - VOCATIONALISATION OF ANIMAL SECTOR EDUCATION: MASTER OF SCIENCE IN ANIMAL PRODUCTION PROCESSING, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SAFETY: A RESEARCH PROJECT (VASES – MAPPES) - GRAND CONTRACT NO. 9 ACP RPR 12/29.

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on table the report and opinion of the Auditor General on the financial statements for the 40-month period ending 31st December 2011 for Makerere University - Vocationalisation of Animal Sector Education: Master of Science in Animal Production Processing, Entrepreneurship and Safety: A research project (VASES – MAPPES) - Grand Contract No. 9 ACP RPR 12/29. I beg to lay.


THE MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR 30TH JUNE 2011 
TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON 
BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the Mbarara University of Science and Technology financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General. I beg to lay. The first one, (a) is on the T-Cell Research Project; (b) is on Breath Research Project; (c) is on Family Planning Research Project. 

THE MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE PERIOD 1ST APRIL 2010 TO 30TH JUNE 2011 
TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on table the Mbarara University of Science and Technology financial statements for the period 1st April 2010 to 30th June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General. I beg to lay: 

    (a) Paediatric ram 
    (b) Transport support to improve ARV treatment outcomes (transport study) project 
    (c) Sustainable Household Income Project (SHIP) 
    (d) Cryptococcal Optimal ART Timing Trial (COAT) project 
    (e) Family Treatment Fund (FTF) project 
    (f) Human Resources for Primary Health Care in Africa (HURAPRIM) Project. I beg to lay.

THE MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE 15-MONTH PERIOD 30TH JUNE 2011 
TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on table the Mbarara University of Science and Technology financial statements for the 15-month period ended 30th June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General as follows:

    (a) The immune suppression syndrome clinic data project - grant number UO1 A1069911-05 under the IEDEA regional consortium. I beg to lay.
    (b) UARTO-NIH research project. I beg to lay.
    (c) Reducing early death under care (REDUCE) research project. I beg to lay.
    (d) Food insecurity research project.
    (e) LTFU research project.
    (f) Centre for disease control and prevention of adult adherence to anti-retroviral therapy project in Uganda (sub contract number 101109). I beg to lay.

THE MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY SOCIAL NETWORKS, HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH WESTERN UGANDA PROGRAM (EMIKAGO) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE 10-MONTH PERIOD 30TH JUNE 2011 
TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on table the Mbarara University of Science and Technology Social Networks, Health and Development in South Western Uganda program (EMIKAGO) financial statements for the 10-month period ended 30th June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General. I beg to lay.

THE MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY LIFE BAND PROJECT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE THREE-MONTH PERIOD 30TH JUNE TO SEPTEMBER 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on table the Mbarara University of Science and Technology Life Band Project financial statements for the three-month period ended 30th June to September 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General. I beg to lay.

THE ENERGY FOR RURAL TRANSFORMATION PROJECT NORAD II GRANT 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on table the Energy for Rural Transformation project NORAD II grant financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development Strengthening Evidence-Based Decision Tool funded by the Department of Internal Development, financial statements for the period ended 30 June 2011 together with the Report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

Other financial statements laid include those for: The Uganda Seeds Company Ltd for the year ended 30 June 2011; the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO), Agricultural Technology and Agro-Business Advisory Services Project – ATAAS – IDA Credit No. 4769-Ug; Ministry of Defence for the year ended 30 June 2012; Ministry of Works and Transport for the year ended 30 June 2012; the Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project II – PAA/IGG (IDA Credit No. 4626-Ug) for the year ended 30 June 2012; The IGG/DANIDA Project under Uganda Good Governance Programme for the year ended 30 June 2012; Hoima Regional Referral Hospital for the year ended 30 June 2012; the National Women’s Council for the year ended 30 June 2012; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the year ended 30 June 2012; Makerere University Economic Policy Research Centre year ended 30 June 2012; Mbarara University of Science and Technology for the year ended 30 June 2012; the National Nurses and Midwife Council for the year ended 30 June 2012;  and that of Kyambogo University for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on Table, the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on financial statement for the National Environment Management Authority for developing an environmental methodology, for testing the effectiveness of payment for ecosystem, service in productive landscapes in Uganda, for the period 1 January to 31 December 2010. The other financial statements are as follows: 1 January to 31 December 2011 – report and opinion of the Auditor-General; and 1 January to 31 December 2012 – the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements. I beg to lay. Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable commissioner. Item 3 (iii, iv, v, vi, vii, viii, ix, x, xii, xii and xiii) are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back to the House. I now invite the Clerk to read items 3 (i and ii) so that they can be submitted by the Government.

3.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): I beg to lay on Table, the Uganda Law Reform Commission Annual Report for 2013. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

3.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): I beg to lay on Table the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority annual performance report from July 2012 to June 2013. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: The report is sent to the Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. Yes, hon. Alice Alaso, do you have a problem with the papers?

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really don’t have a problem with the papers. I just want to ask you to fit us onto the order paper. As the Public Accounts Committee, a month or so back, we laid on Table three reports which we thought the House would debate. Now we have another 32 that are ready. 

So, I beg that we are given space on the Order Paper so that we can complete the cycle. We also want to begin feeding in the report. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, if you laid them on Table, then they are not with me. They can only be on the order paper if they come to me.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the Speaker presiding then, got the copies but we also laid copies on the Table – a submission was made.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is the problem with the Clerk to Parliament because I haven’t seen them. Otherwise, they would have been here by now.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I can undertake to bring all the copies tomorrow including the ones we haven’t laid; I will bring them tomorrow to your office. Thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, thank you. Under (vi) (f) among the papers laid – I think it is important to have the right papers laid. This one reads “Centre for Disease Control and Prevention of Adult Adherence to ARV Therapy Project in Uganda.” But Madam Speaker is it true that we have a centre for prevention of adult adherence to ARVs? Is this really correct? Can we have a project to prevent adult adherence to ARVs?

THE SPEAKER: I think that question will be answered when the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee reports here. Otherwise, I cannot start naming documents here. What I got from the Auditor-General is what the honourable Commissioner Rose Akol tabled and they are in the form in which they are submitted.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure and I just want guidance from you. Yesterday – Oh!  I forgot to congratulate the Government Chief Whip for the massive mobilisation that she did yesterday, which made all of us proud. In my culture, when a lady is married home, she must be visible in the compound, kitchen –[HON. MEMBER: “In the bedroom.”] (Laughter) Madam Speaker, please protect me.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MRS OGWAL: She must be visible in the home so that those who are not there when you were being brought can appreciate. It is now past 3 O‘clock and I thought that we would have Prime Minister’s time and that is why I came running. I thought we would have our first interaction with the new Prime Minister. I am wondering whether something drastic has happened because I am seeing the Government Chief Whip and the ministers have now also defected. 

Madam Speaker, this is a problem for you and us the whips when our members are not here. So you can see that the Government Chief Whip is being put under great pressure to do the work which ministers should be doing. I am more concerned about the Prime Minister whom we all initiated yesterday and we are wondering whether we are going to have the Prime Minister’s Question Time or not. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we approved the Prime Minister yesterday after five. I wrote to the President this morning and the Prime Minister will be sworn in tomorrow and so he cannot come for question time today and that is what I can tell you about the Prime Minister -(Members rose_)- No, hon. Members, what is the stampede about? Let him take oath of office. What is the stampede about? I do not know whether hon. Kasule Lumumba has anything to add but that is the information that I have from my office.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the President received your letter today and the Prime Minister will take oath tomorrow at nine before the President.

MS ANYWAR: Where are your ministers? 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: The Prime Minister wrote to you to inform you that the ministers will be in a retreat and –[MS ANYWAR: “Which Prime Minister now?”]- There is always a Prime Minister.

MR SSEGGONA: Order.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: About what now?

MR SSEGGONA: It is order. [HON. MEMBER: “You have become another Moses Ali.”] 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, this matter is not a laughing one. The Prime Minister is a constitutional office and unlike in the past where we had a Prime Minister who was part of the bigger Cabinet, now somebody was removed from office and another one was appointed subject to approval. Before the approval, this country has continued to run without a Prime Minister which is a constitutional office and of course this is not the only constitutional office that has remained vacant. 
When there is an acting Prime Minister, this Parliament must be informed and by the Government Chief Whip stating this in general terms as if she is addressing people on the street; that there is always an acting Prime Minister who is not known to us, is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think I understand what your problem is. We have told you that he is going to be sworn in tomorrow. What more do you want me to do? Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INTRODUCE A SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR BUSOGA REGION TO ELIMINATE EXTREME POVERTY AND ENHANCE THE REALISATION OF THE FULL POTENTIAL OF THE REGION

3.51
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues.

This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to introduce a special development programme for Busoga region to eliminate extreme poverty and enhance the realisation of the full potential of the region. The motion is brought under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Objective 12 (2) and (3) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy enjoins Government to take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between rural and urban areas and directs the State and society to take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas;

AND WHEREAS Objective 14 (3) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy mandates the State to endeavour to fulfill the fundamental rights of Ugandans to social justice and economic development;

AND TO FURTHER ensure that all development efforts are directed at ensuring the maximum social and cultural well being of the people; all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education, health services, clean and safe water, work, descent shelter, food security among others;

NOTING THAT Article 32 of the Constitution mandates Government to take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for the purpose of redressing imbalances that exist against them;

AWARE THAT the Government has introduced several development programmes for marginalised areas like the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund for the Northern Region, Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme for Karamoja region and Luweero Ruwenzori Development Programme for the central and western region;

FURTHER AWARE that Government is piloting Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE Programme)as part of its efforts to expand social protection, tackle poverty in order to address the impact of poverty on social cohesion and the ability of chronically poor people to access healthcare, education and other key services;

RECONISING THAT –”  
     
THE SPEAKER: Yes hon. Member for Butambala.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you. I am in support of the motion but I would like to follow what my brother is moving. I have tried to locate where the motion is and I cannot see it. I wanted to second but I was not given a chance. So, I want to know whether the mover is procedurally right to move without a seconder and the document not appearing anywhere. But I want to second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: There are two seconders; there is hon. Kiiza from Kasese and hon. Kabahenda. The seconders are there. There are many seconders? You adjust your technologies as my clerk is assuring me that it is on your iPad. It is a very short motion so try to listen.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought that our procedure here was that I present the motion and then the seconders will rise to second and then I will speak on the motion afterwards and that is what I knew. Madam Speaker, I proceed with the motion:

“RECOGNISING that according to the National Household Survey Data in the Eastern region which includes the districts of Jinja, Iganga, Namutumba, Kamuli, Kaliro, Bugiri, Mayuge and others, poverty was reported to be on the rise; 

FURTHER, RECOGNISING that whereas some regions have benefitted from special government intervention, Busoga sub-region continues to be left out despite the unique socio economic challenges that it faces and the existing government programmes such as NAADS, UPE and USE among others have failed to transform the lives of the people over time;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that: 

    1. Government takes special interest in the development of Busoga sub-region through the introduction of special programmes tailored to its development.
    2. Government formulates special principles and policy guidelines under the National Development Plan with a view of enhancing the development of the Busoga sub-region.” 

Madam Speaker, this motion has been brought cognisant of Article 93 of the Constitution. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: You have several seconders; can you justify it?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To begin with, I want to appreciate Government for the different deliberate programmes that Government has initiated to develop the different regions of this country that have suffered because of history, the wars and so on. I appreciate the unique history of northern Uganda and the Luweero region and I want to appreciate that Government has come up with particular programmes to ensure that those regions move at par with other parts of the country. 

I also want to appreciate the constitutional framers for envisaging that surely, all the regions of the country cannot develop at the same time and for that reason, they provided that particular intervention needs to be introduced where it is found that a particular region is lagging behind others. 

I also want to appreciate the President; during the State of the Nation Address, he came up to bring out Busoga as one of the war zones of this country and in particular singled out Mayuge. Madam Speaker, fundamentally, poverty is inability to get optimum choices and opportunities; it is a violation of human rights; it is a violation of human dignity; it means lack of basic capacity to participate effectively in society; it means not having enough food and not having enough clothing for the family. It also means not having enough land to grow food and jobs to earn a living and it also means insecurity, powerlessness, exclusion of individuals, households and communities. 

There are several indicators of poverty and as I outlined them, we shall find that actually most of them are exhibited in the situation that is in Busoga today and of course other parts of the country. We have indicators like land fragmentation, domestic violence or gender based violence like child prostitution, high level school drop outs, malnutrition among the communities, high population growth and others. 

Madam Speaker, according to the UBOS statistics, Busoga which comprises of nine districts has the highest poverty density per sub-county. Poverty density refers to the number of people who are living at less than a dollar a day in a square kilometre and according to the statistics, in Busoga, we have more than 100 people within a square kilometre living in absolute poverty, below a dollar a day.

Recently, when the former Prime Minister was responding to a question raised by hon. Dr Okuonzi, he brought statistics here that actually showed that the general trend of poverty in the country is going down and that is a plus to us as Ugandans. But he also noted that the poverty trend in the eastern region is going upwards; that means that while in other places there is poverty and yet it is dropping, in the eastern region the trend has been reversed; poverty is instead on the upward scale. Somebody may ask, what is happening in the eastern region? Of course we have a number of districts which include Busoga, Bukedi, Teso and other people and Kapchorwa but one thing that we have to appreciate as Parliament is that efforts have been taken to introduce affirmative action in other parts of the eastern region. Yes, I appreciate that poverty is still high in those places but Busoga has been left out.

Busoga lies between two rivers as we know; Busoga lies between the Nile on this side of the west and Mpologoma River on the other side of the east. I want to inform this House that the moment you move and cross the Nile if you are coming from the west, you will have left areas where Government has come up with special interventions to reverse the poverty trend and the moment you cross the Mpologoma River the other side, again you will have entered into part of the eastern region where Government has deliberately come up to develop those places.

Madam Speaker, there were efforts designed towards seeing that the situation in Busoga is reversed. For instance, His Excellency the President launched a Strategic Development Plan for Busoga and in the budget of 2006/2007, funds were provided for this plan but while it was provided for in the budget, nothing was released. It therefore means there was no effect of the programme that was launched by His Excellency the President.

Madam Speaker, talking about the education trend in Busoga, I want to inform this House that among the least or poorest performing districts in this county, if you consider the worst performing 20 districts in PLE in the country, then six of them are from Busoga. This trend calls for a concerted effort to reverse it. Busoga has 10 districts and six of them are among the worst performing. We produce the majority of the districts that are performing worst in this country. 

Madam Speaker, if you are to talk about the nutrition level in this country, according to the Uganda Demographic and Health Survey Report of 2011, the East Central, which is Busoga, had the highest proportion of malnourished children after Karamoja with 8 percent of the children in that sub-region are malnourished. Surely, this must be a concern for all of us as Members of this Parliament, leave alone saying we are talking about Kyoga, but every member must be concerned when we have such a trend in one of the parts of this country.

When we talk about population, Busoga is known for the high fertility rate; there is high population growth in Busoga and the land per capita in Busoga is the least. If we are to take the land owned by a particular head, it is least in Busoga at 0.024 kilometres, that is the land per capita which is the least in the country.

The issue of teenage pregnancy has been talked about in this country. A lot of campaigns have been made in this country and it is on record that Busoga is performing worst when it comes to issues of teenage pregnancy. Recently, there was a story of a man in Mayuge who married off his 12-year old girl and we attribute this,  actually to the high level of poverty. (Interjections)- Yes, they cannot sustain their children in school, they want to look at - now, they see these children as alternatives to solving their problems and for that reason, they give them away into marriage when they are still as young as 12 years.

Madam Speaker, according to the statistics available, the teenage pregnancy rate in Busoga is at 30.6 percent which is still the highest in this country. 

Given those circumstances and facts, considering that, actually, the issue of the poverty in Busoga has been reduced to talking about jiggers; the problem is much bigger than that and we feel it is important for Members of Parliament to pronounce ourselves that this part of the country cannot be left out, that we need a particular development programme, an affirmative action for Busoga.

Madam Speaker, I want to invite the Members of this House to join me to support this motion that Busoga deserves an affirmative action, a special development programme such that its full potential can be realised. I thank you and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Lubogo. Can we have hon. Kiiza. Five minutes -

4.09
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. It is quite unfortunate that in the 21st century, we still have Ugandan people – actually the whole country, Ugandan people where the education levels are very low. Our children go to school but we still get excesses in most of our schools; we still get malnourished children; we still have people who cannot even afford a meal a day.

I wish to invite the representative of Government who is here that the programme we are talking about that should come for Busoga should be a programme that will transform the lives of the people in the region. My colleague who presented the motion talked about the various programmes that government has put in place to address certain imbalances in the region.

Madam speaker, the programme I am envisaging for Busoga sub-region should be a programme that will create jobs for the population, a programme that will enhance household income. It should not just be a programme that will provide only food for the population and we think we are addressing a problem. It should be a programme that should really address a holistic problem that is at hand.

I also look at this programme being a programme that will not really face the challenges of corruption; people will look at the suffering population in Busoga and the money will be directed to the activities that are supposed to be catered for under this programme.

I am looking at the seniors that we have in this Parliament who originate from that region. If for example, the Rt hon. Speaker was married off at an early age because of lack of fees, would we have had such a nice Speaker? If, for example, the Government Chief Whip failed to complete her education because of lack of fees, would we have managed to have hon. Kasule Lumumba in this House? We are looking at a programme that will raise the levels of education for the children of Busoga region so that we can have more Kadagas, we can have more Lumumbas, we can have more Katuntus and more Oguttus in the Parliament of Uganda -[Honourable members: “And Panadol. (Hon. Mugema)”]- the Panadols of this country will not be able to come just by a mere wish. They need an affirmative action and they are many out there. 
	
I just request – it is unfortunate that all members of Cabinet are not here but they would be here to listen to the pleas of the members of Busoga through this Parliament. We request that Parliament takes an affirmative action. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Kiiza for giving way. You know, I am a professional teacher. While in Shimoni Demonstration School, I was training music and we failed to get good children who could play instruments very well. And the answer we got was from Busoga. Personally, I was directed in deep Busoga, Kamuli – that there were children, the moment you brought xylophones, they would just play with ease. So, we went deep there and found children, not studying but the moment you placed a xylophone in front of them, everything would be okay.

When I was in St Agnes Catholic Parish in Makindye, as a choir member, we were also disturbed with music. We went to Busoga and picked children, some of them have even gone further and others even to Europe.

So, the information I want to give is that “sitting” on these children because of poverty, they would have been the best musicians like the lady of “obangaina, obangeyo”. Therefore, this motion is very important. Thank you very much.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information and I know, Madam Speaker, if we must fight domestic violence, if we must address the issues of domestic violence, it is a known fact that poverty has been among the causes of domestic violence and gender based violence in most of the homes.

When the heads of the families cannot provide for the people they take care of, the resulting factor is domestic violence. So, as a means of addressing that vice in the Busoga sub-region, Government should address this matter seriously. When I came to this Parliament, I vowed to uphold and protect the constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Constitution provides for development for every Ugandan. So, people from Busoga are not from a different country; they are Ugandans and they need us. They need affirmative action; they should be treated with dignity, they should be treated with gentility; they should actually benefit from the taxes that they pay. They are taxpayers but they are not getting anything from the taxes that they pay.

That is why, Madam Speaker, I support the motion that a resolution be passed for a special fund to be created to address the imbalances in Busoga sub-region. I thank you.

4.14
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam speaker. I am rising to support the motion for the establishment of a Busoga Development Programme as moved by hon. Kenneth Lubogo. For the last two decades, Uganda has made impressive social economic progress as reflected in the government’s investment in infrastructure, energy, education and health. The economic growth of Uganda is said to be advancing at an average rate of 7.7 percent per year. Poverty is said to have reduced from 56 percent to 19.7 percent in the last 10 years. However, more than 7.5 million Ugandans leave in extreme poverty unable to meet their basic minimum living requirements. 

Madam Speaker, development is not about objects; it’s about the people we have nothing to show; about people living with dignity; living a livelihood that really gives them the basis for which they should live and take choices that are really meeting their appropriate needs. 

An additional 43 percent of the population are barely above the poverty line and, therefore, are vulnerable to falling into extreme poverty in the event of shock, disability, death of family members especially bread winners and climate related risks. As a result, many people experience hunger, malnutrition and those other related problems. They cannot access basic health, basic education. The situation even worsens among older persons with 30 percent of them living in extreme poverty and 71 percent of the households with an older person highly vulnerable to falling into extreme poverty.

Social protection with equity and access is a key tool for achieving inclusive development because it will reduce poverty, extreme hunger, vulnerability and it’s globally recognised as a critical element for national development. This government made a commitment when they signed the; “Livingstone call to action on social protection” and also the African Union commitment on social protection in 2005 which compels governments to ensure equitable distribution of resources so that people in Uganda live in dignity. Social protection is critical in preventing, managing and building resilience so that people overcome situations that adversely affect their welfare. 

The cost of not protecting people, of not supporting people out of shocks both economic and social is much higher than what we think and may cost long lasting negative effects in the future. Because of this, social protection programme will remain at the fore front of the social policy in Africa for the future. I, therefore, would like to support the motion to establish a Busoga region development programme in the strongest sense. 

When I went with my committee on Tourism and Trade to the sugar industry, we met a lady who was overseeing Busoga region in the office of the President; she told the committee that even these industries of sugar are not supporting our people. To that effect, that the household heads have decided to hire out their land up to the doorstep for planting sugar and women are never consulted. They don’t have land to plant anymore food. There is a lot of hunger, malnutrition and remember, 4,000,000 children are living in such poverty stricken households. If we don’t come in to support these people from all these shocks, we are going to lose an entire generation. 

I wonder whether we are looking at a parliament after us or we are just looking at only ourselves to be here until the end of the earth. Madam Speaker, I support the establishment in the strongest sense.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are just going to use 10 minutes so I want to reduce the time to two minutes first.

4.22
MS HANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise up to strongly support the motion for the creation of affirmative action and a special programme for Busoga region. When we talk about government, we discuss power rations, resource allocation and human society management. The question of political inclusiveness brings together all people, society and regions. 

I ask, what is the status quo of Busoga region as of now? Madam Speaker, historically, Busoga region is known for its contribution towards Uganda’s economic recovery. Busoga region has suffered like any other region in terms of war, for example the Lakwena war and in terms of political support, Busoga region should have been rewarded very well. 

On another note, the issue of economic recovery and resource contribution towards our economic growth should take into effect the industrialization in Busoga region; the tourism sites, trade and the natural resources like the source of the Nile which the government is not exploiting and where Busoga region is not benefitting from.

The government should not only take out of Busoga but give Busoga an equivalent of what it gets out of Busoga. Madam Speaker, this is my kind call; poverty is everywhere but the situation in Busoga region is appalling. The young kingdom, the Rt Hon. Speaker and leaders need government support so much - (Member timed out.)

4.24
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I strongly support the motion brought by hon. Kenneth Lubogo in regard to poverty in Busoga and what government can do. I have a very peculiar interest in Busoga because my sister is married to a Musoga from Luuka, Bulamogi. I am being honest with myself, meaning I have connections with Busoga and I would want Busoga to be as good as where I come from, Madam Speaker. I am trying to be a nationalist.

When you consider the Lakwena war, it affected Busoga region. Going to the history of Busoga, it has been having the best secondary schools in this country and it has even produced Presidents that is Busoga College Mwiri even the Prime Minister whom we approved yesterday is a product from Busoga.

Because of these problems of Busoga even Mwiri is now performing very badly. I want us to appreciate that when I had just joined Parliament, I shared with hon. Mutyabule who told me that children in Busoga were becoming swollen and as a doctor I realised that there was a problem; either the hearts of these babies were not working or they were having a condition called hypoalbuminemia, which is caused by malnutrition. I told hon. Mutyabule that this is a problem of lack of nutrition in Namutumba. She brought it as a matter of national importance but I said there is a problem. People are eating rice but there is no protein.

During the previous regimes, people used to say that we cannot wait for Karamoja to develop. Good enough this government is putting some money in Karamoja to bail out the Karimojong. Now, we cannot sit here and forget about Busoga. At least the Northerners have PRDP but -(Member timed out.)

4.27
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I rise to support the motion for a special development programme to alleviate poverty in Busoga sub-region.

Madam Speaker, in the past Busoga, sub-region used to be prosperous in education, agriculture, health, trade and commerce. Today, what we see is poverty. I remember in the last Parliament, I was invited by a colleague to a fundraising function in one of the districts of Busoga. We expected the population to bring things for us to buy, obviously at a higher price but what we saw was Ffene (Jack fruit), a few chicken, a few tubers of cassava and that was it. The fundraising did not look like the other fundraising events that we conducted in the other parts of the country.

This highlights the fact that Busoga is actually living in absolute poverty. According to reports, the poverty levels are in the range of 27 to 62 percent and Luuka is cited as one of the poorest districts in Busoga.

Madam Speaker, we cannot sit in this Parliament and ignore this high level of poverty but I think that as we debate this motion, we need to look at the potential of Busoga as it used to be; the biggest industrial hub in the country. What happened to Jinja? Jinja was an industrial town 30 years ago; this industrial town was booming. Thirty years down the road, it is a dead industrial town and I think Government needs to examine what it did to Busoga in order to revive the economy of the Busoga sub-region.

Madam Speaker, Kamuli district grows a lot of maize but you find at a certain time of the harvest, maize goes for about Shs 200 a kilo -(Member timed out.)

4.29
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (MRS CECILIA OGWAL): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to stand here to support the motion with all the people of Dokolo behind me. I have to say that I have interest in Busoga because my best friend, Lameck Ogwal who is my husband, is a product of Mwiri –(Interjections)- he was a very smart man, he never had any jigger and that is why he managed to marry me.

As somebody has already said, Busoga occupies a specially blessed area in Uganda. No other place in Uganda can claim to be the source of the Nile, which is the source of life for the whole of Africa and yet Busoga is the poorest of the poor as I have heard this afternoon. This means something has gone wrong.

Busoga was identified as the industrial centre of Uganda and even now, it is still the industrial centre but all these developments have not benefitted the people of Busoga. What has gone wrong?

I want to say that in the 1980s, although I was young, I realised that there were two ministers in Obote’s government who were very effective: The late Sam Tewungwa and the late John Kirunda. Both of them did so well. Luwuliza Kirunda is the late. They did so well to make sure that Busoga was developed beyond what was already on the ground. Busoga became the centre consciously developing into a citrus industry in Uganda, which died with the UPC government. I do not hear about citrus fruits anymore in Busoga. All I see -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to hon. Ogwal for seniority.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to say that in Lango, we do not know how to explain this vehicle, which moves with a lamp but we call it wiu wiu. I have seen that right now we have had so many wiu wiu’s going to Busoga. These include the former vice president, my dear sister and friend, Dr Specioza Kazibwe, the current Speaker also goes to Busoga with wiu wiu and the LOP is going to Busoga with wiu wiu and so does the Government Chief Whip. Today, with all these wiu wiu’s going to Busoga, we still have poverty, which means something is wrong with us. I want to stand here and identify myself with any initiative that can be put in place to develop Busoga but I want to warn that I will not support having a ministry for Busoga because that little money, which would have gone into developing Busoga will go into funding the government institution, funding the bureaucrats, the computers and research and by the time it reaches Busoga, it will be at zero level.

So I am begging you and praying that let there be a specially monitored fund. Nobody has told us how much has gone to Karamoja or Luwero and what impact those funds have done for those special regions.

So Madam Speaker, as an interested party, make sure that whatever fund we put in place will be directly managed and monitored. I would also want to advise that special districts like Dokolo, which are still new, will also benefit from the development of Busoga. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.35
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion basing on the fact that Busoga region has been an area that has been traumatised by so many issues, as you are aware. It has been traumatised by jiggers, child marriages, malnutrition and polygamy. Therefore –(Interjections)- yes, I have been researching and I have found that out. Therefore in order to address all those issues -(Interjections)– Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS NYAKIKONGORO: The high population that the honourable was talking about - in order to address all those issues, there is need to come up with a comprehensive programme that is going to address those specific issues.

Madam Speaker, we have the National Planning Authority, which should be directing the country on specific issues of population and regions that have such problems so that they can come up with a master plan to address those issues other than Parliament talking about isolated cases.

Therefore, I want to request Government to call upon the National Planning Authority to tell us the underlying factors that are leading to these inconsistent poverty levels in the Busoga Region.
Madam Speaker, I was reading about the ADF in the recent time times and got to realise that many of the people that are connected to ADF come from the Busoga region. This means that there is a correlation between poverty levels – for people who are redundant and not working are being coerced into rebel activities. 
So, I want to call upon Government to look into this issue. Why is it that some of the ADF rebels that have either arrested or surrendered are related to Busoga Region?

4.37
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank the hon. Kenneth Lubogo for having come out, as Member of Parliament from Busoga, to talk about issue of Busoga. Many people fear to talk about issues in their regions because they fear to be labelled tribalistic. But I want to thank my brother for having taken on the mantel in that form.
Madam Speaker, I happened to work in the Busoga Region, particularly Iganga, when it was still the greater Iganga District with Mayuge, Bugiri, Namutumba, Luuka and the current Iganga as one. But what I realised is that that region has the potential to develop; for example, it is an area that grows coffee. It is an area that grows a lot of maize and rice.

But at the same time, when you are in Busoga, you realise that it is an area where nature rules humanity. When it rains, many homes don’t eat because they will have nowhere to cook food from and this is mainly due to the nature of houses in that region. Some people even fail to sleep because their houses are roofed with grass, which is not the case in many areas of Uganda.

So, when the hon. Kenneth Lubogo comes here with a proposal that Parliament passes a resolution to have Busoga get a special programme for development, Madam Speaker, I support it.

When you go to this region, you realise that a place like Luuka District has never had a tamarack road; from CMS to Kamuli via Nawampiti, there is no tarmac road. 

In Namutumba, people only see tarmac along the main road to Mbale. When you go to other places like Ivukula and other areas, you can’t see a tarmac road there.  That is why I stood to support –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we have got some other work to conduct today. So, I now want to put the question so that we can move on – you still want to speak to this motion? Okay, let us try to be very brief.

4.40
MS KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank the hon. Kenneth Lubogo for tabling this motion. But I want to thank all the colleagues who spoke to this motion and the mood is that everybody is in support of this motion.

Madam Speaker, I am very conscious because I belong to the Frontbench. But allow me to make a few points. One is that, as the hon. Kenneth Lubogo said, you will find that we have a programme to do with Luweero-Rwenzori, but it stops at the River Nile Bridge. And when it came to the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme that stopped at the border with either Pallisa or Busia districts, leaving Busoga region in the middle there yet when these areas were faced with war, Busoga accommodated all the people who came to take refugee without any discrimination. 

I want to state that when Government came up with these programmes, Busoga was left yet this area faced the impact of the people who ran from those various areas to take refuge in Busoga region. That is why I want to state it clearly that in Uganda, if you analyse, which sub region has the highest number of tribes, you will realise that it is Busoga. 

Madam Speaker, I support this motion for a reason that even where we have factories that are in Busoga, when taxes are paid, one of way of raising funds is that when taxes are paid by these factories, some percentage should remain in Busoga to develop that area: For example, we have Kakira Sugar Factory; We have Mayuge Sugar Factory and Kaliro Sugar Factory. But we also have factories like BIDCO and others like Thembo – as we talk, there are over 70 factories in Jinja but when you look at the employees, you realise that majority are outside Busoga. So, I think there should be a deliberate effort by Government to ensure 40 per cent of the employees in such factories come from the local area. That would be one way of boosting Busoga and other areas.

Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that when we talk about this programme it should be wholesome; it should not just be a fund because we also have issues to do people’s attitude. This will help to do attitudinal change. But the Basoga also need to be sensitised on their rights because that is another issue we are faced with. Otherwise, as Ms Kasule Lumumba, the Woman Member of Parliament for Bugiri and the Current Government Chief Whip, I support the motion. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for supporting the hon. Kenneth Lubogo’s motion because it will come to support the efforts we made over the last 20 years to get a programme for Busoga. As you have been told, we are an island. There are programmes surrounding us but we have nothing. As you have been informed, in 2004, we designed a programme to reach each household and we needed only $2billion for those districts. But we were kept on promises that the money was in a particular ministry. We chased it until we gave up. 
Then in the Seventh Parliament we designed another and gave it to Government, but still nothing came out. In this Parliament, we designed yet another programme where we had now reduced to four items per family – bananas, coffee, citrus – just four items at only 61 bullion but nothing is happening.

So, I think we really need your support because at some stage Busoga was rich. We even lent money to the colonial government - £30,000 as Busoga and that was long ago. We also lent to the Government of Australia £5000 – we had money. So, we really need your support. Thank you very much for this support, honourable members.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA ON 
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last time we had a motion here but we agreed that we need to hear from Government before we proceed. So, I don’t know hon. Minister whether you have something to say.

4.46
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker and honourable members. You have given reasons which have not convinced me. For instance, you cannot say that you are levying Shs 200 because you want to stop middlemen from over charging people. In any case, you are also calling upon them to increase. 

As a serious Government and as serious leaders, we should see how we can come in to determine minimum or maximum prices much as we are in a free market economy. Then if you know that we are in a free market economy, you should not give such reasons because forces of demand and supply determine the prices. 

Mr Speaker, if the committee had come up with a serious reason for instance, that we are now levying this money so as to subsidise solar then probably, I would have supported them  because -(Interjections) 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MS OPENDI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the Member of Parliament from Kyotera has just said that the committee has not come up with any serious reasons and then he goes ahead to talk about the solar which he very well knows that it is one of the reasons why this excise duty is being levied. 

Is the Honourable member from Kyotera, hon Kasolo -(Laughter)- in order to continue speaking on this matter when he is very much even aware that the people of Kyotera are already buying kerosene with this excise duty inclusive and I have not heard any complaint from the people of Kyotera to this effect? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kyotera, this tax was already levied as of 1st July this year and the Member is saying you have not received any complaint from Kyotera. (Laughter)

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is the very reason I am opposing the committee report because my people are already complaining, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that there is a wrong impression that kerosene is only for domestic use -(Laughter)- that Paraffin is only an item for domestic use. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to correct this. Paraffin is a farm input as well. When you go to the rural areas where my poor people of Rubaga survive, many people cannot afford electric power especially those keeping poultry. What they do is that they get paraffin lamps for lighting and warmth to breed the birds. 

Honourable member we should treat this as a farm input such that even before we talk of tax exemption, we can talk of subsidy just like we do it for tractors and any other farm inputs. I thank you very much.

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you hon. Kasibante for that wise information. Mr Speaker, as I wind up, much as we need taxes and I respect the fact that we need to widen the tax base and improve the taxable capacity, there are so many items where we can fetch good money. As a principle of taxation, you must tax an item which is, first of all, luxurious. There are so many luxurious goods which are not taxed like beers [Hon Members: “Beers are taxed.”] But taxing goods which are used by our poor people is being unfair to them and come what may, I must ‘die’ with my people. I cannot support that. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of Bill and Polly Primary School in Busia District represented by hon. Kevinah Taaka and hon. Barbara Oundo, the  Woman MP for Busia District. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. You are Welcome. (Applause) 

3.41
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the report – [HON MEMBER: “Minority.”] Not the minority report but the report of the committee and more so, the Shs 200 tax. 

Why? Mr Speaker and members, I want to share my experience with you on what I went through when I was using a paraffin lamp to read - the tadooba during that time. I remember waking up early in the morning with my nose very black, coughing and even up to now at times I breath like chicks suffering from Coccidiosis -(Laughter)- and that is a result of using tadooba. 

When we start debating and say we do not want the tax because our people in the villages especially our children use candles for reading, I really get hurt because the health of these children is not okay and the Government has been telling us that if we get this tax, it has got a plan to introducing solar in the villages. (Applause)   

MRS OSEGGE: Order.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you. Mr Speaker. It amazes me to see that my mother from Namutumba, especially after reflecting that not many days ago we just passed a development programme supported overwhelmingly to support Busoga region; and knowing that Busoga is one of the regions that is known to be infested with jiggers, and knowing that paraffin is very useful in the healing of jigger wounds - (Laughter) -Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to advocate adding a tax on a commodity that will enable the Basoga to heal their jigger wounds and probably get out of the jigger infestation? Is she in order as a representative of people who are suffering from jiggers in this nation? [HON MEMBER: “No, no.”]  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see any violation of any order but the member has now got the information. (Laughter)

MRS MUTYABULE Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for the wise ruling and I am really surprised that hon. Osegge is celebrating over my -(Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: I am wondering whether the motion mover is happy enough to proceed the way he is doing without fearing the other side of the coin. I thought that the guidance from the chair and the agreement in the House was that we should be able to give Government opportunity to respond and on the basis of the response, then this House will take a decision whether to have a select committee or refer the matter to the sectoral committee. 

So, I want to beg the mover of the motion whether you would want to proceed, you want your case to be heard ex parte and then it can be overturned, but basically we understand the urgency but we don’t see the relevant minister. Would the delay be too much in these circumstances that we can’t wait for the minister to come? The procedural issue I am raising is that wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the mover of the motion to put his case for the second time ex parte?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is exactly what I have been saying. There is the House and there is the Executive but they are part of this House and it is really fair that we hear from them. If we are not satisfied, we can then move to the next stage. And also, we have to address the question of whether we should issue a vote of no confidence in our committee and set up an ad hoc committee. All those things are just half. 

MS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the concerns of the mover of the motion but because we want to debate this issue comprehensively and on an informed basis, in order not to fall into the same problem that we had the other time when we were discussing the issue, many of us definitely are not happy when things go wrong and I believe everybody in here would like to see things move in the right way but it doesn’t help us if we do things hurriedly. 

I would like to concur with my colleagues, who are proposing that we get you, Madam Speaker, who has guided very well that we definitely need to have the input of the ministers concerned - so, I would like to propose that in order to get a comprehensive response from the ministry concerned, we should give a timeframe, and in my opinion, I propose one week to give them enough time to make sure they come up with a comprehensive report. I am glad hon. Ssekikubo laid on Table some of these documents. Madam Speaker, it is good enough to give the ministry at least five working days or seven working days to make sure they present a report to us and we discuss it properly. That is my input.  
 
MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Following the trend of events in this Parliament where sometimes our regulations have been considered not binding on Government but just advisory, and also looking at your directive last week on Wednesday that the government should come up with a response and they have failed to come up with a response; and then considering that the documents which were laid on Table look very organic and very original from the government departments, the persons involved, the ministries, would it not be really procedurally right for us to proceed with the debate, come up with our resolutions to save the government.  

They have bypassed the House and that is up to them; for us, we will be on record because I am thinking justice delayed is justice denied. If there are some irreparable damages that we are going to suffer or the whole process will suffer jeopardising the people of Uganda may be in losses and damages and so forth between now and the many days left that we may give to government.  Would it not be really proper to make ourselves clear as Parliament that this is our position? If you delay the debate and your response and so forth, it will be up to you, for us we would have washed our hands. Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate your ruling on this matter and it is something that we would keenly go by. There are however other things that are at stake and I hope that in deciding to give the Executive more time, we consider the issues that are stake – the first one is the fear that this alleged breach of contract is going to cost this nation heavily. But secondly, there is public opinion out there that this Parliament never does its work and I would like that we balance the two given the fact that we also wanted the Executive to have their side of the story. Actually it is in the interest of the Executive to come here and clear its name and given that the documents that were laid here were also documents of the Executive, I think they should act and be more serious than this. 

So, Madam Speaker, if as you have guided we move with a view that the Executive is given more time, may it be clear to the Executive that, that is the last one. If they don’t come we will proceed. And maybe it will be a shorter interval than what we gave them the last time. 

So, should we choose that they are still in a retreat tonight or wherever they are inducting the new Prime Minister - I don’t know what is happening please give them only two days since they have been preparing; that is in the interest of fairness. You are being fair to the utmost. You gave them a week, you have given them another two days, but in case they don’t show up on Thursday or wherever after two days, Madam Speaker, we also have a stake and we have an image to defend and you are the head of this institution so that it doesn’t come back to us. That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: And when the House is being bashed it is the Speaker who is being bashed, not you.

MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. The issue that we are talking about borders on Uganda’s national development and it is one of the sectors that we have been challenged with – the transport sector together with the other sectors in terms of harnessing our development as a country. 

I recall I was in the House when we discussed this motion and I remember the urgency, the importance of this matter on the Floor of Parliament then and the ministers heard when you rightly guided that let them be here in the House on Wednesday; actually that is approximately a week today.

Madam Speaker, I somehow get perturbed whenever an issue that borders on this kind of national importance and that is the moment that the Cabinet most of the time chooses to have retreats more especially on a sitting day like this –Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. As a an MP I get problems in that area and I think that there is just an approach or you know an agenda to dismiss Parliament and the strength it has in terms of doing oversight in this country. And I do understand the issues that my colleagues are raising, the need for fairness to the two sides, that having had such issues and especially names being mentioned that really as Parliament, we needed to give the ministers an opportunity to respond and therefore, I am really hesitant to accept another two days but there should have been at least some importance given to this matter rather than having the Chief Whip, at least the concerned ministers would have come to the House on such a day to avoid wasting Parliament time. We sit here, we come to debate this matter- and I want hon. Anywarach to bring this out- the issue of justice because that report raises very important issues, abuse of rights of people who are engaged in those contracts and so, as Parliament, we needed to be dispose of this issue very urgently. And therefore, Madam Speaker, I am a little hesitant to agree to the fact that we give two days but I have no choice but to agree at least up to maybe tomorrow so that the minister concerned can come and give an explanation to the House. Thank you.

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the efforts of hon. Ssekikubo but it is very important to listen to the side of Government because to my understanding, the ministry or the government must have something; we want them to come and brief us so that when we are taking decisions, we are well acquainted with the issues. Therefore, I request that we give Government up to the last day of Thursday next week, -(Interjections)– not to go beyond that so that they come here and explain about the issue and then, we take an informed decision. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a Parliament, which is responsible for oversight to the executive work, much as over 70 members of the executive are members of this Parliament, we are increasingly seeing disregard of Parliament, sometimes bordering taking away and delegating our mandate, to the effect that even to have a retreat on a parliamentary working day without harmonising that with the Speaker borders disregard of Parliament.

Secondly, there have been very important debates in this Ninth Parliament, including the oil and gas report which we have never debated and we are busy going into other areas of refinery negotiation without Parliament pronouncing itself on this matter. We are discussing a standard railway gauge. For the last two and a half years, Government is busy with the contractor in Karuma, the biggest ever loan without parliamentary approval.

These are very serious matters and for us to be as Parliament giving away our mandate and saying that you can do something and later come and explain is what has caused the precedence that in Parliament anything can pass, you can go and explain later. For me, I do not find this okay for Parliament. So, I would really want us as Parliament to regain our mandate, to regain our respect to the Executive that they do not just do anything like that and know that Parliament will anyway pass it. So, I was of the view that this matter – since Cabinet and the ministers responsible got this information well ahead, tomorrow without fail, they should come and explain. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to support whatever hon. Mukitale has just said, that the Executive wants to usurp the role of Parliament. It is our duty to do our oversight role and it is embarrassing if we are discussing issues of national importance and the ministers are not around. I think we have to send a strong warning to the Executive that we cannot discuss these issues without them. We always want answers and responses from them. Not all of them should go, but if they should send their representation at least five or even 20 ministers, because they are very many - we would appreciate that.

Madam Speaker, the issue at hand is very important, it concerns the tax payers’ money but we are also seeing that things are going strange and that needs to be corrected as a matter of urgency.

The Parliament may be taken to court and then we pay heavily or somebody will do sub-standard work and then it will not impress us. Somebody is suggesting that we should give the ministers until next week. Madam Speaker, you are aware that by next week, we are going for independence and I feel if we could handle this matter as a matter of urgency, then it would really save this country.
Let the Government Chief Whip tell us for how long the retreat is and can you cause the ministers responsible to be here by tomorrow so that we handle this matter and it is done. I thank you.

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, last time I do not know whether we gave the Executive a timeframe, was it one week, colleagues? I think to have this properly debated as guided by the Speaker and other colleagues, we need to give the other side - natural justice demands that when you are accusing someone, give them an opportunity to be heard. (Interjections) Yes, we have done that, but without –[Honourable Members: “Where is your report?”] My report is ready, I even submitted here.

By the way, colleagues, the report on oil is ready; we even submitted here, it is hon. Amuriat who wanted the Arabic portion to be translated but it is already in the Hansard that we were ready to submit it. It is ready and I think hon. Amuriat is my witness. On the basis of the oil report, colleagues, let us not be accused tomorrow that we debated and we pronounced ourselves and took decisions on the basis of a motion. I can assure you when that report comes here, you will discover certain things and therefore, we need to take caution.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very uncomfortable that as an arm of Government, which is supposed to contribute for the common good and the good name of the sitting Government we are being not taken seriously because when we sit here, we are supposed to do what the Executive has brought to us and we are supposed to get feedback and give them also the feedback from the public; the expectation of Ugandans is that Parliament is their voice. More often, we speak but the Executive takes it exceptional. At times, I am even taken aback when they say we are only giving advisory role; they do not take this Parliament serious.

In your chair, the whole world and particularly Ugandans look at you to save the situation. Your Members as we said, are agitating that we need our place to be recognised. This is an arm of Government and we must assert ourselves, I really pity my sister the Government Chief Whip sitting lonely in front of us. Hon. Ssekikubo is just on to move of motion and you can imagine. 

Madam Speaker how do we proceed when the front bench of the Executive are not there? The agenda today is heavily loaded, we cannot proceed when the very people whose interest and comfort we are discussing here are away; do they take it as a priority? Do they really harmonise the position? I saw honourable Bahati moving to your office before we started, I thought this was harmonised. 

So I don’t buy the issue of saying that the Executive did not know or they are delayed, if they are delayed, do they take it as important? I think it is high time we assert ourselves and direct that our resolutions are not just advisory because we represent the voices of the people  and we play our oversight role Therefore, the Executive must implement that, if not what is our purpose of working with people who don’t appreciate our effort?

Madam speaker with this loaded agenda of today on the order paper, I would want to be guided, how do we proceed with this item when the Executive is not there? Wouldn’t it be procedure right that we adjourn or we deal with issues which are not directly connected with the executive? Otherwise it is like the emotion we moved which I’m in support of; yes my sister had to put on two coats but at the end of the day we would want the other responsible minister to take it in the docket because she has a lot of to oversee the Executive.  Madam Speaker, can you help us and direct the Executive that they have a constitutional mandate to be in this House because this is part of their business; we sit here even sometimes we can sit in the morning and afternoon to make sure that the business of Government is concluded. 
The Ugandans out there are looking at us. We don’t want when they have a hidden interest to stampede Parliament with some of the items so that we pass it in a hurry and we don’t look into detail. And that one is not going to move us forward please assert yourself and particularly the weight we have behind you. We are behind you to make sure that our power at Parliament is asserted and felt by the Executive. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable members yesterday when I was congratulating the Prime Minister I told him about the problem of absenteeism of the ministers, and I didn’t know that they were going to go for retreat. 

5.20
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM Youth Representative Central): Thank you very much Madam Speaker and colleagues. I wish to draw the attention of the House that we are talking about a project which is involving in billions of dollars and in our own local currency it is in trillions and as a matter of fact the matter we are talking about involves value, young people as far as unemployment is concerned, skills transfer; it has a lot of bearing as far as private sector in our country is concerned and more specifically local content. 

Rt. hon. Speaker and colleagues, when you give kin interest in this programme it is an investment which is going to last for about three to five years and when you look at the costs involved in this really it is a matter of strategic importance and of urgency. 

I vividly recall last week when you informed the Deputy Leader of Government Business that Wednesday, today, he should present, and I did recall the ministers who were mentioned then they were all eager to respond to some of the questions that were put to them. They really exhibited that they knew the importance of this matter. To find that today they are not here but only the Government Chief Whip is here, I would wish to first interest myself in this that what happened then? 

How come the other time they were responding so fast was it because they were present and today I can’t really take it that they have just forgotten? I just wish to understand the position of the Government Chief Whip, just minutes ago. She was stating how she is labouring so hard to find Government executives to respond to the cause and this particular moment she came alone and she delivered the message that we pray -(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute

MR NAKABALE: In the interest of the diverse benefits I feel Uganda is leaping from this exercise. I would wish to propose that before we go for recess, which might be early next week, perhaps the maximum we can give the Executive, could be two days, reason being, indeed, when the honourable member was moving the motion the last time, of course he gave us this main information connecting from this and the other.  We would benefit from listening from also the executive side, but we think two days are enough for us to do our business as Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I must express my disappointment; I gave Wednesday for a reason, because I wanted this work done today, but when we were handling the issue of NSSF, I called the minister here to speak and then we took a decision. I think that is fair. So, I want to give the government one week and under Rule 19, I have the power to call the House at any time. So, don’t worry about the recess. I’m giving only one week hon. Government Chief Whip; if that week expires we shall just move and there will be no more opportunity for you.

MS KASULE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION CONFEDERATION AND ADAPTION OF 
THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS 
ON THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORT 1999 TO 2006
5.27
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, this is our institution we must support it and we can only remain strong in whatever we are doing if the implementers are with us. Right now we going to debate a report of one of our committees, we would have done our part and we are expecting the Executive to listen to our argument, understand our argument and implement whatever recommendations we have made. Right now our chairman of the legal committee is ready with the report and we have the Government Chief Whip representing the entire Cabinet. 

But I want to just make one point; it is important for the sake of this institution to be effective that we must now also define the role of the Government Chief Whip. The Government Chief Whip is supposed to be a strong pillar of Parliament. The Executive and Parliament are separate institutions and we must honour that principal of separation of powers. And now you find the Government Chief Whip doing her rightful work as defined by the law and yet she is also over-stepping the boundary of the institution of Parliament to be on the other side in order to defend them. 

We are making the work of the honourable member very difficult, and if I were to be given one day in your chair, I would immediately rectify that and ensure that hon. Kasule takes her rightful position. We can sit here in the House with an empty Front Bench then the government will understand what they are doing to us.

It is actually an insult to us as an institution. We passed a resolution here and made very painful decisions regarding Umeme. We directed Government to wind up Umeme and we gave them the time line but up to now, they have not come back. I do not know whether you are aware of that. We have discussed many sensitive issues and somehow they are ignored. Why? To them the institution of Parliament is not important and now you want us to debate this report. I have looked at it as it is already uploaded on our iPads and these are very important issues but we are going to talk to ourselves. Our Speaker will listen to us, she will guide us and then we go home.

Madam Speaker, this is a very painful matter and I insist that the institution of Parliament tears away the Government Chief Whip from the Executive. That is the only way they will understand what it means for Government to play its role and for Parliament to play its role. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know how Parliament can do that. You must move a substantive motion. I do not think the Speaker has powers to say, don’t talk on the issue of Government. 

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance. When I looked at today’s Order Paper, I realised that the reports that are yet to be discussed are very important. I tried to go through them and there are some questions I would like to present to the ministers concerned. My question is, and this is where I am seeking your guidance, how are we going to proceed like my mother hon. Cecilia has pointed out? How are we going to proceed without ministers to respond to our questions and probably to explain to us what the way forward in some of these concerns? Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on how we are going to proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had hoped that after my guidance to the Prime Minister yesterday, they would at least send some of the ministers here as we have always agreed so that they could do their retreat while we are doing our work, but it seems from the letter, which I have received late this afternoon, that they are not here today and tomorrow. I want to read the letter; let me read the letter please.

Honourable members, this is a letter from Office of the Prime Minister. The subject is Joint Cabinet retreat on the second National Development Plan (NDP II) for Cabinet ministers, ministers of state and permanent secretaries at Speke Commonwealth Resort Munyonyo 1st to 2nd October 2014. 

“As directed by Cabinet, the National Planning Authority has organised a retreat on the draft NDP II for Cabinet ministers, ministers of state, permanent secretaries and designated technical officers to be held at Speke Resort Munyonyo from today Wednesday 1st to Thursday 2nd October. The retreat is residential for ministers and ministers of state. 

The purpose of this communication is to inform you that the ministers and ministers of state will, therefore, not be able to attend the plenary sessions of Parliament today, Wednesday 1st and tomorrow Thursday 2nd. 

Yours sincerely, Henry Muganwa Kajura, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service.”

MR BIGIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really need to be guided as to whether it would be procedurally right or in order for this House to pronounce itself especially on this kind of matter because this is not the first time a similar scenario has happened and I do not think this is going to be the last. How are we, as an institution of Parliament, going to guard against this? Is it not the right time for us to come up with a resolution urging Government - because every time Government has a parallel program well aware of the parliamentary calendar of Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. Why doesn’t Cabinet have retreats for example on Friday, Saturday, Sunday up to Monday? 

As a Member of Parliament in my first term, I feel very irritated and if this continues, it makes no sense because for how long are we going to be in this type of situation? The Order Paper is put forward, all of us have researched to debate on these very important subjects as stipulated, only to be let down by the absence of ministers. Why don’t we come up with a resolution of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think a resolution will do. If you want, let us amend the Constitution and get the minsters out of this House. Kenya has done it, where Parliament is just Parliament without ministers. I do not think there is any other way of doing it.

5.33
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I had the benefit of representing you on Monday 29th September at Hotel Africana on the Mid-term Assessment of the Ninth Parliament. What I discovered is that what they call the failures of Parliament are not failures. When they say that we have failed to pass Bills, which Bills are not before Parliament, it is an indictment on us for no offence committed.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that if Parliament can be adjourned by remote - because this is the effect of that letter. They are only informing you to adjourn for today and tomorrow, but they are being diplomatic and sending it in form of a letter.

So, Madam Speaker, we have to take a decision as Parliament as to whether we are going to allow the House to be adjourned in Cabinet or you take back your rightful position as the Speaker and actually control Parliament. In that mid-term assessment, they assessed the Speaker and the Parliament and they gave us 37 per cent and gave the Deputy Speaker 32 per cent. What does this mean? That the powers you have to preserve the sanctity of Parliament have been surrendered to the Executive and they are doing it in a very diplomatic way. The effect is that the entire business of today cannot go on. This is the effect unless we are here for academic purposes, but if it is to do our work as an arm of Government, we may not dispose of today’s business. Maybe you need to give guidance, otherwise some of us feel very small when we call ourselves Members of Parliament when Parliament can be adjourned in Cabinet. I thought this should be understood so that you give some form of guidance, otherwise we shall feel out of place.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes you talk as if I have done nothing for this institution. Last December they took off for a retreat and I said, we shall sit here and make our rules and we did. They were not here for the higher education financing, but we did it for the people of Uganda. I was taken to court for standing up for this institution. So, when you speak take into account how I have handled this House and I just dismissed those fellows. They do not understand. Yesterday I told the Prime Minister that they had a list of 64 proposed Bills but have only brought one. I said it but the press will not report because the press reports to the government; they are not reporting it. But that is a fact. The laws are not here. What does the Speaker do? Anyway, honourable members, we are wasting time; we are hanging about here being idle and disorderly. (Laughter) House adjourned to next week. 

(The House rose at 5.36 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 October 2014 at 200 p.m.)
