

Thursday, 1 October 2020

Parliament met at 3.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. 

First, I would like to, as presiding officer, express my displeasure at the continued absence of ministers from the sittings of this House. In particular, we have noted that the Prime Minister and the deputy prime ministers have been continually absent for several sittings of this House. This is a direct breech of rules 42 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure.

The absence of the ministers from the sittings has not only limited effective discharge of parliamentary duties but also defaced the image of Parliament in the eyes of the general public, who think that it is the elected representatives that are letting them down. As custodians of the rules of this House, I call upon the Prime Minister, who is Leader of Government Business, to invoke Rule 113(2) of the Rules of Procedure to ensure attendance of ministers at all sittings of the House, in order to respond to urgent matters from Members and take charge of items on the Order Paper, which fall under their respective dockets.

You may find that at the end of this Meeting, we shall be accused of having not completed a number of Bills. The Bills have been on the Order Paper for several weeks but the movers, who are the ministers, have not been present. Let that be recorded for the information of the general public.

Secondly, honourable members, on 8 October 2020, we shall conduct the 22nd National Prayer Breakfast. It will be held at State House, Entebbe, from 8.00 a.m. to 11.00 a.m. Due to the current COVID-19 pandemic, the scientific national prayer will not take place in the hotel or here as we normally do, but it shall take place at State House, Entebbe. It will be attended by 70 people drawn from all branches of Government, representatives of religious leaders and the public. Uganda Parliament will be represented by 25 Members. 

The event will be live on television networks and radios. It will also be live streamed and can be followed on all social media platforms. 

For those who will be invited, please attend so that we can fulfil our longstanding commitment of holding the National Prayer Breakfast for this country.

There are two matters of national concern.

3.11
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the role played by the national COVID-19 taskforce. Because of their advice, we are blessed that during the presidential COVID-19 addresses to the country, the President has given the country many interventions.
One of the important interventions was that the churches and mosques should be opened, so that we can have spiritual healing and encouragement for our people. 

The Inter-Religious Council of Uganda gave very good guidelines concerning places of worship. In their guidelines, they proposed that churches and mosques should be allowed to meet all the requirements of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), which was done, through the good guidance of the President.  

Madam Speaker, as I said yesterday, I was blessed to attend Sunday service in a large church that could almost handle 1000 people. Therefore, I would like to raise this matter of national importance and request Government - All places of worship observed the SOPs on the first Sunday. People sat two metres apart to implement social distancing, ensured that there was hand washing before people entered churches and sanitisation of the seats in places of worship. They also registered all the people who went for prayers and at the same time took temperature measurements of all the people entering churches and mosques before they entered. 

It is my prayer, therefore, that the national taskforce advises our President that we have large cathedrals and mosques like Namirembe Cathedral and Kibuli Mosque. We have large churches like where I come from - Miracle Centre, Church of God of Prophecy, St John’s Church of Uganda and St John Catholic Church. 

We pray that these churches be allowed to sit the number of people they can manage, maintaining a distance of two metres. We see that churches are having a challenge in having people pray in phases. I, therefore, request, through this august House, that the President revises and gives emergency guidance that churches, mosques and other worship centres should be allowed at this time to sit any number of people they can handle. 

People are yearning for spiritual guidance and prayer. Some of us are Christians and we believe that when we pray, things happen and with prayer, God can heal our nation, like the way Tanzanians have prayed and the infections of COVID-19 have gone low. They have even entered –(Interjection)– Madam Speaker, I need your protection. The Tanzanians have prayed and the spread of COVID-19 has reduced in their country –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, when it comes to my faith - the Catholic Church - Lubaga Cathedral can accommodate over 10,000 people. You talk about 70 people, but the priests at Lubaga are about 20; the nuns within those hospitals and schools are more than 40. This means that they only allowed nuns, priests and the brothers to attend mass, not other believers because the number will be surpassed, as it was stated.

What the honourable member is stating is pertinent and must be revisited. Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, hon. Macho, for giving way. Madam Speaker, you recall that the President, in his guidance, allowed private cars to carry four people. 

We have got churches like some branches of Watoto Church, Christian Life Church, Miracle Centre and others which sit up to 2,000 and even more people. When you say they should be 70, it is not even five per cent of the capacity of the church, yet there are smaller churches whose capacity is actually 50 or 40. This number is confusing to a point that in some of those small places of worship, it is not really about the space but they are counting the number of people who are coming in there.

Madam Speaker, I think the most important thing is to establish the spacing. A church which carries 2,000 people can actually accommodate 500 people or a number like that, as long as the recommended spacing between them is observed. We cannot restrict it to a certain number of people, regardless of the size of the church. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, in the Islamic faith, we have mostly Taqwa in Busia and Masjid Noor, and the SOPs that have been given is that people should pray maintaining two metres’ distance. We need Government’s advice because in the Islamic faith, as believers are praying, they must be together and not create a gap on that mat.

Lastly, my request is that let Government gives masks to churches and mosques so that our people can pray with hope. Yesterday, we were told we are in phase four of COVID-19 infections –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, in the same spirit, the chairperson of the Muslim faith in my area asked me to seek for clarification. When Muslims are praying, the men sit in front and the women sit behind a curtain. His question was: Does the total of 70 worshipers include only the men in front or only the women behind the curtain, or it is the total of both the men and the women? He asked me to have this question answered. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to think that our scientists who advised the President had a lot of misinformation that they gave him about churches. The good thing is that the Minister of Health is here, and I am sure she leads those scientists. 

If you consider the space in some churches, social distancing would probably be a good way to handle this problem. This business of saying only 70 worshipers - Some churches have large spaces and they are wondering why the same Christians are allowed to travel four people in a car. If you compare the space in a car or a bus to that of a church, even if you told them to make worshipers sit ten metres apart, they would still do it. 

Therefore, we would like to request the COVID-19 national taskforce and our scientists to advise the President, so that it does not look like he makes arbitrary decisions about churches and places of worship. 

MR MACHO: Thank you. Our prayer is that mosques and churches be given masks and temperature guns as solutions to curb COVID-19 in our country. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I think the point has been made. I also do not know whether it is cost effective for the church to provide soap, water and sanitisers for 70 people and again organise the same for another 70 people. I think it is really unrealistic. I do not know – 

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Geoffrey Macho, for raising this very important matter on the Floor of Parliament. 

As we all know, the motto for this country is “For God and My Country”. I thought it was very appreciative to have His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, in his wisdom, give a window for the churches to start giving services to the people of Uganda. However, it is true that the capacity of the churches varies from one to another and they also vary based on faith. 

You recall that the reopening of places and services during this pandemic has been in a systematic coordinated manner, so that we do not open everything full blast. We recall this happened with the directive on the carrying capacity for private vehicles, opening of districts and other services. I would like, therefore, to say that it is true that 70 worshipers might be a small number, but given that this is still the first window of reopening churches, I am very sure His Excellency the President will, after this review, make another statement in that regard. 

Secondly, on the issue of face masks, which my brother prayed for, I have a statement, which I thought I could make at an appropriate time. I can say that face masks are given in districts and the churches are in those districts. As a result, I believe that the Christians who are in those districts are probably the same Christians who get the face masks. However, allow me to make the statement on the face masks as per the Order Paper. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, I do not know how many people can sit in a bus. How many people sit in a bus? They sit in that bus for seven hours. I hope you, the scientists, can advise better. 

3.23
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a matter of national importance. I do not know whether the Minister of Education and Sports is around. However, since you have talked about the absence of the ministers, we shall continue refusing to give them way along the road with their open cars and policemen. 

In March, when schools were closed, some media houses took the initiative of conducting lessons for children. One of those media houses was Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) and all its sister entities. They would give teachers transport allowance and other allowances for the lessons they were conducting. Later on, from April, the Ministry of Education and Sports hijacked this programme and promised to pay these teachers transport allowance, which was Shs 50,000, plus Shs 100,000 for every lesson on the timetable they gave them.

Madam Speaker, ever since the Ministry of Education and Sports took over, the teachers have not been paid for the last five months. They are teaching without being paid. When they complained, they were intimidated and told that they would be stopped from teaching without being paid. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that you intervene and ask the Ministry of Education and Sports to pay these teachers who have been teaching. They were getting their money from UBC and its sister media houses before the ministry came in.

Lastly, the Ministry of Education and Sports stated that they were going to give certificates to every school which has complied with the SOPs before they open. My prayer is, before they give or deny any school those certificates, let the ministry provide schools with what they need to put in place those SOPs –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I was talking to a primary school teacher this morning who heads a Government primary school that has 150 pupils in primary 7. He wondered how they were going to comply with those SOPs because it would mean he needs around seven classrooms to teach those primary 7 pupils.

Secondly, the capitation grant that was supposed to be given to them has since been removed. Even if it is reinstated, it is as minimal as Shs 300,000. How do you purchase a temperature gun, soap, sanitisers, disinfectant and the like using that amount of money? Does the ministry seriously have any plan to help both the public and private schools to resume classes for candidates in light of these stringent SOPs?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member. As I conclude, there is no Universal Primary Education (UPE) school in Uganda, not even the school where the President studied from, which can afford the demands of the Ministry of Education and Sports unless money is provided. This is very key. That is why we have always demanded for the presence of the Prime Minister here to explain all these issues, but he has deliberately refused to come. I am lucky that I am one of those Members who never supported him to be the Prime Minister; I think we were only three in this House. 

Let the Ministry of Education and Sports go to those rural schools. I am interested in the UPE schools because as the honourable member has stated, and I even said it last week, money was taken away from these schools. They have not slashed the school compounds, teachers are not yet in school, but they are going to give them certificates. On what basis are they going to give those certificates to schools in Kyotera, Kalungu or any other areas as stated?

MS AVUR: Thank you, honourable member. I would like to thank the Government for thinking of reopening schools for candidate classes. Some of us, parents, are already receiving notices from schools stating that we are expected to pay a certain amount of money for school fees. There is automatically an increase, and they are also asking parents who were not able to clear fees in the first term to do so. 

Madam Speaker, in economics, you pay for services rendered to you. However, in this case, the first term was interrupted not even half way through. Therefore, why are schools asking us to pay for what we did not even use or receive in form of services? 

What will happen to those in nursery school, senior 1 to senior 3, senior 5 and all those who are going to remain home for the entire year? Should we expect that come next year, we have to pay fees for first, second and third term? I pray that the minister clarifies on this to parents out there. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports should come and clarify on the fees structure - The matter is on the Order Paper. Okay, he will speak when we get to that item. However, hon. Ssewungu wanted Government to commit to paying the teachers who have been training children in the media? I understand they have not been paid.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The doctrine of collective responsibility - I would like to first of all confirm that even during the COVID-19 lockdown, Government teachers continued receiving their salaries. For the case of teachers that were earmarked to conduct remedial lessons in the media, this is an issue that is being administratively handled at the ministry’s level. 

I would like to kindly and humbly request those teachers - They know the procedures and channels. We remain committed as long as they also follow the channels that they are supposed to follow to have this matter sorted administratively. I beg to submit. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I pray that our ministers pay more attention to what we are saying other than coming to say something different. I have stated that these teachers were being paid by the media stations when they began their teaching. The station was giving them transport and also a teaching allowance of Shs 100,000 per lesson. The Ministry of Education and Sports came in immediately to stop this so that they could take over the programme and pay. 

If these people were getting their money for every lesson and for transport and the ministry has taken five months without paying them, is the minister in order to tell us that they should go to those who appointed them other than paying them? They are already intimidated, like I have stated here, by you people in the ministry and you might be among them, honourable minister. Therefore, is he in order? 

These teachers need justice. They fear that they will be dismissed from their jobs without payment yet they have been travelling from their homes to the media stations to teach. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a people’s House and they are entitled to bring their issues here, especially when there is no recourse from the sector ministry. Honourable minister, please deal with the problem to the satisfaction of the teachers because they have come to their representatives to complain that for five months, they have not been paid. Please, handle that.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In private schools, including clinical officers’ training schools, parents are being taxed because the teachers have not been catered for. 

You rightly said that those teachers on the Government payroll are receiving their pay. Yes, that is okay. However, how about those private teachers and those teachers in Government schools who are on the Parents Teachers Association (PTA) payroll? Can’t we get something like a stimulus package for them? Why don’t we also think about a stimulus package for education, and instead of taxing parents we tax the ministry?

In the ministry, there are staff or personnel who behave so arrogantly to the people who go to them. Tomorrow, we are not going to be here. How are you going to help the people when you do not receive their petitions at all? Even a secretary will just rubbish people like that.

Therefore, something should be done for teachers. We have a clinical officers’ training school in Gulu; they are now asking parents to come with Shs 750,000 on top of the official fee. Where will parents get this money, especially now that we were locked down and money is scarce.

Honourable minister and your staff, can you think of something like a stimulus package for education so that teachers are paid, private schools are supported and the pressure on parents is reduced if we are to open. Also, when people come to your ministry with petitions or any other thing, accept them. At least, have that courtesy to attend to them. Your people have not been attending to our people and this is very unfortunate. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to say something, honourable minister?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, such an allegation coming from the Leader of the Opposition is seriously taken. When you accuse the ministry staff of being arrogant, that means they are acting below the requirements of the Public Service Standing Orders –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has said that it is an allegation. I only do not want to disclose but I can disclose that some students went to the ministry and asked to be attended to but their paper was just received and thrown away. They said, “You people always keep going to Parliament; you go there.”

The person who just tore and threw the papers is not even the one who should attend to such students. Hers or his role was just to receive and ferry it to the right people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you substantiate? Who is this person in the ministry? Substantiate so that we can take action.

Ms betty aol: I would like to say that one of the students is called Solomon – (Interjections) - I am giving the name now. They took their petition and they were ignored. They were told to go wherever they want to.

The Speaker: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I would like to know whether it was an office messenger, secretary or commissioner who threw them out. 

Ms betty aol: Madam Speaker, I would like to tell you that it was in the office where the big minister also sits. (Interruptions)

Mr kibalya: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister was here and was very clear that the Leader of the Opposition is making an allegation. She raised a point of order against the minister saying that it is not an allegation, that she has facts. The Leader of the Opposition has however refused to disclose those facts. I wonder whether she is debating in anticipation or refuting what the minister said. The House is about to believe that she is making an allegation because she has failed to prove with facts that there are staff in the ministry who are mistreating people.

The Speaker: Honourable member, if you cannot tell us which person threw away the children -

Ms betty aol: Madam Speaker, if I am given time, I can come with a written paper to Parliament to prove that it is not an allegation. It is the truth, nothing else but the truth, except that the paper is not in my hands.

The Speaker: You should then ask for time.

Ms betty aol: If I am given time, I will produce that information. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

The Speaker: Where is the Minister of Internal Affairs? - He is not here. Is there anybody acting on his behalf? 

Mr Patrick nsamba: Madam Speaker, I am not the minister but I was here yesterday. When we raised the importance of this Bill, the Attorney-General was here and he lied to us; he promised that he would come back today with this Bill. It was indicated that according to the parliamentary programme, we are breaking off today. The Attorney-General is aware of this because he is a Member of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the ministers in this Government are continuously underestimating our pleas and proposals here. They desire to do what they want to. This is a matter that is going to determine people’s positions in the forthcoming nominations, which are slated for the 12th. Now, here we are. Yesterday, I remember I was on this podium telling the Attorney-General, “You are going to hide tomorrow.” He is in hiding now. 

We have waited for the Bill since morning. Madam Speaker, I remember when you were adjourning the sitting yesterday, you indicated that the House would resume today at 10.00 O’clock –(Interruption)

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the women Members of Parliament here. As we were coming in, most of the ladies were lobbying us to keep around for this particular Bill. 

The information I would like to give is that some of us are going to be very mad. Madam Speaker, you have to mention some ministers who have given time to this Parliament - I do not want to mention hon. Sarah Opendi and hon. Bahati. However, there are ministers, when you go out there, who are making us suffer along the road. Some of them have lead cars. They have sirens in their cars and they trespass on grass to get to where they want to go. Every facility has been given to them. 

As a member of the Committee on Appointments, I know what we go through when vetting these ministers. It is very unfortunate to have some who are now underrating us. Above all, the Attorney-General should appear daily in Parliament because he is needed whenever we are dealing with Bills. Now, we are here stuck. Everybody in our constituencies, in rural areas, is waiting for this Bill. They want to see it in place and they move on.

Therefore, honourable members, if you do not work hard to censure some two ministers before we close this session, we are in trouble. The ghost is going to hover over us until we leave this Parliament. Thank you.

Mr kibalya: Additionally, if you remember well, yesterday I was in this same position asking the Attorney-General, “On Tuesday, we requested you to give us feedback from the Executive, why don’t you tell us what you agreed on so that we begin from there?” You then ruled rightly, Madam Speaker, that we cannot debate when no Bill is presented. 

The Attorney-General then promised that the effort he had used yesterday to sneak out of Cabinet would be the same he would use today. I foresaw this and said, “The Attorney-General may disappear and we will look around and fail to trace him.” However, everybody said that he would appear. Here we are now. 

We have only today to determine people’s future, not for the women only; we intimated that there are men and ladies who have become Muslims and people who have adopted pet names. These are campaigns, where somebody uses a name that can earn him votes but he remains the same person who went to school. Now, some people in their positions are dilly-dallying with people’s futures.

We need to do something to save the people, Madam Speaker. We cannot just leave today because the Attorney-General, his deputy and other concerned ministers are there enjoying.

Mr mwijukye: Madam Speaker, if you move around the whole country, there is a lot of anger among the people and they are venting it on Members of Parliament. Some people have lost primaries and people are annoyed with Government because ministers are not working. So, when they see you, they see you as Government and want to vent this anger on you.

We cannot continue shouldering this burden, yet the people who are supposed to work are just hiding. I think we need to do something, just as hon. Ssewungu has suggested.

Mr basalirwa: Madam Speaker, I have been given an opportunity to give information. To understand the gravity of this matter, the Attorney-General appeared before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and he did assure us that this matter would be resolved in Parliament through the appropriate process.

Unfortunately, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Attorney-General are not yet here. The danger this poses is that if that issue is not addressed, then the majority of the women here will not get nominated; the Electoral Commission was very clear about this before our committee. Therefore, unless that matter is addressed – even if it means prolonging today’s sitting and suspending some rules as required - we are going to cause a very big crisis.

First of all, with due respect, we did not do the Registration of Persons’ Act very well; there is a lot of ambiguity with regard to that provision. The public is actually laughing at us. However, we have an opportunity to correct the ambiguity. Unfortunately, Government seems not to be prepared to save face.

Madam Speaker, you did mention the other time that the biggest culprits are likely to be women, and indeed they are going to be the biggest culprits if this matter is not addressed. My colleague, hon. Bichetero, is there; she knows what she is going through. Therefore, this matter must be addressed now, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But where is the Bill?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, that brings me to my prayers. We are expecting the Attorney-General to inform us. When we amended the Local Governments Act, we requested Attorney-General to come back today and inform us about the decision the Electoral Commission took about the extensions we required. 

Madam Speaker, even during pregnancy, we usually have expected dates of birth. Up to now, however, people are going for nominations but nobody knows when the elections are going to be held. When you ask people, they all have their own dates. 

Madam Speaker, I know you had communicated that Parliament is breaking off today, but these are very critical matters. We know you have been very hardworking all through this time of COVID-19. However, we are requesting for tomorrow or another day so that these matters are resolved. I so pray. Thank you.

MS BICHETERO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with what has been said on the Floor by the Members that have spoken before me. We are running out of time. We believed the Attorney-General when he said he was coming with the Bill today. Most of us stalled the alternative actions that we would have taken, believing in the Attorney-General, but up to now he has not come.

Madam Speaker, some of us are affected. I would like to speak on my behalf. I was born Isala, baptised Veronica and I adopted my father’s name, studied and all my papers bear those names. This was before I got married. Now, it appears I committed a crime to get married.

I have all these impediments before me. After we raised the impediments and said we could cure the impediments by bringing an amendment, here we are; somebody is stalling with the amendment. What is actually happening? Are we working for the men and women of this country or are we here to sabotage some of them? I need to know, Madam Speaker. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this issue was discussed in Cabinet yesterday and was resolved. The concerns of this House were taken into account and addressed appropriately. Given the importance of this subject, we wanted you to give us 15 minutes to look for the Attorney-General so that he can come to the House and communicate what Cabinet resolved, which actually answers all the questions that had been raised by this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is unfortunate that all the three ministers in that ministry are not here - the Attorney- General, the Deputy Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. You better look for him. Let us go to item No.4.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ACTION TAKEN REPORT ON COMPENSATION OF KANUNGU ORPHANS WHOSE PARENTS PERISHED IN THE INFAMOUS KIBWETERE INFERNO IN MARCH 2000

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is not here as usual. Next item.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, this matter has taken over a year. The Kanungu people keep on coming and we refer them to their Members of Parliament, but to date, their issues have not been taken off the Order Paper. 

What are these ministers doing? The same items appear every day on the Order Paper, just like the issue of the South Sudan traders. We feel so bad that we cannot deliver but come here to lament because the other section that should be able to clarify and take action is not always there. 

Therefore, the person acting on behalf of the Prime Minister, hon. Bahati, take note and let your ministers come whenever they have issues on the Order Paper so that we do not seem to be doing nothing in this Parliament. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, on Tuesday we raised an issue concerning the police and power; the Minister of Energy was here and she clearly said that the Minister of Internal Affairs would come and give information. He was supposed to appear yesterday but he did not come. We thought that after finding out that Parliament was closing today, they were going to come. However, we are closing and leaving the police in the whole country in darkness.

We wonder what all those ministers are doing in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I would request that in the same way that the Minister of Finance is hunting for the Attorney-General, let us at least have the Minister of Internal Affairs as well. It has become a habit for the Minister of Internal Affairs; we wonder where he transacts his business from, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall take action against the minister. Let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF 3 MAY 2018 ON PAYMENT OF MONIES OWED TO THE UGANDA-SOUTH SUDAN TRADERS

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to Item 4 (iii).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROPOSITION TO SUBSIDIZE THE COST OF LIFE JACKETS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you can ask your senior minister to understand that we are not going to conduct your fresh business in this House until this matter is resolved. We shall not do all those things. Are you coming in on the life jackets?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You just mentioned to the minister that Parliament should not be doing the work of the Executive and I am bothered about items No. III and No. IV. I think these are purely administrative matters that should be handled by the ministers. For as long as the attention of the ministers has been drawn, they should take action and account either to Cabinet or the Prime Minister without some of these matters coming to Parliament. I think we end up wasting a lot of time and taxpayers’ resources discussing these matters which are purely administrative-

THE SPEAKER: Which items?

MS KAMATEEKA: Items No. III and No. IV, on life jackets and the people who came from abroad and were repatriated and they had to spend some days in quarantine in disregard of their monies. These are administrative issues. 

THE SPEAKER: How will they be answered for the people of Uganda? They are on this Order Paper because the citizens want information.

MS KAMATEEKA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, the people on the islands want to hear about this issue of life jackets. It is important for them. 

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we undertake to this House that when we are bringing the next tax measures, the issue of life jackets will be handled by reducing on the taxes for importation of these items. In addition, we are encouraging the use of those that can be manufactured here because that is the only way we can address this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Should we ask the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take note of that and ensure that it is provided for?

MR BAHATI: Yes; I am speaking as a person who represents people who are being affected by this issue all the time.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we wait for the minister to go through those processes, the fishermen are suffering throughout the country. Some of us who represent those areas are in a terrible situation. 

I visited the islands with one of the ministers, the Minister of State for Water and Environment, Mr Ronald Kibuule. We were the only people who had the recommended life jackets. The other people have fake life jackets and the soldiers tell them that those are not the required ones, and then they arrest and beat them. Therefore, this is an issue, which should be handled very fast because some of us are suffering. 

Furthermore, the issue is not only about life jackets; I have just been talking to the Minister of Health because masks are not there on the islands. So, whenever these people get the opportunity, they say that if you have not supplied them with the masks, let them have the life jackets. The recommended life jackets cost between Shs 60,000 and Shs 75,000 and they say they are too expensive. I do not know whether the committee will come back with a resolution after January when some of us have lost elections on the islands.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should just commit himself because the budget cycle starts in October and we are already in October. He should not delay us by referring to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It will definitely will come to them. However, can he give a guarantee and a commitment that in the budget process, which is starting this month, this proposal to waive the taxes on the life jackets will be included? 

This is the beginning of the budgeting process; he should be able to give us a commitment. He should commit that this is something that the tax policy department of his ministry is taking seriously and it will be exempted. Thank you.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, you had given me an opportunity to make a submission. I am glad that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here and we are addressing the matters of subsiding and tax reductions. 

The minister offered to give a statement to this House in regard to the issues of materials and apparels and he did not appear yesterday. We are glad that he is here today. In the same spirit, it is our prayer that he states the position of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to this House and to the people of Uganda.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, it is true that the soldiers on the waters do not allow certain life jackets to be used. Moreover, Government has not given any alternative to our people who are moving on the waters. With the situation we are in now, we are experiencing many deaths on the waters. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that you order the minister to direct the soldiers who are guarding the waters to allow our people use the life jackets that they have. This is because that is the only alternative that they have for now. They can do this, other than waiting for what he is talking about that will come during the budget preparations. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS AVUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since what is before us touches on water transport, I would like to say that on the 16th of September, I raised here an issue about how the people of Pakwach are suffering from flooding and we have already lost a person. If this person had a life jacket, perhaps his life would have been saved. 

This House approved a substantial amount of money for the Office of the Prime Minister. I would like to know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development if that money was released and if it was released, where it is being used. Why is Pakwach being isolated and not supported, yet we have even lost lives and we have roads that have been cut off due to floods? It is too much! We have given money but we do not see it on the ground. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we expect you to come back with a statement on the issue of the life jackets when we resume. We expect you to make a commitment or tell us the position of Government. Unfortunately, in this country, the major planners are mainlanders and they do not think about the people on the islands. That is the problem we have in this country.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, some of these issues could be handled by the House if we moved fast on the work that is before this House. We brought some tax amendments to help during this period of COVID-19 and some of these amendments could be done here without prolonging the debate on this issue.   
 
The Bills have been considered by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they are waiting for our debate as a House. Therefore, in one way or the other, the House can also help us to dissolve these issues without prolonging them.

THE SPEAKER: Are we allowed to introduce new matters into the Bills? That is what I want to know.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it will be with our consent. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BAHATI: On the issue raised by the honourable Member for Kampala Central, we have been discussing this issue and we are extending the deadline from 30 September to 31 December. This will help the business community and Government dialogue and resolve this matter in an amicable way. An instrument will be circulated tomorrow or Monday to this effect.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Bahati. We shall take it from your submission that you have committed to this House that an instrument extending the period has been already issued and it will be circulated to the people and this august House. It is important that the Members of Parliament are aware, together with the Speaker, who was present and heard the plight of these people. 

Secondly, you have introduced another subject that when the tax amendment Bills are considered by this House, we are free, with your consent, to either introduce new amendments or buy what you will have brought. Be clear on that matter. Otherwise, thank you for your intervention. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us be alert. When the Bills come, we should put in our proposals and see whether what the minister has said is what he is going to do.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON COMPLAINTS BY INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE REPATRIATED FROM VARIOUS COUNTRIES WHERE THEY HAD BEEN STRANDED DUE TO THE COVID-19 LOCKDOWN AND QUARANTINED AT SHERATON HOTEL FOR THE OBLIGATORY 14 DAYS YET UPON EXPIRY OF THE DAYS, THEY WERE UNJUSTIFIABLY RETAINED FOR AN ADDITIONAL THREE DAYS AND WITHOUT TAKING INTO ACCOUNT THE EXPENSES INVOLVED

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health, this matter has been on the Order Paper for two months. 

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, quarantine in the COVID-19 context is defined as a transparent home or institutional restriction of exposed persons’ activities when they are not ill or do not have symptoms of COVID-19, for the purpose of protecting unexposed members of the communities from contracting the disease, should any person at risk become sick. 

It involves physical separation from the rest of the population and restriction of movement of healthy persons who might have been exposed to the virus. 

The objective of COVID-19 quarantine is to closely monitor exposed persons for any symptoms and ensure early detection of cases, to prevent additional exposures or spread of the infection.

The duration of COVID-19 mandatory quarantine is 14 days, where we begin counting from the last day of exposure. The national guidelines require two samples to be taken off the residents in the period of quarantine. 

The first sample is taken off on day one of the quarantine and the last sample is taken off on the 14th day of quarantine. The final sample taken is taken to the laboratory for a Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test. In the laboratory, they are currently running a test for COVID-l9 called PCR, which requires 24 to 48 hours to be complete and sometimes 72 hours, depending on the workload in the laboratory.

This is to enable health workers complete all processes involved, like sample collection, sample processing, quality control and discharge processes. The machines in our laboratories do not load individual samples. Therefore, it requires all laboratory processes like extraction, loading, running, quality assurance to be complete so that loading and processing procedure for the PCR test can take place.

This information has been shared with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ Public Relations Office and uploaded on the website and travellers have access to it. 

There are other PCR tests like using GeneXpert cartridges, which takes less time to get results, which is approximately one hour but currently, it is not in use because of lack of GeneXpert cartridges in the country.

Madam Speaker, I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you have answered that question but I think let us move to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EVALUATION OF COVID-19 GUIDELINES AND RESPONSES

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking you for the wise guidance that we need to update this House from time to time, as far as matters of COVID-19 are concerned.

A recent study by the Lancet Medical Journal, which was released on the occasion of the 75th Session of the UN General Assembly by the Lancet COVID-19 Commission of Experts, placed Uganda as one of the ten best countries in responding to COVID-19 pandemic globally. 

In their report, Uganda is the best in Africa. On this note, allow me to appreciate the Head of State for the visionary leadership and for spearheading this fight against COVID-19, which has enabled Uganda to make her mark on the global front in response to this pandemic.

In the same vein, I wish to take this opportunity to appreciate and thank you, Madam Speaker and all honourable Members, for the unwavering support and leadership you offered during this pandemic. 

The strategic leadership in public health is not new for Uganda, as evidenced by the shift control of other major outbreaks that occurred in Uganda, such as Ebola in Gulu in 2000, HIV/AIDS pandemic and others.

Before the West African Ebola outbreak, its outbreak in Gulu was the largest in the entire globe. However, we managed to avert the situation and similarly prevented the spread of other bigger Ebola outbreaks from Democratic Republic of Congo since 2018 to 2020. 

Uganda continues to adopt strategic measures in responding to public health emergencies such as the pandemic that we are fighting today. 

The overall COVID-19 national epidemiological picture presents an intense transmission in the Kampala metropolitan area. The total of positive cases stands at 8,129. Recoveries have gone to 4,260 and we have registered so far 79 deaths. We are currently registering an average of over 1,300 cases and four deaths on weekly basis.

In the Kampala metropolitan area alone, we have registered a total of 2,735 cases and 47 deaths. However, within the last one week, from 23rd to 30th September this year, we have registered 448 cases and three deaths in Kampala alone.

There continues to be local transmission, with 103 out of 137 districts reporting cases. Out of these, there are 87 districts with active community transmissions.

Madam Speaker, the current transmission and clusters are mainly seen in the Kampala metropolitan area, Kiryandongo, Pader, Moroto and Kapchorwa. In addition, there are multiple prisons and prison inmate clusters in Amuru, Manafwa and Moroto. There is also a large cluster in Pader District that is linked to a construction of the project at Aswa Hydropower Station.

The Karamoja area has remained largely silent with only subtle transmission but this changed from 16th September, with the break out of prisoners in Moroto Namalu Prison, where 59 inmates escaped. So far, 22 of these prisoners have been reprehended. We are yet to establish how much interaction and transmission has happened as a result of that. 

World Health Organisation has phased this pandemic; Phase 1 up to Phase 4. Each phase of the pandemic requires a specific intervention and measure to control the infection. Uganda stands at Phase 4. 

Phase 4 implies that there is a widespread community infection. In this phase, there are multiple and connected clusters of the disease and the response measure is only mitigation. So far, a total of 28 districts are already in Phase 4 while the rest of the districts are slowly progressing to this phase. It is, therefore, pertinent for all of us to note that this phase requires implementation that are specific to Phase 4 intervention. 

Phase 4 of the pandemic requires adjustment of the response measures to refocus energy and resources to mitigate the negative effects of the pandemic. In this phase, Government response will focus on mitigation to avert deaths and severe infection as much as possible. 

The community widespread of COVID-19 in the current phase has coincided with the timing of easing of the lockdown. The surge in the number of cases has been contributed to community activities like large gatherings due to the election period, burials, illegal house parties, improper use of facemasks and congestion in public places especially transport. All these are associated with poor compliance to Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs).

In this current phase, the response of the objectives is threefold:

    1. To control the number of confirmed cases to avoid overwhelming the healthcare and the clinical health system;
    2. Minimise deaths in the community and health facilities among all suspected individuals;
    3. Minimising the number of severely and critically ill people by early case detection and referral.

To achieve the above objectives, the critical interventions such as massive community engagement for compliancy and shielding of the vulnerable population especially the elderly will be scaled up to optimise all available resources. 

Regarding the testing facilities, a lot has been explained. I leave that for the Members to read through. 

It is of importance to note that the private sector in Uganda serve over 42 per cent of individuals receiving healthcare services. We have observed that many suspected COVID-19 cases first visit private health facilities before confirming the diagnosis. They are then transferred to the COVID-19 facilities for treatment. This delay in diagnosis is due to low index of suspicion among the private health workers. For that reason, the Ministry of Health is conducting an assessment and accreditation exercise to identify and designate private health facilities to provide care for COVID-19 patients for those who may wish to be treated in private facilities.

Allow me to thank all the healthcare workers who have committed their lives to serve the lives of our people infected with COVID-19. On a sad note, so far, we have lost six healthcare workers to this highly deadly infectious disease. May their souls and the souls of those who have equally passed on due to COVID-19 all rest in eternal peace.

To date, we have 530 health workers who have got infected from 60 districts as per the report. Preliminary investigations have shown that the majority of the health workers infections did not originate from the hospital setting, especially from the treatment unit but they originated from the communities where they reside. We are, therefore, developing interventions that will specifically target the health workers. 

In accordance with international guidelines, recent population and laboratory based evidence and given the shift to community transmission, the Ministry of Health has, therefore, updated the criteria of care and discharge of COVID-19 patients. It will depend on the severity of the disease and also whether the patients’ immunity is suppressed or not. 

    1. In line with that, COVID-19 test will no longer be required for discharge of asymptomatic, mild and moderate cases. Rather, a time and symptoms based criteria will be used, whereby individuals with COVID-19 who do not require oxygen may be discharged at least ten days after symptoms onset, provided their symptoms have improved and they are at least 24 hours fever free.

    2. Asymptomatic patients may be discharged or de-isolated ten days after the date of initial positive test if they have no symptoms at all.

    3. COVID-19 cases who do not require supplementary oxygen but may have presented other symptoms will be discharged at least ten days after symptoms onset provided the symptoms have improved and patients are 24 hours free of fever. 

The ministry has also developed guidelines for handling bodies of persons that have died due to COVID-19. The guidelines outline the process of handling the bodies that have died both at the health facilities and in the communities. The guidelines provide detailed information on safe dignified burials by the community members. 

You recall His Excellency the President directed that airport be reopened to tourists, businessmen and women returning to Uganda. In this regard, the following advice has been given by my ministry:

    1. All incoming travellers via Entebbe International Airport or the land border points are required to have a negative PCR COVID-19 test done within 72 hours at the point of entry or departure.

    2. For travellers who present at the airport without test results, a sample will be collected upon arrival and the individuals are required to meet the cost of the test as well as quarantine until their COVID-19 results are returned. 

    3. Responsibility of ensuring their travellers who board their planes are tested prior to traveling rests entirely within the respective airlines.

    4. All arriving travellers with COVID-19 negative results will not be subjected to institutional quarantine from today onwards. The returning travellers will be guided by health workers at the airport on procedures to follow until they get to their homes. 

    5. Lastly, testing for any other recent travellers will be symptom-based should they develop symptoms consistent with COVID-19.

In conclusion, the Ministry of Health continues to build capacity of our health workers, leverage on resources and rely on advice from the scientists to address the growing challenge and ensure that the health system is not overwhelmed with the fast-growing spread of COVID-19. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister of Health for that update. Can we have a few comments?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has made. I have been made to understand through the media that the International Day for the Elderly is being celebrated today. The theme for this year is: “The Management of the Elderly in the Pandemic.” 

Therefore, I thought that the minister was going to incorporate in that statement how the Government is planning or has planned to manage the health situation of the elderly in this pandemic. I am surprised that there is no statement at all from the Government regarding this very important day, which is being celebrated internationally.

I am even more surprised that the Minister of Health would give a brief on what is going on in the Ministry and does not focus on the day’s theme.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister is responding to issues we raised here in this House and not general debate about the elderly and so on.

4.28
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has presented. We are losing people due to the Corona pandemic. Last week, on 23 September 2020, I lost the chairman of NRM to COVID-19.  He was buried last Friday and it took a lot of time for the team to go and take samples from his contacts. This was only done yesterday; samples from his contacts like the wife, children and others. It took a whole week before the samples were taken.

I am concerned about the delay in taking these samples. As the minister was reporting on the procedure that we have to observe the SOPs, we are not following them and Corona is spreading.

Kole District has already registered 18 infection cases with three deaths. We do not have test kits and even Lira Regional referral Hospital is complaining of having no test kits. Even if we request for an ambulance from the Regional Referral Hospital to handle the suspects or to take the suspected cases to the facility, we are not granted any help.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister - first of all, they are not following the guidelines. How do we, as the communities follow the normal procedures and guidelines if the ministry is not following the SOPs?

Madam Speaker, let the minister clarify on the Floor of Parliament on how they are following the right procedures so that the community can also follow suit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.31
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. There are some few points of concern I would like to seek clarification on from the honourable minister.

I hope you are aware that last week, the medical officers from Gulu Regional Referral Hospital complained that the risk allowances were not paid for the last four months. I would like to seek clarification from you, honourable minister; for not only Gulu Regional Referral Hospital but all the medical staff who are supposed to get the risk allowance are not being paid including in Amuru District. Why is that so?

Secondly, I would like to find out from the honourable minister; where are the vehicles, the land cruisers, ambulances and the money donated by the well-wishers to fight against COVID-19? I would like you to tell us where the money is and if possible, you explain the allocations of these vehicles; which hospitals received the ambulances and the big land cruisers that were paraded at Kololo airstrip. We would like to find out where they are.

Finally, I would like the minister to explain - Many times someone tests positive, the person goes to the hospital and spends only two or three days and the next test shows that they have become negative; repeatedly negative and the person is discharged to go back home. How does this happen? 

I would like to find out from you, is our coronavirus not strong? How does someone spend only two or three days and they are cured? Thank you.

4.34
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I come from the Lake Albert border with Buliisa area where we did not only have the COVID-19 lockdown but also the fishing community has not been allowed to go back to the lake and we also have the floods.

We would like to appeal that you consider us for some of those ambulances and relief supplies, which came to the ministry. We are at the border region of the DRC and the lake area whose floods have gone beyond the National Environment Management Authority areas for over a kilometre. Therefore, our problem is complex and it required intervention yesterday.

The second one is to thank Government and the task force committee for finally allowing us to seek divine intervention by opening the houses of worship. However, you have not given them temperature guns and other things that they require. The pressure is now on us as leaders to provide them.

If you have a problem, as the task force to supply those temperature guns and other things, we can deliver them as the people’s representatives so that you save us from that pressure, which is currently placing on us.

Thank you also for considering opening the schools. As Government is reporting on COVID-19, it should not be only Ministry of Health dealing with COVID-19 but we should bring in other areas. Minister of Education and Sports has not come back here fully for us to reconcile. I do not know whether Government is moving unilaterally like they have done before on the curriculum, relief and food. 

I thought that this time, we shall move in unison and it would be proper for Ministry of Education and Sports working with other ministries. When you come here, we also get answers on issues, which were not addressed by the Ministry of Education and Sports because they say that it is your technical experts telling them the dos and don’ts, yet we find a lot of areas, which are beyond their mandate.

I would like to also pray - up to this stage, six months of dealing with COVID-19, which is the new normal for 2020; we are now talking of balancing acts between preventing the infection while not strangling the economy. 

You do not seem to be coming out to tell us something. We have interfaced with people in other countries who are even told how to boost their immunity. I have not heard that in your statement for the last five months. Other people are even told what others are using to treat - I have prescriptions here, if you allowed me, from six countries. 
However, you keep telling us, “don’t touch” without saying what is to be done in circumstances if I found myself in Buliisa where there is neither an ambulance nor any immediate referral system. Government is not going into that area. What do we do to live positively with this new normal COVID-19? 

In line with that, I know that part of the immunity is in good feeding. The message should be for agriculture to produce more food and how to make sure the companies do not collapse. If they do, I have been told that people who are dying are not dying because of COVID-19. This is just finishing them because they are vulnerable to other challenges including poor feeding and diseases.

Therefore, why don’t you have a more holistic way of managing this problem so that as a country, we can be seen to move on?

Finally, you have opened the airports and we are happy to hear that. Tourists may come back. Our children are crying to come back. We would also like to be given slightly more information on how we are going to cater for these people when they come back home, because there is a lot of mixed messages, so that we can see us living with this challenge while we move on as a country.
 
Most importantly, the next presentation should be from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development responding to what Parliament had recommended earlier. As a COVID-19 stimulus, how does the economy get back? 

It is important that we balance the whole equation and discuss more of the economy with the Ministry of Health being just a component. Thank you.

4.39
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask a subsidiary question to the honourable minister.

This House passed some money a number of months ago. His Excellency the President also pronounced himself on the provision of masks. It is not clear up to now where these masks are. 

The President talked of two weeks from then. We have counted four months since then. We have not seen the masks especially in rural districts like Agago.

We keep seeing some ministers distributing these masks in their districts. We wonder whether they are first phasing out the ministers, then they come to give members of Parliament individually. Is there any systematic approach to the distribution of these masks?

Secondly, Pader District was among areas with the most registered cases last week. It neighbours Agago District. Five cases were also reportedly discovered in Agago District. Since that announcement was made, we have not seen anybody coming to the district to follow up, especially, with the contacts. These five people were mixing with others.

Is there any response, as it has been that you follow up contacts, such that we reduce on the infections? Thank you.

4.41
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. 

We have issues in Karamoja. I remember Members here once requested us to have testing areas decentralised. We have issues of delay of samples being taken, for example, from Karamoja and brought to Uganda Virus Research Institute for testing, which causes a lot of anxiety.

To make matters worse, our roads at the moment are not good and this could be one of the hiccups causing this issue. The testing should be decentralised. Probably, we can have ours in Eastern Uganda in Soroti so that we are able to get results as soon as possible.

I would like to highlight what my colleague, hon. Olanya, has just mentioned, the issue of taking people to the treatment centre. Last week, they picked my Chief Administrative Officer and Chief Finance Officer. The test results came back positive. After three days, the second results indicated that they were negative. 

It brings a lot of problems. For example, the team that has been working with those people in their offices have again tested positive. We do not know whether the second test will come out negative. Is there a problem in declaration of these test results or is there some mixture during the testing of individual samples? 

I remember this Parliament appropriated money for procurement of masks. We said that most of the border districts should be given masks. However, we have not seen the masks being given to any of the districts of Karamoja. 

We have cross border districts such as Moroto and Amudat. Right now, the cases are rising very much, as indicated in your report, in Karamoja having it at the back of your mind that people there live communally. 

It is perturbing for us who live –(Member timed out.)

4.44
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of my friends who have appreciated the minister for this statement.

In Kapchorwa, when victims tested COVID-19 positive, it took a long time for those who came from those families to be isolated. Even now, people are very scared because some of the victims whose people died have never been attended to. We fear what the ministry would be thinking about this.

Secondly, schools are going to open. Some of them have children coming from other countries where even there are more victims than us in Uganda. How are we going to handle that? Is the ministry ready to provide masks for all those candidates who are going to school on 15th October?

I feel that Sebei sub region, which has no ambulance but has border districts of Kween, Bukwo and Kapchorwa, should be given an ambulance for emergency. Some of these cases fail to be transported to the right places.

I still appeal to the minister because the other time when I raised this issue of the ambulance, she did not say anything. 

Something should be done about the beds in the hospital. The mattresses could even cause COVID-19 because they are in a very bad state. The minister should take the issue of Kapchorwa Hospital very seriously. Thank you.

4.46
MS CAROLINE KAMUSIIME (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukiga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the minster for the statement. I would like to add a voice on the issue of masks. I do not know what is happening. I am lucky the minister is here. She talked about some districts not getting masks. I can confess to that because my neighbouring districts got masks but Rukiga never got any. I would wish to hear from the minister why Rukiga never got masks and yet, it is on the border.

Secondly, I have several times mentioned about our Health centres IV. We only have two and one medical doctor. I would like the minister to tell us when we shall get the second medical doctor in Rukiga. 

Our power is on and off in Rukiga. I have requested for inverters at least for the two Health centre IVs. I would like the minister to tell us, especially the people of Rukiga- where are we getting those two inverters and a car to help us at the border. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.48
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and the country for the fight so far put in containing COVID-19. 

The minister said that we are entering Phase 4 of COVID-19, because we have more infections in the villages. Honourable minister, I would like to think that we should also change strategies. I would like to know what new strategies you have put to run in line with infections in the villages because the villagers are not like people in town; so that they are able to cope and manage even from home.

Madam Speaker, I am saying this because one of the chairpersons in my sub county got COVID-19 but many people were visiting him claiming this was politics not until the results came out positive today. 

The Ministry should focus on these issues, otherwise, many people will be infected like that thinking it is something else. They think COVID-19 is for town dwellers. The ministry must focus on the message and issues that should be able to address these challenges.

Secondly, I would like to know the mode and the preparedness of the country in terms of Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) for the surveillance teams, test kits and resources.  With the infections in Kwania and contacts to be followed, the district does not have any PPE. There are no test kits and the district has not received any money for this quarter. How prepared is the ministry and what resources are available for us to deal with many cases that are in the villages? That must come clear in your report.

Finally, we are opening schools, churches and the airport but I see pretence. We pretend that the bars and markets are closed but, in the villages, they are all operating. Why don’t we just open these other sectors of the economy so that they operate while observing SOPs?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how long we can police the population. I think we should teach them how to live with SOPs and get on with their lives.

4.51
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the opportunity to thank the minister for the report. It is now about seven months since this pandemic broke out especially in Uganda and we have been under lockdown.

I think it is high time the message and the strategy changed. I would like to agree with hon. Ayoo and hon. Mukitale that we need to look at other options because this being the new normal, you can see clearly that the President is opening the country, yet the cases are increasing. What this means is that we have to change the message from merely wearing masks and not touching soft areas and change it to how best we can operate with increasing infections.

I would suggest that we begin telling the population how to prevent using may be local herbs to clear internal organs, social distancing measures and boosting our immunity.

Madam Speaker, I have a close friend who is currently in Jinja Hospital because of COVID-19, which he got from the wife who works somewhere in Mbale. The son is infected as well. However, he is the only one in hospital because the hospital is full. Therefore, we need to change the strategy and think of how to advise the public on how to handle this issue.

The other issue is the high cost of testing. Someone to test for COVID-19 needs around Shs 240,000. The ministry should do something about that. Thank you.

4.54
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. Yesterday, I raised concerns about the situation of COVID-19 in Abim District. Madam Speaker, you had said the minister should make a detailed response soon after recess.

However, there are certain things that might not wait for recess. I waited for the minister as she presented her statement. She spoke about Moroto, Kapchorwa and I expected Abim to be the next district. Abim Hospital is closed with 29 COVID-19 patients of which 17 are staff of the hospital and the 7 are staff of Morulem Health Centre III.

I communicated with the District Health Officer regarding the concerns I raised yesterday but there is no food. For the last two days, it is the other staff who are not infected, who are contributing food.

This morning, I received a message from one of the patients saying, “COVID-19 patients are waiting for your concerns about them in Abim Hospital.” I have failed to answer, maybe the minister can help me to answer. Who is supposed to feed these patients?

4.55
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What the honourable colleague has just raised is the opposite of what I am going to say. I would like to appreciate Government for the concern and the many facilities they have provided to support our COVID-19 patients, and one of them is Namboole. 

I have some patients from Tororo District, who are admitted in Namboole and they have told me that Namboole has a lot food; they eat a lot of nice things like chicken is given to them on a daily basis. However, the problem that COVID-19 patients face in Namboole is the places of convenience, which have turned out to be a disaster. The patients are crying that bathing is a problem, let alone easing themselves after being fed well. They also request that, where necessary, Government should provide for them mobile toilets such that they are able to relieve themselves after being fed very well.

The other challenge they are encountering is; whereas they were taken there as patients, many of them look healthy. They involve in daily exercises and then they eat. They are now afraid of going for exercise because after exercise, you need to go and bathe and the place is so filthy. I do not know whether the minister has visited that facility of recent - and it is highly congested. There are very many patients and some of them, I am told, have started creating opportunities of escaping maybe by facilitating the officers there so that they are given a clean bill and discharged because of the environment. 

Madam Speaker, I thought the minister should look into that and see how to help those patients who are being fed well. If we have those who are not badly off, let them be released to go home. Otherwise, they may get infected with other diseases due to the environment. 

In addition, the too much food that is being given to them should be extended to Abim and other places for all COVID-19 patients to feel that Government is attending to them. Thank you, very much.

4.58
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the minister how many ambulances they have been able to buy to take care of the increasing numbers of COVID-19 cases in helping the COVID-19 intervention.
 
Secondly, I also want to know from the minister how long they are going to retain the ambulances by members of Parliament.  I think their request to keep our ambulances is overdue and they seem to have overstayed and it actually not helping. Can we have a new request for this so that we either put a condition or allow them to use it but after recognising that they have used it for quite some time? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.59
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is also related to what one of the honourable members has just moved. I come from a hard to reach area, which is Kagadi District, and it is a risky area bordering with Congo. I am privileged that one of the ministers of health represented my area, at one time. She came and did an assessment and saw how the situation was. 

The promise was that it would be among the first districts to get an ambulance but to my surprise, to date, we have not been given any ambulance. Amidst the challenges of health facilities we have in Kagadi, even an ambulance is not there to help us in such a situation. 

Also, honourable minister, you have presented to us and I think the way COVID-19 appears today, we must learn to live with it. It is like delivering a baby and think that it will not die. COVID-19 is not ending very soon; as a country, we must find ways and sensitise our people and show them how we can live with COVID-19 like any other disease. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the minister to make some brief remarks? We have other work on the Order Paper. 

5.01
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the minister for her statement. 

However, I want the House to know this and the minister to respond to this; that Parliament, through the Committee on Budget, allocated money for a minimum of 20 isolation centres per district in this country. When we talk of an isolation centre, it means food for maintaining the suspects or the patients who are there and other maintenance costs. 

Madam Speaker, if you went to the different districts, you will find that if there is an isolation centre, it is only one and we wonder where the other 19 are moreover the budget was already made for it. 

Secondly, contacts are no longer being traced. If they are to be traced, there is nowhere to put the COVID-19 suspects because they are many. A case in point is Lira District. We had an isolation centre - a school - but because the Ministry of Education and Sports has come up with a proposal of opening up schools, Lira District does not have any isolation centre. This means that there is nowhere to put people that have been traced or their contacts. The existing one, which was a school, was also closed a month ago due to lack of food; you cannot take people to a centre, where there is no food. 

I have an issue and I would like this House to understand; yes, this happened in the Parliament of Uganda, where when we are tested, we are given serial numbers. Madam Speaker, you wonder a situation where a Member has been tested and given a serial number but that Member is later called on his or her contact number and told that he or she is sick. We wonder how people trace people’s numbers and also their names.
I think the minister should answer that. There is a lot of extortion and I know they are aware that there is extortion in those testing centres. 

On the issue of face masks, majority of the population are complaining about face masks. In my district, face masks are already politicised. It is given to people during ‘big’ burial ceremonies and it is given in the names of “they would be” but other people do not have, yet police charges people who do not have face masks. You pay a cost if found without a face mask. Therefore, there is a problem with the distribution of face masks and the Ministry of Health should see how to handle the issue of face masks so that everybody benefits. Thank you very much.

5.05
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the minister for the statement. I have two issues; first, the President of the Republic of Uganda announced that schools will reopen on 15th of this month for the candidate classes. The parents are asking; who is going to meet the cost of testing the students to be sure that they are COVID-19 free before they are admitted to the schools, given the high cost of testing?

Secondly, in my district, a number of LC1s who are responsible for the distribution of the masks, have been complaining that the masks they were given were not enough to cover the people in the communities. I would like to know from the minister; are we expecting another consignment of masks sent to our districts? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.06
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for being lenient and allowing us, although you had already invited the minister. 

I would like to request the minister; yes; we are opening the airport and we are all happy that our people will be able to travel back. However, the honourable minister has said that people who have tested negative will not be required to go into quarantine; they will just go into their homes, yet we are at this phase where we have increased cases. 

Are we saying that we will welcome people to come into Uganda and they just go and mix freely with the families? Are we being safe? Are we being cautious? We should at least put some measures; either advise them that maybe this person can go into self-quarantine for a few days as they are observed, rather than open up and say they should mix freely. I think we need advice on this. 

The health department has already declared that the hospital capacity is constrained. Supposing we got an influx from these people who are coming from abroad, what then would we do? We acknowledge that the cases are now spread countrywide because even in Mitooma, we registered four cases last week. However, we all get amazed when these people test negative. They are taken in positive and then after about three or four days, they are declared negative and healed. 

It is time that the Ministry of Health comes up to tell us what the difference is between the COVID-19 that we have here and the COVID-19 that is in other countries, what it is that is helping our people and if it is food, then let everybody know so that they can eat this food and be okay. We get surprised that Ugandan cases take only just one week. 

Lastly, on the testing of teachers, the Ministry of Education and Sports said that as they open up schools, all teachers will be required test. However, the students mix more amongst themselves than the teachers. So, what is the rationale of testing teachers and not the students? Thank you. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is, when we have cases from the North, why do you bring them up to Namboole here to suffer? Can’t we create a centre in Baa’ Pece, Pece Stadium, so that we keep them there instead of bringing them up to Namboole? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: As I invite the Minister of Health, can I know whether the Attorney-General, his deputy or the Minister of Justice have been found?

5.12 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Dr Joyce Moriku): With your permission, allow me put off the mask to respond to some of these issues. Thank you. 

As I said, Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this pandemic, we were at phases one and two that required more to do with preventing the infection from entering into the country, since entry was through the airport and the border points. 

Now that we managed to prevent the infections from entering - however all the same, the infections have entered into the country. We are now speaking of phase four, meaning that the infection is in the community extensively. We cannot trace exactly where the source is, if you happen to go into a community today. 

That puts Uganda in Phase Four of the COVID-19 pandemic and that requires a new shift of policy and strategy. As opposed to treating everybody in the hospital and putting people into quarantine, we are now moving to community-led strategy. 

Madam Speaker, as of today, we have 8,129 positive cases but according to the scientists, it has been projected that the high peak will be between November and March. That means we are likely to double this number that we currently have. That is why this is the time that we need to shift strategy. We need to go to the household. We need to go the nucleus of the family so that the approach is altogether changed according to the –

Madam Speaker, the churches have been opened and we are happy that they have prepared a number of SOPs, including acquiring temperature guns. That has been encouraged and we continue to encourage them, so that we take personal responsibility of all the Christians in their jurisdictions. 

A lot have been raised about the testing kits. I thank all my colleagues who raised issues that are pertinent. Testing kits are not available. Currently, we are using PCR – the Polymerised Chain Reaction. This is a gold standard, internationally. Currently, as we all know, there is no recommended reliable anti-body based rapid diagnostic test for COVID-19 in Uganda. 

However, the Uganda Research Virus Institute has carried out a performance-evaluation of this antigen RDT test that can easily be rolled out into the community for testing asymptomatic cases because the PCR is lab-based. It cannot be moved in other parts of the community. 

Madam Speaker, we have accredited quite a number of laboratory facilities. We started from one; we have expanded so far to very many, up to nine accredited laboratory facilities that have been working in the country. 

The testing is going to be decentralised when we get the rapid test that can be rolled out into the community. The question that when you first test positive and after two days, you test negative; it really depends on the time when you get this virus. So, that goes back to science. 

We may not exhaust it here but it is very possible, depending on the timing and when your first test is done. Of course, as the ministry and health professionals, we observe medical ethics and professionalism. Positive results are to be released to the individuals. However, if that has really occurred, we are sorry about it. The problem might be in the laboratory –(Interjection)- can I continue –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for allowing me space to seek clarification on this. You have mentioned laboratories; I wish that you mentioned it because you are speaking before the country and they need this information; the accredited laboratories. We need to know which are the nine laboratories and at what cost, if a Ugandan wanted to go and test for COVID-19? 

The other clarification I want from you, honourable minister, is that you have continuously stated that we are in Phase four. The question is, what are you communicating to Ugandans under this phase four? What should Ugandans do? What should the ordinary person within the community do under the circumstances? What should the local leaders do? What are we supposed to do as leaders? 

This business of still talking that we are in Stage Four; kindly communicate that the stage is this; this is how you are supposed to behave because initially, you communicated that everybody should stay home. Even when they stayed hungry, people believed you and stayed home. Therefore, what are you asking us to do in phase four?

DR MORIKU: Thank you. First of all, as I said, we started with one accredited laboratory that has been known internationally and that is the Uganda Research Virus Institute. From there, we have so far accredited eight other laboratories. The accredited laboratories are:

    1. Uganda Research Virus Institute
    2. The Central Public Health Laboratory
    3. Makerere University Laboratory
    4. A mobile laboratory situated in Mutukula
    5. A mobile laboratory situated in Tororo
    6. A mobile laboratory situated in Adjumani
    7. The Laboratory at the Infectious Disease Institute
    8. Mildmay Laboratory
    9. Lancet Laboratory 

In total, we have nine accredited laboratories for this country which are carrying out COVID-19 tests. 

Coming to the second question as to what phase four –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I just walk there and be tested or must I be referred to those facilities? How do I get into the Uganda Research Virus Institute as an individual? 

DR MORIKU: By and large, all these laboratories have been testing Ugandans for free. The procedure has been clear; using alerts, contacts and people who have been quarantined. However, of recent, -

THE SPEAKER: What I would like to know is, if I am an ordinary citizen here on Kampala Road and I would like to be tested, can I just walk there or do I need a reference saying, “Please, check this one”? That is what I want to know. 

MR OKUPA: The other one is, the minister is saying they have been testing for free, but recently, we saw a circular saying we must pay Shs 240,000. Can the minister please clarify whether I can just walk into the Lancet Laboratories and be tested for free or if I have to pay? The test may be self-requested because I want to know my status. Please clarify that.

Also, honourable minister, we saw in the newspapers two days ago that 80 per cent of the people who have succumbed to COVID-19 had pre-existing conditions. You may also need to clarify that. 

Finally, we also saw that our scientists in Mulago are testing for low plasma. Please explain that to us too. Thank you. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker –

MS CHEKAMONDO: On testing, recently, we had a case where we wanted to have somebody operated in Nakasero Hospital. The doctors there said before a person is operated, there is a law that has been passed, which requires you to go to Mulago Hospital to be checked for COVID-19. To get tested for COVID-19, you must pay Shs 240,000. I do not know what we are going to do when you have a case to be tested. Honourable minister, can you clarify that please. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: This morning, I was at Mulago Hospital for a COVID-19 test. I just wanted to test to see whether they test people free since this is a Government Hospital. They asked me whether I was on the list of the people to be tested. I said I was not and I had just gone for a test. They refused to test me. They said I have to be on the list. I also did not want to disclose to them my intention. They had refused to test me until I asked them to check the list. When they checked the list, my name was there. 

So, when the minister says they are testing free, I wonder which hospital is testing free.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please respond. We need to do some other work. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you. These nine laboratories are across the country. The procedure we have been following is very clear. We have hotlines, responsible people and people that you call. Some of the cases are picked from institutional quarantines. Some are alerts and they are all taken to those facilities for testing. 

However, the recent statement that we released in terms of payment is for specific categories of people: the truck drivers and people who come through the airports without COVID-19 test. Even today, if you come to Uganda without a negative COVID-19 test within the 72 hours, you will be subjected to a COVID-19 test at your own cost. So, those are the areas concerning testing. 

There was a question on Standard Operating Procedures; whether the Ministry of Health follows the procedure. We do follow the procedures. I am not aware of any gaps but if they are there, we are more than willing to correct them. 

There were issues raised by colleagues about risk allowance of health workers. You recall that at the onset of this pandemic, a supplementary budget was approved to cover the months of March to June. Indeed, it is true that was implemented. However, in the first quarter, money was released but it did not cover all the health workers in terms of risk allowance. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is still committed to ensuring that whatever has been budgeted for is released to cover staff in the health facilities.

My colleague, hon. Robinah Nabbanja, was at Gulu Regional Referral Hospital last week. She had a talk with the staff and indeed, there are issues that she shared with them at length, which gave them hope that they will certainly get their allowances. 

I would like to thank the colleagues that raised issues concerning donated vehicles. We have taken most of these vehicles to border districts. I, personally, took one brand double cabin pick-up to Amuru District. Maybe my colleague, hon. Olanya, was not there but I did that in person. However, if there is need to bring the list of all the donated double cabin pick-ups, we oblige and we are in position to do that. 

On donated money, I cannot respond to that. I am not the Accounting Officer but I believe at another forum, accountability was done concerning cash donations. If need be, more accountability can done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to answer the questions. We have other work we want to do. 

DR MORIKU: Probably, if need be, we can bring a comprehensive list of all donated double cabin pick-ups, ambulances and other vehicles which the ministry has procured.

Importantly, I would like to thank my colleague for the information about the ambulances for the members of Parliament that they have willingly handed over to the Ministry of Health. Surely, it is overdue for us to make another agreement, if need be. If not, the vehicles – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the next item. 

DR MORIKU: There was an issue on economic – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: I rise to put the minister to order. She has stated clearly that she took to Amuru District Local Government a brand new double cabin pick-up. The cars that were donated by the well-wishers were brand new but the vehicle which was taken to Amuru District Local Government lasted for only one week. Immediately it reached Amuru District Local Government, it broke down after it had been driven for a day. It is just a very old car. It means they changed the car; they took the old ones to the districts and they are hiding the new ones somewhere. 

Is the minister in order to inform the august House that she took a brand new car to Amuru and yet the vehicle she brought to us took only one week? Currently, we do not have any vehicle. There is no ambulance in Amuru and our District Health Officer is really suffering.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my difficulty is that I did not see what they took there and I do not know what is there. It is difficult for me to rule on that issue. However, honourable minister, please clarify on the state of the car.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling because donations are donations. When somebody gives you a gift, you do not refuse. Unfortunately, there were a lot of complaints about those donated vehicles including one of the ambulances taken to a regional hospital that broke down within two weeks.

Therefore, when I am told to take a brand new double cabin, I do that but I cannot ascertain the condition of the vehicle. That is what I can say but donations are donations.

Madam Speaker, concerning the practice of living positively, I would like to thank my colleague that emphasis has been put on a balanced diet and boosting our immune system using available remedies and food that we have in the country. We cannot over emphasise that point.

The issue of the airport has been raised and we have been very loud and clear on this. Regarding travellers who are coming back to our country, we expect them to come with a certificate of a negative COVID-19 test within 72 hours and then they can be allowed to go to their home. However, if you come without a certificate of COVID-19 negative, you will undergo testing at your own cost. 

Madam Speaker, even the children who are coming back will be subjected -

THE SPEAKER: We must do other things. Leave the minister to conclude. You will go and talk to her later.

DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, there was an issue of contact tracing that has been raised. With this new shift of policy to community strategy, contact will be followed at community level. Those who are positive, symptomatic and mild, will be managed at community level under an SOP that will be provided by the Ministry of Health. 

We are going to involve from the village level, all leaders, the village task force level, LCI and all the VHTs within the village will be strengthened and their capacity will be built to ensure that we manage the community strategy at village level.

That is why treatment of symptomatic mild cases will be at the village level. Then contact tracing also will be followed by the community and self-isolation will be in the village as opposed to quarantine institutional centres.

We are going to talk about the masks but most of the districts, we have so far given 68 - Madam Speaker, if you can allow me to discuss this at an appropriate time.

THE SPEAKER: You can bring and lay on Table the list then we can discuss it.

DR MORIKU: Thank you. Regarding Kapchorwa District, we will probably discuss in detail. This is the second time we are talking about ambulances. I cannot commit but I would like to take keen interest on the issue of Kapchorwa District.

Regarding Rukiga District, the second doctor can be employed depending on the District Service Commission and availability of funds in the district. As a ministry, we have decentralized recruitment at the district level and of course we can coordinate with your Chief Administrative Officer and District Service Commission once there are funds available for wages; the doctors can be recruited. Also, for the other issues of vehicles, we can personally talk about them, including the issue of masks.

I have already talked about strategy for mitigation; this is a community led strategy that is going to focus on the community and a lot of advocacy on local remedy in terms of boosting our immunity. Getting Vitamin D has been recommended and as scientists, we are doing that study in our country; getting other vitamins like B12, C and everything that boosts our immunity. Physical activity, being fit to fight the virus is the way the way to go.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, opening of other sectors has been discussed here but that can be emphasised another day.

Then regarding Abim Hospital, I will personally take keen interest but I cannot pledge that we are going to provide food as we are shifting the policy to a community based approach.

I have listened to the issue of Namboole Stadium and we will try our best to ensure that the sanitation and hygiene are addressed so that people are comfortable. 

Madam Speaker, money has been allocated for quarantine centres, as I said, that was the financial supplementary Budget and financial year one. However, as of now, I do not expect more money for the quarantine centres as we are shifting to community isolated cases.

Lastly, we are waiting for SOPs but honestly, with this new policy shift of testing symptomatic people, we cannot subject all school children and teachers testing. What we can subject them to is screening using temperature guns and symptoms. If you are symptomatic, you have cough, flu, fever, headache and difficulty in breathing, then you can be subjected to a test. Otherwise, what is feasible is to screen you for temperature and the symptoms. 

Madam Speaker, as I sit down, there is one critical issue on ambulances, which my colleague has been handling. I kindly request you to allow her respond to the issue of ambulances. I thank you.

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, allow me to respond to the question that was raised by my brother from Kassanda. What is the role of leaders? What is our role?

Honourable members, our role is to sensitise our people so that they can stay safe and to inform them of the mitigation measures, the way we have been doing it and that is the way to go. Phase 4 of the pandemic means we are now in a very difficult situation with community transmissions without even knowing where the problem came from.

Madam Speaker, allow me to talk about ambulances. We expect 38 ambulances in November and we already have 7 ambulances in our regions. Three ambulances among those that were donated remained at the centre for response of COVID-19. We are setting up ambulance stations countrywide such that those ambulance stations preferably will be put at regional referral hospitals level such that the health sub districts can access these ambulances.

We are also being accredited and getting an emergency medical services number which is 911 that we shall be using to call ambulances. I thought you needed to know this. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES NO.1 AND 2 OF FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a Supplementary Schedule No.1 which is under the 3 per cent limit and Supplementary Schedule No.2 that requires parliamentary approval for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL 2020

5.35
THE DEPUTY-ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I am sorry I came late because I had an emergency to attend to. Most importantly, we were supposed to secure a document from the Cabinet Secretariat authorising us to go ahead with the Bill, plus a waiver. We have not been able to secure it.

With me here is a statement and a Bill, which we have not had time to discuss with the First Parliamentary Council (FPC). In short, I request for more time so that I can comprehensively prepare and present something that is palatable for this House.

The Speaker: Honourable members, any elections conducted without resolving this issue could be a breach of Article 21 of the Constitution, which provides for equality and freedom from discrimination. For that reason, I will reluctantly give the minister time until Tuesday next week to make sure that the Bill is brought here and we handle it before Members go for nominations.

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. We have nominations going on for Local Governments, which should have ended today. Does he mean to say that - because there are affected persons - the Attorney-General is asking the Electoral Commission to extend the deadline for the nominations and those for Parliamentary representatives? We still have time if they can have an extension because there is a process to handle it.

I would be happy if the Attorney-General and the Minister of Local Government or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - I saw hon. Kamuntu around; can he clarify this such that those who have missed getting nominated by today, which is supposed to be the deadline, are taken care of? An extension by either a week or two to accommodate them can be made.

Mr magyezi: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform Members that it is official that the Electoral Commission has extended nominations for the Local Government leaders up to Monday, including the weekend. (Interjections)

In the meantime, we are waiting for His Excellency to pronounce himself on the Bill, which we passed the other day.

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, to extend it to Monday does not help what we are going to address on Tuesday. The issue of the names that affects the women and some men will not have been solved. We thank them for the extension up to Monday but in the issue of the names –(Interruption)

Mr niwagaba: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question of names only applies to those positions that have educational qualifications. Councillors do not submit but the LCV Chairpersons.

If the extension can apply to the LCV Chairperson only and, of course members of Parliament, then the rest can remain as is. Maybe the Minister of Local Government can help us explain whether that extension covers also the LCV chairpersons in view of the position we are yet to take on Tuesday.

Mr abala: Madam Speaker, extending up to Monday may not help us given the fact that this country is not properly networked. I do not know which mechanism the ministry and the Electoral Commission have used in disseminating this information.

I am sure that there are places that get newspapers two days after they have been read in Kampala. In this case, I do not know whether that extension to Monday can help us in addressing some of these challenges. 

In my opinion, that time is short and it should be extended by two weeks.

Ms franca akello: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek further clarification from the honourable Minister of Local Government, if he could hear me, whether that extension is going to take care of the LCIIIs that were left out because of the Bill that we passed here, which is yet to be signed and the communication be made in as far as their fate in terms of whether they will nominate or not is concerned. Right now, they are calling members of Parliament asking about their fate.

Mr partrick nsamba: Madam Speaker, this is my humble request to the Attorney-General. You have heard the communication from the Minister of Local Government indicating that the Electoral Commission, because of the amendment we made the other time, it has extended up to Monday.

Can you politely talk to the Speaker and we handle this matter tomorrow so that that day can be met? (Interjections) – You kept on pushing us. You kept on promising that, “Tomorrow, I’m coming.”

If you can convince the House, especially the Speaker, we can handle it tomorrow –

The Speaker: Honourable members, I have not seen the Bill. I cannot call the House where there is no Bill.

Mr Patrick nsamba: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Lastly, I would like the Attorney-General to advise the country. When is the election date for members of Parliament and the President?

The Speaker: Honourable members, let us proceed with the Order Paper.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INTERVENE AND MEET THE COSTS OF EXAMINATION REGISTRATION FOR PLE, UCE AND UACE CANDIDATES, 2020

5.38
Mr Henry Kibalya (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to intervene and meet the cost of examination registration for Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE), Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) and Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE) candidates for the year 2020 moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded? (Interjections) – It is seconded by several Members. 

(Motion seconded.)

The Speaker: Justify.

Mr kibalya: Madam Speaker, the motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Uganda National Examinations Board Act, Cap. 137 establishes the Uganda National Examinations Board under Section (2) with the mandate to conduct primary, secondary, technical and such other examinations within Uganda as it may consider desirable in the public interest under Section (4);

AND WHEREAS under Section 14(1)(c) of the Uganda National Examinations Board Act, one of the sources of the funds of the Uganda National Examinations Board is monies that may become payable to the Board in the discharge of its functions;

AWARE that the Uganda National Examinations Board requires all students in candidate classes to pay determined examination registration fees, which is a prerequisite for the students to sit PLE, UCE and UACE;

NOTING that according to the calendar released by the Ministry of Education and Sports as reported in the New Vision of Thursday, 24 September 2020, students in candidate classes are expected to start registering for the Uganda National Examinations on 22 October 2020 and end on 20 November 2020;

FURTHER NOTING that the registration fee for each PLE, UCE and UACE candidate is about Shs 34,000, Shs 164,000 and Shs 186,000 respectively with the additional fee of Shs 15,000 for each UCE private candidate and Shs l8,000 for each UACE private candidate;

CONCERNED THAT given the impact COVID-19 pandemic has had on the economy and consequently the strained financial resources, with the greatest impact being felt by the poorest and most vulnerable sections of society, who are the majority of Ugandans;

CONCERNED FURTHER THAT as a result of the impact of COVID-19 and
given the short timelines indicated by the Ministry of Education and Sports, there is a strong likelihood that most parents might not be in position to pay the required examination registration fee to the Uganda National Examinations Board in addition to the school fees…”

Madam Speaker, Uganda like the rest of the world, has been grossly affected by the effects of COVID-19 pandemic. The lockdown that came with Covid-19 measures to control the spread of the pandemic has adversely affected the incomes and welfare of most households in Uganda.

As such, the anticipated reopening of schools for candidate classes will have an overbearing financial burden on the parents, guardians and the society.

This may result into failure by parents, guardians or other caretakers to pay for the registration fee of the candidates hence, school dropouts may increase.

Each candidate is required to pay examination registration fee at the respective levels as I indicated. According to the Budget Framework Paper 2020/2021, 2024/2025 presented by the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) to the Parliamentary Committee on Education and Sports, the projected number of candidates at the respective levels is:

Primary Leaving Examination - 723,624
Uganda Certificate of Education - 347,845
Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education – 106,570.

The Government is currently paying registration fees for students under Universal Secondary Education and UACE under the programme of Universal Post “O” Level Education and Training (UPOLET). This means that additional costs would be for private students under Universal Primary Education (UPE).

Going by the figures for the candidate who registered in the year 2019 as presented by UNEB in their Budget Framework Paper 2019/2020, Government is already paying 42.7 per cent for UCE as USE students and 18.5 per cent for UACE as UPOLET students.

The projected total cost for candidates’ registration is Shs 101,471,816,000. This means that additional money needed is the remaining 57.3 per cent for the private students under UCE which sums to a total of Shs 32,682,690,340.

It should be noted that countries like Ghana, Malawi and Kenya pay examination fees for pupils and students under their universal free education.

Therefore, our prayer and recommendation is that Government should consider meeting the cost for candidates’ registration fees for the respective examination levels as highlighted above. This is largely because most households have been negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and as such should be relieved of the impending registration.

We urge Government to intervene in the plight of parents and students and meet the examination registration cost of PLE, UCE and UACE candidates for the Financial Year 2020 or for the candidate classes that would be sitting in the Academic Year 2020. I beg to present, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Who is the seconder?

5.50
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to second the motion. Indeed, it is a concern of many Ugandans. The figures mentioned here by hon. Kibalya are not the exact figures that are charged by many private schools.

Madam Speaker, when you go to private schools, the UNEB fee is not uniform- each school charges any amount. Some charge Shs 450,000, others demand Shs 380,000 and other Shs 300,000 and the reasonable ones charge Shs 280,000 which almost doubles the required amount by UNEB.

Madam Speaker, in respect of the above and having seen that parents already have no capacity to even cater for school fees now because of COVID, the Government should take over that small budget of only 32 billion. That would protect the parents from the burden of being cheated by the schools more so when the directors and other operators of schools are desperate.

For those who had already paid at the beginning of first term in February and March, that amount can be reduced from the fees of second term and that would be a big relief to the parents and students. As we talk, many are looking at ways of being assisted by the Government. Therefore, I strongly recommend and support the motion.

5.52
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. Madam Speaker, private schools pay taxes to this Government but it does not provide anything to them other than going around posing that they are part of the body that helps them to educate children.

Madam Speaker, when you compare the number of children in private schools with those in Government schools, they are few. The Government can afford this money.

Above all, the Ministry of Education has saved a lot of money during COVID. There were a number of activities that were supposed to take place in the ministry that have not taken place. This money can be used to pay for registration.

Private schools had problems when they were closed because many of them had loans in banks. We deliberated here to stop them from paying these loans but it was not helpful. Therefore, if they are given this opportunity- 

This money is little and we do not want children to miss doing exams. The ministry is beginning with candidate classes but what will you gain from having candidate classes, coming to study for examination and yet they cannot afford this money?

Madam Speaker, as hon. Ssenyonga has stated, many private schools over charge students. There are schools where a student is meant to pay Shs 160,000 but he or she is charged Shs 500,000. With the debts in schools, head teachers will eat this money if it is collected.

Therefore, I pray that we do this for the first time and even for those of you who want votes, you will get votes. However, it is not about that. It is about the situation in learning institutions, parents and the guardians who cannot afford this money. Therefore, it will be very helpful. 

The ministry of education should come out openly and support us in this area then we shall push the ministry of finance to get them more money on top of what they have saved. This will help and make sure that all our children do examinations and avoid all the inconsistencies that come as a result of failure to pay registration fee. 

Why should we continue charging registration fee when the economy is doing well, as hon. Kasaija always states here on the Floor of this Parliament? The economy is doing well and that is what he has always said. Therefore, how do you fail to pay registration fees for these few students that need this money? I support the motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.55
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the mover of the motion. This motion is really thinking about Ugandans out there. In economics, there is what they call stagflation; a situation where people have something to sell but they do not find somebody to buy. 

Before COVID-19 pandemic, in Kassanda North, we were selling a bunch of matooke at Shs 15,000. Today, a bunch of matooke goes for Shs 4,000. We were selling a kilogramme of maize at Shs 1,200, today, it is sold at Shs 500. The economic situation of the people at the grass root is really bad; people go without meals. The Government is opening schools at a time when people have not fixed their economic situations at home. Now, this is one of the costs they have to meet. 

If Government chooses to downplay this motion, what will happen is that a big number of students will not sit for their examinations because continuously UNEB has been increasing the cost of registration fees and it is very high for the parents at the time. 

This motion is very critical because it touches the person who needs support around this time. We all desire that our children go to school; not children of the rich only. You will hear rich people saying, “How can you fail to pay Shs 100,000 or Shs 160,000”? The rich people can adamantly say so. 

However, raising Shs 100,000 among the local people these days is quite difficult. I urge our Government to think through. We know that the Ministry of Education and Sports has money lying somewhere because we expected the money for quarter one, two and four to have been used. There is some saving that can be made, and if that is not possible, let a supplementary come here. I have already seen hon. Bahati coming with supplementary schedules one and two, are they touching the needs of the people? Can we focus on the common person at the moment? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to ask the Hansard team to correct the records of the House. Hon. Oshabe represents Kassanda County North and hon. Nsubuga represents Kassanda County South. They should also adjust the records for hon. Ameede to read Butebo instead of Pallisa. 

5.58
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion. As we talk now, schools are sending letters to parents asking them to take their children back to school on the 15th October, 2020 with all the school fees for second term and registration fee. 

Parents are not doing well, and if schools continue insisting so, it means we shall have very few students and pupils who will report back to school on the 15th of October. Let Government come in and bailout the parents. If you recall, when we went for lockdown, all businesses were locked down; transport and agricultural products were closed. In fact, nothing was going on. Most of our parents survive strictly on businesses. If Government fails to bailout the parents, in Amuru District, I am sensing danger. Very few students from the village, where I come from, would go back to school. 

I urge Government to take this motion in good faith. Let the ministry rally behind Parliament and support us, and we task the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that Government takes over. This is not a normal situation and it is a common problem that we are facing. I beg to move.

6.00
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate hon. Kibalya, for the motion that I think the nation is eagerly waiting to listen to.

If there is a single intervention towards supporting the Wananchi, that the Government should undertake during this time of the COVID-19, it should be this one. We tried to distribute food and we know that it was unsuccessful. We tried distributing face masks and we know that it has not been successful as well. 

Government pledged to support the private sector with utility costs, however, we have no explanation to that effect. During this season of COVID-19, the poor have become poorer to the marrow. Even those who had something, have also become poor, except those who have corruptly benefited from the COVID-19 funds but generally, the situation is bad. This is an abnormal situation that the Government must be considerate to the young Ugandans whose education has been jeopardised by this COVID-19. Imagine somebody who has been sitting at home, and now a parent says, “I cannot afford to pay for your registration fees, so, come back and sit!” Just imagine that kind of situation. 

Government has planned for activities, which are completely ill-conceived like the emyooga programme. This is not a well thought about programme. Therefore, if we are talking about a few billions to support the 1.2 young Ugandans, I think it is a deserved intervention that Government must take up. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.02
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank my colleague, for this motion. The call for Government intervention is justified by the situation on the ground. Yesterday, I was on the Floor of Parliament requesting for Government’s intervention because of the looming famine in my district. I know it is not only Adjumani District that is affected by COVID-19 and other factors. 

Therefore, the situation is alarming, especially in relation to those who are in abject poverty. People are only thinking about food. If they can have food to sustain their families, that is what they are struggling for and not even diet. The honourable Minister of Health was talking about how to build our immunity but the situation in Moyo and Adjumani is the same. People have lost their businesses and they do not have hope because they do not have alternatives. Even from the fields, people have lost their produce and the productivity is so low. 

Madam Speaker, I support the motion that Government comes in and supports our children to have successful examination. The disadvantaged in terms of poverty level, have already been affected even in the preparation process. The teaching that has been going on, has only favoured those who can afford to facilitate their children because the issues of computer, internet and so forth, even the radio programmes, have never helped the poor because they cannot manage the process. They cannot access the teaching.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in support of those who are in abject poverty, we need to take this request and support it. We need to even plan higher because as a teacher, I am not a prophet of doom. However, if students are ill-prepared, what will you expect? Those who fail will be our children of the poor.

Therefore, I support this motion. Thank you very much.

6.05
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I will follow my colleagues by appreciating hon. Kibalya for the wonderful motion, which I will call a gift to the people of Uganda. 

I call it a gift because Busia District has been in lockdown for seven months. In these seven months, we have experienced a lot of famine. In these seven months, all the markets have been closed. In these seven months, no vehicle has left Busia to go to any part of the country. In these seven months, the borders have been closed, moreover we depend on cross-border trade.

This shows that our people are very poor to an extent that if Government helps and pays the examination fees for the pupils and students, this will be a gift that I think the regime I love so much – NRM – would have given to the people in the 40 border lockdown districts.

I, therefore, support the motion by saying that this is the right time, since the Ministry of Education and Sports has not spent a lot of money and has been saving money. There have been no external travels, workshops and even some construction was suspended in the time that we had many donations for COVID-19 from World Bank, World Health Organisation, International Monetary Fund plus other organisations.

I think Government should take this motion in good faith, so that it can pay examination fees for our children. If this is not done, expect big dropout levels in this country. The wealth of every country depends on education of that country –(Member timed out)

6.08
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my friend – hat is hon. Kibalya – for this motion.

Madam Speaker, we all know that the lockdown has been there from March and some areas in the economy are still in lockdown, like for example markets. For many Ugandans, they get their resources from those markets. Unfortunately, they are locked. At the same time, they have children who are in senior four, primary seven and senior six, including universities. 

I am supporting my brother because he was very clear. The motion is very clear; it is in good faith. It is a way of helping Ugandans who are actually poor.

Madam Speaker, according to records, almost 19.5 per cent of Ugandans – because of coronavirus – are now going to fall into poverty. That is one thing.

Two; we all know that in this country, we have always bailed out companies. We have always given stimulus to different sectors. Even some of those business people who were in South Sudan were paid billions of shillings.

That is why my request is that Government should actually look into this matter and help our children who are going to run this country in the future. The worry, as my brother here from Busia was saying, is that many are going to drop out because they will fail to pay the fees because the parents are unable to pay.

The last one, Madam Speaker, as I wind up is we all know we are under lockdown. We also know that the impact of coronavirus is serious. The economy is slow –(Member timed out.)

6.10
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to appreciate and support my colleague for bringing this important cause for this country.

When you look at what has happened down there; maybe in the city here, something is happening. However, when you look at upcountry where people have been depending on markets and selling commodities to pay fees and when you look at a district like Kapchorwa, Bukwo and Kween where they are depending on Irish potatoes which were not there or selling a cow or goat; this time, there is no where you will sell all those things.

Madam Speaker, when you look at a local Ugandan who has failed to even raise money for soap, do not be surprised that while we are talking of examination fees, others will not even come to school because of school fees.

I was thinking that while we are talking of these examination fees, something should be done to especially those very vulnerable children whose parents may not be able to raise school fees.

Something should really be done to adjust so that they do not miss. Even if the examination fee is there but the school fees are not there, then it is meaningless. Therefore, I am calling upon Government that something should be done to intervene, especially on the children where the school fees and examination fees will not be there.

If we really love our country and children given the problem that we have at hand, something must be done in terms of school fees and examination fees in certain situations. I thank you.

6.12
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 30 of our Constitution gives a clear dictate of what each citizen of Uganda should actually attain, in terms of education. All citizens of Uganda have a right to education, according to Article 30 of our Constitution. Therefore, it implies that the duty of this and the role of Government cannot be over emphasised.

Madam Speaker, I recall that the capitation grant was recalled from schools and that money is within the coffers of Government. I would suggest that if Government actually meant what they did by recalling that money from the school, then that one can work as a starting point. 

There is already some money that Government recalled and it is within its coffers. They can begin from there to mobilise the monies for which the motion has been moved and for which I thank hon. Kibalya for moving this motion.

Secondly, there is also money for State House scholarships. As you are aware, the first and second semesters, for example, for universities will not be paid for. So, there is money lying in State House under the State House scholarships, which money can also be recalled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

They spend this money because it is very critical but this time, it will be very important – (Member timed out) -

6.14
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. This is a pro-people motion, and every right thinking Ugandan should really support it. 

If there is any package that we can take to the population as we go for recess, this is the best we can go with. Since we talked about education for all and education being a basic need, there is no way we cannot support such a motion. 

Finally, the costs of running schools are going to be very high because it is just the candidate classes that will be at school. Therefore, the schools will struggle to even support themselves. Parents will definitely have to pay more money in terms of fees. Therefore, for Government to assist them by paying part of the candidates’ fees is a very good move. I support the motion. Thank you.

6.15
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. I would like to add that the other time we told the Minister of State for Education and Sports that they were not prepared. This is part of the preparation. If they came to Parliament to request for use of finances, that would have been the best thing to do.

I just would like to add that this idea of buying – if at all they have not yet supplied or contracted – television sets to send to LC1s is not going to have any impact because sometimes, under one LC1, there are over 2,000 children. You can, however, see that this proposal is going to have great impact.

So, I wish the Ministry of Education and Sports could still go ahead to plan and withdraw that idea of buying television sets for education to be given to LC1s. Rather, it would be better if the TVs are given to schools other than LC1s.

I would like to also think there are very many other needs that if our technical people think them through, they will help our education better. This is one of them, but there are still many others. Very many schools will not manage to actually reopen if the Ministry of Education and Sports does not address those issues. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Call the last item please, Clerk. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SET UP A SELECT COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE FUNDS LOST BY MAKERERE UNIVERSITY RETIREMENT BENEFITS SCHEME FROM NATIONAL INSURANCE CORPORATION

6.18
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving a motion for a resolution of Parliament to set up a select committee to investigate funds lost by Makerere University Retirement Benefits Scheme from National Insurance Corporation: 

“WHEREAS a disagreement ensued in 2010 between Makerere University Academic Staff Association (MUASA) and the National Insurance Corporation (NIC) on the amount of liability that NIC owed to Makerere University Retirement Benefits Scheme (MURBS), the disagreement arose out of Government's divesture of 60 per cent of its shares in NIC resulting in the withdraw of MUASA's savings from NIC; 

AND WHEREAS due to the disagreement on the liability owed by NIC, MUASA sought the intervention of His Excellency the President to prevail over NIC, the President responded by a letter dated 26 August 2010, wherein he directed the Auditor-General to carry out an independent assessment to ascertain the amount owed to MUASA; 

NOTING THAT NIC paid to MUASA a sum of Shs 10 billion pursuant to an interim agreement between NIC and MUASA, arrived at in a meeting of NIC and MUASA chaired by His Excellency President Museveni; 

FURTHER NOTING THAT on 06 July 2011, the final special audit report of the Auditor-General was submitted to the President and it indicated that the actuarial valuation of the fund was estimated of Shs 26.7 billion; 

COGNISANT of the unending impasse, the President directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to withdraw from the Consolidated Fund a sum of Shs 16.7 billion and have it paid to MUASA on behalf of NIC and then tasked Makerere University to recover it from NIC; 

AWARE THAT following a court case by Makerere University against NIC wherein Makerere University sought to recover the funds owed by NIC, Makerere University and the Registered Trustees of Makerere University Retirements Benefits Scheme and NIC entered into a consent agreement where it was agreed that NIC transfers its property comprised of LVR279, Folio 14, Plot 2A Kampala Rood, valued at Shs 8 billion to Makerere University; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT to date, there has been no evidence that the said property was transferred to Makerere University as agreed in the consent judgment; 

COGNISANT THAT the total of Shs 16.7 billion was withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund, of which Shs 8 billion was settled by the property that was transferred to Makerere University and the balance of Shs 8.7 billion to date seems to be unaccounted for;

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED by this august House that a select committee be set up to investigate:

    i. The balance of Shs 8.7 billion that was part of the Shs 16.7 billion withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund, but to date only Shs 8 billion seems to have been recovered. 
    ii. The failure by Makerere University to refund the total sum of Shs 8.7 billion to the Consolidated Fund; and
    iii. Whether the property comprised of LVR 279, Folio 14, plot 2A as agreed in the consent judgment was transferred to Makerere University and if not, what the current status is.”

I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded. Justify the motion. 

MR MPAKA: Madam Speaker, allow me to give a background of the case. Following a series of strikes at Makerere University in 2010, the President called for a meeting with all relevant stakeholders. In this meeting, it was discovered that the lecturers were striking because they were demanding from NIC their retirement benefits. 

The President then directed the Auditor-General in 2010 to carry out a special audit and establish the actual amount of money. The Auditor-General on 06 July 2011 carried out an audit and submitted its report, which indicated that a total of Shs 16.7 billion was supposed to be paid to MUASA by NIC.

The President then directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development at that time, Ms Maria Kiwanuka, on 28 August 2011 to withdraw this amount of money from the Consolidated Fund on condition that Makerere University sues NIC and recovers this money and takes it back to the Consolidated Fund. 

However, immediately after this money was given to Makerere University, the university sued NIC, but on 27 November 2018, the Vice Chancellor, Prof. Nawangwe, directed the university secretary in a letter to sign an out of court consent judgment, which the university secretary, who, at that time, was the accounting officer, declined. He stated as follows:

    1. Government must approve before he signs this consent judgment.
    2. He requested a formal update from the Permanent Secretary/ Secretary to Treasury on the current status of this money.

On 5 December 2018, Prof. Bazeyo wrote in reply to the university secretary’s letter on behalf of the vice chancellor stating, “I and the vice chancellor had had discussions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and had had a discussion with the PS/ST who confirmed commitment to a negotiation conclusion to this suit.” 

He further states, “The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development verbally consented to an out of court settlement as contained in the consent judgment.”

On 7 December 2018, the vice chancellor Prof. Nawangwe wrote a second letter to the university secretary and he stated, “I need this consent judgment signed without further delay as I want to conclude these matters before the end of the year.” On 13 January 2019, the consent judgment was signed. 

Therefore, what is the problem? He problem is after the signing of this consent judgment, on 18 January 2019, Ms Patrick Ocailap on behalf of the PS/ST wrote a letter to the vice chancellor regarding the procedure they used to sign the consent judgment. He stated:
 
“1. 	Shs 16.7 billion paid by Government was charged on the Consolidated Fund and the Makerere administration should explain why it remained silent on the documentation regarding the process to write off Shs 8.7 billion in accordance to the prevailing procedures and law. 

2. 	The deputy vice chancellor and Prof. Bazeyo lied out rightly in a letter dated 5 December 2018, that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had verbally consented to the out of court settlement.

3. 	How did a mere vice chancellor and deputy vice chancellor get the power to write off a Shs 16.7 billion debt contrary to section 35 of the Public Finance Management Act which gives Parliament this sole authority.

4. 	The university appropriated to themselves money to buy a building contrary to Article 156 of the Constitution without seeking Parliament’s approval.

5. 	The university was procuring a building which was above Shs 200 million. Therefore, validating Statutory Instrument 2014, No.97 regulation 2 which states ‘An agreement or contract involving an amount of Shs 200 million or less is exempted from Article 119 of the Constitution’.” 

In this case this money was above Shs 200 million. What does this mean? This means Article 119 cannot be exempted. What does Article 119 say? The Auditor-General is responsible to draw, pursue agreements, treaties and contracts, conventions and documents in which Government is a party or respect of which Government has an interest. In this case, Government had an interest because this money was withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund. 

I have copies of the land title which I wish to lay on Table of this said property, which is still in the names of NIC. I also have the Auditor-General’s report and a letter written by the PS/ST, signed by Mr Patrick Ocailap; seeking clarification on the process in which they used to sign this consent judgment. I also have a letter from Prof. Bazeyo to the university secretary demanding that he signs this judgment. I also have a letter from the university secretary demanding an explanation from the vice chancellor on why he is supposed to sign this consent judgment without authority from the Government. 

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay these documents.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Mwine. Are there seconders to this motion?

6.28
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu South County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I take this opportunity to thank hon. Mpaka Mwine for this motion. It is high time we set up this select committee to investigate the matter. It seems the vice chancellor and his deputy, in this case okayed the out of court settlement and made so many mistakes as far as settlement of this case was concerned. 

The purchase of the building in question: one, the value was not matching with the Shs 16.7 billion; and two, they did not follow the procurement guidelines. Therefore, we need to investigate this case further so that we help Government not to lose this money that came from the Consolidated Fund and only Shs 8 billion was recovered. We need to find a way of recovering the balance.

6.29
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support this motion for a select committee. The issue of pension is a very serious matter because that is the only benefit that an employee for a long time can benefit from.

Then these are institutional issues we are talking about; two of our coveted institutions, the National Insurance Corporation as well as Makerere University. I respectfully support and agree that a select committee should be instituted to investigate this matter. I thank you.

6.30
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Mwine for the motion and I support it. I would like to say about three to four things. One, why should we investigate? We all know that the only university that we knew and still know is called Makerere University; the Ivory Tower of this country.

Now, if the Ivory Tower for example has done some damage, there are issues that are not clear, we must ascertain why the Ivory Tower is doing things outside the law. Remember so many renowned lawyers, accountants and administrators in this country come from there. Therefore, we want to ascertain why? Where did the money go?

Secondly, since they were our eye, they are the ones who taught us and other people, we should not keep quiet. It might be an element of corruption. We want to unfold this thing to the very dot and the only way of addressing this matter is by us instituting a select committee to investigate why and where the money went. Who took the money? Who is responsible? 

And those who took this money must be brought to book so that we get to know that so and so flawed a law and if so, what does the law say such that we are able to address some of these issues comprehensively and have a lasting solution to some of these problems.

Thirdly, Makerere is an example to this country and since they are, and at the same time manages taxpayers’ money - it is not money from anybody’s pocket. It is public money; we should be concerned! Why did they abuse the law? Why did they ignore –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Is there anyone with a contrary view?

6.33
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion to set up a select committee. My only caution is, this issue of Makerere has been there for long. I was a Guild President in Makerere in 2005 and this issue was there. It only came to be seen and became a big issue of recent.

I remember when we were in the university council one time, it was a heated debate and the President could not understand what was going on. He also failed to understand the cause. However, the staff were up in arms about their money.

Therefore, this issue of Makerere regarding this money disappeared sometime before I even became the Guild President. It has been an issue that the committee needs to be very cautious and sensitive with because it involves a lot. Look at more than 15 years ago and it has been on.

Therefore, the select committee that is going to be formed needs to be very cautious because it involves a lot. I know that even some people that were in this, somewhere somehow, are big shots in Government. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: I put the question that this House do agree with the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, we shall advise on the terms of reference and the composition. For now, I would like to thank you for the work done.

I had, of course, indicated that we shall adjourn the House today but because of an issue that concerns the rights and freedoms of the individuals in Uganda, I have reluctantly agreed to postpone our recess.

Therefore, we shall reconvene on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General must be here with the Bill early morning on Tuesday. House adjourned. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.35 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 October 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
