Wednesday, 31 October 2012

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to begin by welcoming Mr Tarsis Kabwegyere who had gone on forced leave but has resurfaced. (Applause)

I would want to amend the Order Paper. I will be allowing the chair of the Public Accounts Committee to lay on the Table the special forensic audit relating to the Office of the Prime Minister.

Secondly, I have received news that Mrs Sugra Visram, whom we honoured a few weeks ago in this House, died. I want to read to you the letter from her son, the young man who came here to receive the award on her behalf:

“Dear Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Rebecca Kadaga, after having met you during the happy commemoration of the 50th anniversary of Uganda’s independence, it is my sad and solemn duty to inform you of the passing away of my mother, Mrs Sugra Namubiru Visram. After a long period of illness, and at an advanced age, she left us peacefully on Sunday, 20 October 2012.

I have to tell you that her last days were made immeasurably happier by the honour that was bestowed upon her during the ceremony on Friday, 28 September 2012 when as her representative I received a beautiful plaque and citation from your hand. I only wish you could have seen the happiness in her face when I handed them over to her on my return to London.

These symbols of her distinguished service to Uganda and as a Member of Parliament have become the most cherished items of our family. They will be treasured by her great grand children and beyond.

May I ask you to pass on the sad news to the Parliament and Government of Uganda in which she had many friends and co-workers. Please remind them she was born a Ugandan and died a Ugandan.

As a family, we will never forget that she was given such a high and special honour during an event that was held under your auspicious advice and brought into realisation by the hard work of the MPs and staff. For that, we salute you all.

I cannot end without thanking you for the wonderful arrangements that were made for me during my stay in Kampala representing my mother. The kindness shown to me and guidance given by your staff were impeccable, in particular by Helen Kawesa, Lillian Iculet, and Charles who escorted me around Kampala and Parliament. I cannot thank them enough.
With kind regards,
Anil Visram.”

Members, I have been away doing some work on behalf of Parliament and I just wanted to inform you that the campaign to legitimise homosexuality has not ended. As you will recall, during the IPU I met several delegations and I told you that most of the time that is what they were talking to me about.

This time while at the IPU meeting in Canada, I had a head-on collision with the foreign affairs minister of Canada. He declared that he was going to ensure that the rights of homosexuals will be protected from Kampala up to St Petersburg in Russia; so, the campaign must run from Kampala to Russia. The speech is here and I will pass it on to Members. I told him that we are independent and not a colony and I will not take orders from anybody including the foreign minister. (Applause)

I want to urge the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; can we make that law and get it out of the way. (Applause) Nigeria made their law in April this year and nobody says anything about them. Burundi has made the law; nobody is saying anything. We are the target because we have failed to pass this law. I want to appeal to the chairperson of this committee and the members, please bring the report and we debate the matter.

Finally, I received a notice that the Clerk was organising a retreat for chairpersons starting today, but that is interfering with the work of Parliament. So, I want to direct the Clerk that that retreat will take place at the weekend. We must do our work today and tomorrow because these are parliamentary days. We cannot abandon work of Parliament in order to have a retreat for the chairpersons. It will be done during the weekend.

3.07
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to briefly comment on your communication with respect to the defence you gave for the country in Canada, where the foreign affairs minister of Canada at the IPU meeting was attacking Uganda. This has been a situation that occurs every time Members of Parliament go out to various meetings; leaders from various countries in the West want to attack this country.

We want to thank you for the firm and courageous response that you gave on behalf of Uganda. We do hope that other leaders, particularly the ministers and all those who travel to represent this country, will be able to do the same. We want to associate ourselves with the response that you gave, that Uganda is a sovereign country and this Parliament has the powers to legislate on behalf of Ugandans and nobody, irrespective of the relationship you enjoy with Uganda, should be able to direct or force what this Parliament should do.

The question of homosexuality is definitely a key issue. I was at the airport where I joined many other Ugandans who received you and the impression I got was that Ugandans would want this law considered by this parliament and passed. I also want to say, from a technical point of view, that those who argue that homosexuality is genetic are wrong. Homosexuality, and other forms of behaviour, is just a behavioural disorientation which is learnt in adulthood which can also be unlearnt.

On that note, Madam Speaker, I want to move according to our Rules of Procedure, rule 50(K), that we record thanks and this Parliament appreciates the contribution you made in Canada to defend this country. If I am seconded, I move that this Parliament do resolve to thank you. – (Interjections) - I am moving according to rule 50 – motion without notice - that this Parliament records thanks and appreciates our Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, for the contribution she made to firmly and courageously defend this country on issues of homosexuality when we were being attacked by the foreign affairs minister of Canada. I beg to move.

3.11
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion. I was in Quebec with you. Before the foreign minister arrived, we were given a briefing by our high commissioner that he has always been a punching bag for the foreign minister on the issue of homosexuality and that he would be surprised if Uganda misses in the speech that the foreign minister was going to deliver. Therefore, for us as the delegation from Uganda, we were not surprised when the minister began attacking Uganda.

I want to partly quote the statement of the foreign affairs minister of Canada. The sub heading on that subject was “Speaking truth to power” and the contents were: 
“I do so, standing firm on the principles that have made Canada economically prosperous and rich with diversity yet too many countries currently have regressive and punitive laws on their books that criminalise homosexuality. In some countries, these laws are enforced. 

I give the example of David Kato who worked tirelessly as an advocate for Sexual Minorities Uganda, an organisation fighting for full legal and social equality for gay people in Uganda. Its work is exceedingly difficult. Fear for personal safety and the likelihood of being isolated by society is a daily reality for gay people in Uganda.

Against those odds, David faced constant death threats because of his work and his sexual orientation. In 2010, a Ugandan newspaper published on its front page the pictures and names of known homosexuals in that country with a headline “hang them”. David was one of those in the pictures. Last year, in his own home, David was brutally bludgeoned to death with a hammer.” 

He concluded that part of speech by saying, “We are working with all political parties in the House of Commons of Canada to fight those who restrict basic human rights, from Kampala to St Petersburg.”

We felt small and humbled and also humiliated. The whole House was quite. According to the rules of IPU, it is allowed for one to react - there is a right of response on any matter - and our Speaker did just that. I also want to read her immediate response at that time:

“Mr President, distinguished speakers and heads of delegations, when we came for this Assembly, to which we were invited, we expected respect for our sovereignty, our values and our country. I, therefore, on behalf of the Ugandan delegation and indeed the people of Uganda, protest in the strongest terms the arrogance exhibited by the foreign minister of Canada who spent most of his time attacking Uganda and promoting homosexuality. Mr President, I was not aware that we had been invited to promote homosexuality in this country. 

Coming to the death of David Kato, his death was a crime of passion; he had contracted to pay some money to his lover in order to have sex with him. When he failed to pay this money, he was beaten to death. The case was taken to court, the assailant was jailed and he is now serving his sentence. 

Let me take this opportunity to clarify that as a Speaker of Parliament, it is my responsibility to protect the rights of Members of Parliament hence I cannot deny them the right to move private members Bills. The debate on homosexuality is not a settled matter. This debate began in the USA in 1967 and to date, 39 states in the USA prohibit same sex marriages.

In the Anglican Church, the matter is not yet settled; indeed, in the Anglican Church of the USA some bishops pay allegiance to the Province of the Church of Uganda because they do not believe in homosexuality. 

Mr President, if homosexuality is a value for the people of Canada, they should not seek to force Uganda to embrace it; we are not a colony or protectorate of Canada. The subject under discussion is ‘Citizens identity and linguistic and cultural diversity in a globalised world’, please stick to that. Please, respect our sovereign rights, our cultural values and our social norms.”  This was the immediate response of the Speaker, and I stand to support this motion because I think it is unbecoming of some of these developed countries to impose their interests on others. 

Canada would not even qualify to talk about human rights. The Aborigines, the Eskimos, the Red Indians; where are they? They are the indigenous people of Canada but they are almost second class citizens. Why don’t they talk about them - those who survived because some were killed? Why don’t they talk about human rights in Canada before they look elsewhere? In Australia, the Aborigines are almost wiped out; they were taken over by emigrants, people who immigrated into those areas. 

While supporting this motion, I would like to inform you that immediately our Speaker finished her contributions, she got a standing ovation from three quarters of the delegates in the conference. These were delegations from Asia, Africa and Latin America. They all stood up and they kept on congratulating her up to the time we left Canada.

This also means that what some people call universal human rights may not actually be universal because there other countries which do not like them. The Nigerian press immediately came and told us they wanted to report what the Speaker had said live to the Nigerians because they passed a law and the sentence is life imprisonment in their law.

So, honourable members, I want to take this opportunity, while in support, to strongly urge our Executive branch of Government to stand firm. This kind of belittling of our country happens almost in every conference wherever people travel and sometimes people do not have the courage to rebut. They just sit back, they pack their bags and they comeback.

The Speaker also told them that they did not pay our bills from their own taxpayers’ money - the hotel, food and transportation bills. So, I think Ugandans should be proud of our Speaker that at that level, in the presence of the international community, she was able to make us walk with heads high. Wherever they would see us with the badge of Uganda, we were all respected. They would say, “These are the people; please continue to speak for the world”. So, she did not only speak for the people of Uganda but she spoke for the whole world. 

The challenge now goes to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Please do the needful and deliver this. While I sit down, I want to take this opportunity to lay the full statement of the minister on the Floor of Parliament and also the response of our Speaker so that they become documents of Parliament. The Minister’s statement is dated, 22 October 2012. I also want to lay on the Table the immediate rebuttal by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on the same day. Thank you.

3.24
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I want to support what you did during your visit to Canada. I would like to state, as a Member of Parliament for Rukiga, that we Ugandans support those values that our people do cherish. We were too proud when we heard what you stated, what you stood for when you were in Canada. I happened to have lived in Canada for five years during the exile days and I would have expected that that nation should have had the courtesy to respect the values of those other nations that do not want to be involved in things that harm their society.

Uganda is a nation state; we have many nations in this country and most of them have values which do not support homosexuality –
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sabiiti, let me just introduce some children. Honourable members, in the gallery, we have the pupils and teachers of Kitende Primary School Kyankwanzi. They are represented by hon. Ssemugaba. We also have pupils and teachers of St Kizito in Luweero represented by hon. Byandala.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, Uganda should not be dictated upon by the foreign nations that give us aid. Aid is given to people; it is not given based on the values of a given country. I therefore fully support what you did. We should request all those nations that give us aid that this aid should not be hinged on undermining our values and our culture.

We continue to support you. As head of this Parliament, guide this Parliament. I request that the Bill on this issue should come as soon as possible so that the entire world knows what Uganda believes in. Members should not be hoodwinked or blackmailed. The people of Uganda should talk clearly about this issue so that we conclude it. I thank you very much.

3.26
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You did us proud. Indeed, when we heard that you stood firm and informed the Canadians and others that Uganda is a sovereign state and indeed independent, having celebrated 50 years of independence, we were extremely happy. 

As the Imam of this institution, I bring you greetings from the two Islamic hills, Kibuli and Old Kampala. They are very grateful to you for being firm in as far as fighting homosexuality is concerned. As long as our motto stands as “For God and My Country”, we cannot afford to miss any word. I have never come across any holy book, be it the Bible or the Quran, where that kind of arrangement is allowed. Therefore, we must be very proud and say that Ugandans believe in God. 

My humble appeal goes to the Executive, right from H.E. the President. The last time the President told us that he had been receiving calls from world leaders, including Obama. Whenever our President goes abroad, let him be very clear and firm that as a country, we cannot afford to engage in homosexuality which is not allowed by God. (Member timed out)

3.28
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I want to join in to thank you for standing very firm. I think what you did for humanity is comparable to the works of people like Esther in the Bible who stood to save Israel when they were on the verge of extinction. 

If we talk about homosexuality and you imagine that people are proposing that we do the unnatural thing, which even the dogs in Serere do not do - I have not seen a male dog jump on a fellow male dog in Serere - that brings humanity on the verge of extinction. For you to be our Esther, for standing to defend the word of God, we would like to say that the good Lord will bless you and will keep you and prosper you. 

I would like to bring to you the gratitude of the Christians, the pastors, mainly those whom I have talked to. They urge you to stand firm. They urge the Executive to stand firm on this matter. It is our prayer and theirs that this Bill before Parliament gets into law within a short time. 

Madam Speaker, for that very reason that recruitment is going on in our schools, churches and other social places, we would like to pray that once the law is in place, we will swing into action to contain recruitment and also rehabilitate our children. Again I say, may the Good Lord bless you.

3.29
MR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice in thanking you for standing firm to represent the interests of the people of Uganda. I also want to sympathise with our diplomats out there who take the bashing on our behalf.

Madam Speaker, the Imam of Parliament has spoken; that means the Quran is very clear on homosexuality. If I was prepared, I would have given a quotation from the Bible. It is very clear in the Bible that God is against homosexuality. 

We all know how the riches that these nations are bragging about came about. It was through exploitation, especially of the black race – (Interjections) - and the Red Indians, as the honourable member has said, and in some cases through genocide. 

Madam Speaker, I would also wish for this country to stand firm in supporting communities which have got evidence of plunder and genocide, so that we can put them to task. I come from Bugangaizi and we have evidence on how the British committed genocide against the people of Bunyoro. We have actually wanted to take this to court. So, we need support from Government so that we can go to court the next day. We have all the evidence. When we take them to court, then they will realise that our silence does not mean we are nothing – (Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information that I want to give is that when the so-called developed countries were conquering our countries, especially Bunyoro, it is on record that sexually transmitted diseases were introduced along with colonialism. They looted our natural resources, our cows, and they took the energetic men who would produce. They wanted to exterminate the races that were found in those areas. So, you never know, the practices which are being introduced here might also be geared towards exterminating the Africans. Thank you.

MR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI: Madam Speaker, I propose that Parliament passes a resolution in support of your statement so that by the time we make the law we shall have something to refer to. Thank you.

3.33
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I want to join my colleagues to thank you for the strength and the courage you displayed because it is not easy. Most of us have been travelling, including our colleagues the ministers, but we have been intimidated. So, coming out openly to support Ugandans in calling upon European countries to respect our culture and norms is a very good thing. We, the women of Uganda together with the youth and all the people of Butaleja, want to let you know that we are very proud of you. We shall support you strongly and we shall not allow our ministers to be intimidated. 

I call upon my colleagues to join hands. I call upon our Government to be open; let Government bring a statement here so that Ugandans can know their stand. They should call upon the European countries to respect our culture and give respect to our country. So, I want to inform you that we are totally behind you. The people are proud of you and you should keep up the spirit. 

3.35
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker, first of all, on behalf of the young people of this country and the young people of the East African States and as a Member of the Parliamentary Forum of East Africa I want to say that we are proud of you. First of all, it is important that Government condemns the statement that was made. Two, Government should come out clearly on this matter. We are not going to allow other nations to condemn us in our own country on issues which we know are not going to help our generation. 

My question to that foreign minister of Canada is: was he produced by a man? Second question is: does he have a man in his house for a wife? If not, honestly, I think the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs should do us a favour and bring that Bill quickly. My colleague, hon. Bahati, is suffering. He has a ban from the international community; he cannot move to some parts of this world because of this Bill. 

We are ready to remain in Uganda. Some of us were born here and we did not know we would get an opportunity to move out of this country. Madam Speaker, even if they put a travel ban on you, we are with you. We are together here at home. Do not even bother with those foreign countries. Thank you so much.

3.37
MS ANIFA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and more so, to associate myself with each word and expression given during the response on this issue.

I am hearing colleagues calling on the Speaker to be firm and that we are with her. I have no doubt in my mind that on several occasions, the Speaker has demonstrated that she cannot be intimidated by pressure - (Applause) - no matter what. For me, even if I was there with her, I would have expected that what she did is what she would have done and I thank you so much! On behalf of the women of Uganda and as the chair of the Committee on Equal Opportunities, you have made us women extremely proud. 

I was in Malawi and we met with our fellow women MPs and the Speaker extended his regards and appreciation. What did we come out with? At that time there was a lot of pressure around - we shall present the report here – but the Speaker and women MPs said, “Stand by your Speaker; she is moving in the right direction.” We said, “Yes; that is why we are here.” I therefore wish to say, Madam Speaker, that no matter what, you have shown and demonstrated the values of what is right is right and what is wrong is wrong. (Member timed out)

3.39
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Western): Madam Speaker, I wish to join my colleagues in congratulating you upon the decision you made at this global conference. There is no serious event in history that has occurred without someone taking a decision. If Ugandans were to carry out a referendum today on whether you presented their views or not, I think we would get over 99 per cent saying that you actually presented the views of the majority of Ugandans. We therefore congratulate you in that direction.

Our moral values are being threatened by cultural invasion from the western world. It is incumbent upon us to ensure that we insulate our society from this cultural invasion. What we hear is that agents of homosexuals are pouring in lots of money in our educational institutions. The main objective of education to our children is to train them to think right and act correctly. With the advent of homosexuality in our schools, we feel that the young generation of Ugandans are under threat and therefore, the future generation of this country is threatened. The challenges of the world tomorrow need solutions to be sought today. I have - (Member timed out)

3.40
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to thank you for your boldness and for the response that you gave. We need leadership in these issues; we need leadership in the protection, preservation and advancement of the socio-cultural values and norms of our people. These are the things that distinguish us as Ugandans. These are the things that we are proud of as Ugandans. We are proud of these socio-cultural values because they are the ones that bind us and distinguish us as Ugandans. 

We have just rededicated this nation whose motto and guiding principle is, “For God and My Country”. We just rededicated this nation to God, entrusting the future of the nation to Him. His Excellency the President led the nation in a prayer of repentance and rededication at Namboole on 8 October 2012 on the eve of our Golden Jubilee commemoration. We must walk the talk. It should not just be in words. We are happy when we see our leaders take the lead in these matters. We are proud that our leaders have not been found wanting. 

This Parliament should also pronounce itself on whether homosexuality is a human right because some of these friends of ours in the West allege that homosexuality and these other practices are human rights. (Member timed out)

3.43
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to second the motion and thank you for being the Speaker of the Ninth Parliament. 

What is killing us in most cases is fear; and once fear becomes bigger than our faith, then we shall never realise our dreams. I thank you so much for being a Ugandan in Canada. Yesterday I came to your office to thank you; I did not know this issue would come to the Floor of Parliament. 

As a trained medical doctor, not witchdoctor, I have never seen any man pregnant but I only see them with very big stomachs but there are no babies in them. Even when you operate them there is no child. (Laughter) The prevalence of HIV in Uganda has gone slightly higher and we think, as scientists, that possibly the mode of transmission is not being tackled, and one of them is homosexuality. Homosexuals are hiding in Uganda and they are transmitting the disease. 

Madam Speaker, how do we come to this Parliament and say that we want to promote homosexuality and increase the rate of transmission of HIV in Uganda! I was talking to hon. Kyamadidi today. I told him that I wish the father of the Rt Hon. Speaker produced another girl who has genes similar to yours – (Laughter) - so that we could have tough ladies in this country that can say no to sin. 

When I heard what happened in Canada and that you were the one who had what we call a head-on collision with this Canadian – (Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is that through one man this world was saved, and that was Jesus. Through you, Madam Kadaga, this world will be saved. The time is not tomorrow but the time is now. I thought I would not get an opportunity but let me say it; Mark 8:36 says, “What does it help you to have the whole world and you lose your soul?” The Executive, why don’t you come out boldly? Madam Speaker, I know we shall get a lot from you. God bless you, and God bless Uganda. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am requesting the Rt Hon. Prime Minister now, since we have decided to open war on homosexuality as Ugandans, to also give a strong statement and say where he has ever seen in Kanungu a man marrying a man and a woman marrying a woman. (Member timed out) 

3.47
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to thank you very much and commend you for your boldness to save the world. Homosexuality is immoral. It is bad culture. Thank you very much. I sincerely thank His Excellency too because when he was in London, he told them off. 

Homosexuality is immoral; it is inhuman because even animals do not practise it so why should human beings practise it. The proponents of homosexuality should refrain from it; they should leave such bad culture. According to Genesis 1, sex is for procreation. When God created man and woman He said, “Go and produce, multiply and subdue the world.” Was that foreign minister produced by a man? 

The whole world should know that Sodom and Gomorrah were punished because of such an evil practice. Therefore, Uganda, a God-fearing country, as per our national anthem, we cannot support that. That is why we are behind you. We commend you and thank you for the statement you made in retaliation to the foreign minister’s statement. That showed that Ugandans are God-fearing, we respect our culture and we are a sovereign state and we shall stand by that. We urge the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs not to sit on our report. (Member timed out)

3.49
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Whenever we are paying tribute or celebrating the achievements of the country, backbenchers normally compete with our colleagues on the front bench to contribute. I have seen 16 members from the backbench contribute passionately. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to hear from our bosses at the frontbench, to give us their take on this matter? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask hon. Kenneth Lubogo to speak before we hear from the frontbench.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when the member asked why we should not hear from members of the frontbench, I saw the honourable Minister of State for Youth get up but I was taken aback when the Prime Minister told him to sit down. So, is it in order to stop a member from expressing his opinion in defence of the youth of this country? (Laughter) Is it in order for the Prime Minister to signal to the Minister of State for Youth to sit down?

THE SPEAKER: I will protect the right of the Minister of State for the Youth to speak; no one will intimidate him. I will protect your right to speak. 

3.51
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion but also to welcome you back from Canada. As many Members have said, you spoke as a great leader and it is my prayer that God makes you greater.

I am not a historian but from the little history I know, civilisation started from Africa and from the way things are going, it is very possible that civilisation will end in Africa as others are shunning it. So, we have to fight to protect our values as Africans. Probably, it is because civilisation began from this continent that it is despised by many.

On the issue of human rights, I have always felt that we cannot have a right that is wrong. Any right that is wrong should not be considered a right at all. For this, Africans must stand and say they are not ready to accept the imposition of this cultural colonialism in Africa.

By the Grace of God, I happened to attend the European Parliament in Brussels sometime back. While there, a member rose and talked about the same matter, homosexuality. He actually spoke in the same tone using the same words like those of Minister Baird of Canada. He castigated Ugandans on the issue of Kato. He in fact asked the president there to allow him speak to the Ugandan delegation that had visited the European Parliament. 

In that side meeting, that minister told us how much they were willing to fight to see that the culture of homosexuality is respected by all, including Uganda. We told him off and we said “no”. If anything created problems between us and those people, it was the issue of homosexuality. It was so controversial. We and our colleagues from Sudan told them off, that we will never accept the imposition of homosexuality - (Member timed out) 

3.54
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome you back. I also salute you for making us proud. When this Bill was introduced by my brother, hon. David Bahati, I made some consultations with my constituents in Kitgum District. That was the time we were having campaigns. 

I would like to report that my position and the position of the people of Kitgum and Acholi sub region generally is that life must continue. We have never seen a man in our culture marry a fellow man. That has not happened in Acholi sub region. I imagine, as a mother, seeing my American-height boys coming home holding a hand of a fellow man and saying those are their partners! I will collapse and die.

Having heard from colleagues and the House plus the country at large, it is pertinent that we urgently bring this Bill on the Floor of Parliament and we do justice to it. I am saying this because delaying it means justice is delayed. You will also realise that as we talk, so many of our youth are being lured into doing something that is not African.

Two, I also would like to think that the stand you have shown, Madam Speaker, should be taken up by the entire country and Government in particular. On many occasions, as a country we have been let down because of many borrowing conditions that are given to us, which conditions are foreign, but which we usually accept because we want to receive that money. This should be a signal to the Government that much as we go borrowing, we should endeavour to be mindful of our African culture. Preserve our norms and integrity as Africans; we rather die poor but preserve our culture and integrity.

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. He has been talking about this issue internally – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi but before he comes, let me introduce pupils and teachers of Namukoge Primary School. I do not know whether they are here. Oh! Yes, Bana tusangayire! They are represented by hon. Munaaba and hon. Kenneth Lubogo. You are welcome. Please stand up, children. (Applause) We also have pupils and teachers of Kabagaya Primary School. They are represented by hon. Semugaba and hon. Nankabirwa. You are also welcome. (Applause) 

3.57
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, Sir – (Interjections) –Because of excitement I was tempted to speak in a way that is unusual. Otherwise, I would like to say that we are very grateful to you, Madam Rebecca Kadaga Alitwala. 

When I first heard that news aired by CBS Radio, I nearly went mad. I could not believe that you could openly confront a fact of importance to the African people before the people who have got the money. You rejected all the money they have and preferred to speak the Ugandan tone. Thank you very much!

The promotion of homosexuality is a curse to the existence of mankind and is also environmentally unfriendly. (Laughter) What I mean here is that man was born and he bred man and woman, and man and woman extended their tentacles to produce the present generation. So, anybody who endeavours to carry out machinations that kill the explosion of the breeding of mankind is a danger to mankind.

You have given a very big challenge, Madam Speaker, which will remain in the history of this country. You are the third in the hierarchy of power in Uganda. I have heard someone call upon ministers to say something about what we are talking about. Your challenge should go higher. After your statement, we expect the Chief Justice to say something about this important subject; then we expect the Vice-President to say something about this important point; and lastly, we expect H.E. the President to come out in a pronounced tone about what you have done in Canada. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I do not see any reason as to why our Bill does not come to the forefront so that we can start debating it and pass it. Let us remain poor but principled. Let their money go and hang! We must protect our being, our image, our morals and the image of Uganda. God bless Uganda. God bless the Rt Hon. Kadaga. (Applause)  

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Mr Ronald Kibuule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You know that glory has no fixed price but you brought glory to Uganda. Thank you. The glory that Uganda enjoys today is a clear manifestation that we have moved. The young people of Uganda were going to be denied a chance to even have meaningful families. It was a wise move that the Speaker of Parliament, who happens to be a woman, spoke for the voiceless. In that conference, I would not have assumed that if the men gave the version that you gave, they would be taken seriously. It was a clear indication that the women of Uganda still want the services of their men. (Applause) However, in money terms, this is dirty money that I would not - (Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for having accepted that I give him this information. What I would like the House to know is that all of us here, both men and women, need each other. That is why we are calling for the Bill. It should have actually been brought yesterday. 

You should be proud of your mothers because if your fathers had decided to take on other men, you would not have been born. You are proud of having your wives for had they chosen to take on other women, their sisters, you would not be having them as wives. So, men need women and that is why most of them are saying the Bill should come just like us, the women, want the men. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I would like to affirm that in order for generations to continue - being a mother of girls and a Nalongo who is expecting another pair of twins - I should say that homosexuality is a curse to humanity.  We should fight it as much as possible. That is the information I want to pass over to this House and I would like to thank you, colleague, for having accepted that men and women need each other. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. In the Holy Bible, if you read the story of Deborah in the book of Judges, when Moses died as he was leading the Israelites to the Promised Land Joshua took over but also subsequently died. God then spoke to the lady prophetess, Deborah, and instructed her to pick a gentleman called Barak. Barak, out of fear, was hesitant and so it was Deborah who took over that mantle and led the Israelites. 

I would like to quote something about Deborah: “An exceptional servant. Deborah stood for courage in time of fear. She stood for Godly wisdom in a time of human reasoning, when ‘every man did what was right in his own eyes’. She stood for decency and order in a chaotic time of sexual perversity and idolatry. Deborah was a leader who was an exception to the rule in her time.” Madam Kadaga is our Deborah and that is why she spoke. May God bless her! Thank you. (Applause)

MR KIBUULE: Thank you, colleagues, for the information that you have given me. Nalongo, it is true we need each other. I have to stand as youth minister to assure this country that we, the young people, are energetic and we need to perform our duties and add to the population of Uganda by doing the needful. (Applause) I thank you.  

4.06
MAJ.GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join everyone who has welcomed you back and to congratulate you very strongly for making us proud when you were in Canada. (Applause) I had never read such an article where your story was properly covered like that. I enjoyed every word that I read quoting you when you made a statement on behalf of all Ugandans in the face of provocation of the highest order.
 
I associate myself with everyone who has given the background to this issue of homosexuality but I would like to concentrate on one thing, which you also talked about, poverty and donor support. I think we should be united in fighting poverty because that statement that was made in your presence about Uganda was because they think we are poor and cannot afford to stand up and defend our rights and our culture. That is why it is important as a country that in whatever we do, including in democracy, we do not lose sight of the important point of developing Uganda, so that we can be economically independent. Unless we are economically independent, we shall remain a mat to be trampled upon. That is why everyone in Government and outside Government must do their bit. If it is democracy, let us practice it properly - on principle - nationally and even internally within the party. (Applause)  

If it is in the interest of Ugandans and is to enhance development, we should debate everything. There is nothing we cannot talk about – (Interjection) - including term limits, of course; why not?  (Applause)  The point I am making is that we must really be united to fight poverty and make Uganda independent. It is only then that we shall be strong and scare off other people from abusing us and even challenging our sovereignty before an important person like our Rt Hon. Speaker. Thank you very much for standing firm. Thank you very much. (Applause)  

4.10
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Allow me once again to congratulate you and also join fellow Members of Parliament in congratulating you for standing firm, restating the position of our country and defending our sovereignty.

Let me, for purposes of the record, say one or two things. One, I personally definitely have no sympathies nor condone homosexuality. Madam Speaker, you may recall that we have also had discussions on this matter and indeed, we have also had discussions with a number of people including the ministers responsible and the mover of the Bill, hon. Bahati.

Maybe for purposes of also correcting the record, I would like to say that it is true this Bill came in the last Parliament and it is also true that our committee actually made a report, but we did not have time to present that report on the Floor of Parliament. This Bill, like any other Bill, was caught up by the processes we had in the course of last year. 

Madam Speaker, you may recall that we also had discussions, I think about one or two months ago, when you were also expressing your concern not only on this Bill but also on the Marriage and Divorce Bill. At that time I pointed out, and I want to reaffirm, that our priority as a committee has been to get out the commercial Bills that are affecting trade in the East African Community. That process is coming to an end.

I want to assure this House that yes, we already have a draft report and on conclusion of these Bills, which we are about to finish, the said Bill, the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, will be considered. It will be tabled before this House before we break off in December.

4.13
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join others in welcoming, congratulating and thanking you. My concern is that we are congratulating you in happiness but my question again is: how much are we willing and able to support you in action? I have got one small experience to share with the House.

A few months ago, I went to one of the universities in the city -  some MPs had been invited. I honoured the invitation and I found a big seminar with many whites, but the leader of the team was a black and a Ugandan. I asked that young man, “show me your man friend here whom you do it with and then you convert our children?” These people had a sumptuous lunch so that they could sit in and listen. My challenge was, you young man who is Ugandan, show me or tell me your man friend because I would expect you to be patting your man friend so that you tell the people what you are going to do and how you do it, but the man had no friend around. He admitted publicly that he was merely an agent of others on pay.

So, we should carry the burden. The way we support you is the same way we should carry it and be frank with our people. These things happen in our schools, in our universities and in some of our churches and they are residents in our constituencies. So my concern is: how much are we able to support the Speaker by reciprocating what we say with what we do? We should fight this habit right from the ground up to the sky. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise not to debate the merits or demerits of the Bill because when the Bill comes and the report of the committee comes, we will do that. 

I rise to add my voice to others before me to state very clearly on behalf of Government that Madam Speaker, you represented Uganda effectively in Canada. (Applause) You represented our right to do what we want to do as a country. That is what sovereignty means. Sovereignty means that we are under no one outside our control and outside the territory of Uganda. We are not under the control of anyone outside the territory of Uganda. Whether we make mistakes or not, they are our mistakes and we have a right to make mistakes, no doubt about it. So you are absolutely right.

Secondly, we have made this point very clearly many times before that we abide by our Constitution. The Constitution of Uganda is the basic law that governs our conduct of public affairs in Uganda. Our Constitution guarantees the rights of backbenchers to bring private members Bills; all hon. Bahati did was exercise that right and no one has a right to take it away from him. Therefore, when you spoke, you did not speak only for those who support the Bill but you spoke even for those who may oppose the Bill because everyone in Uganda who is a Member of Parliament has a right to come to Parliament and present a private members’ Bill. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker, when you had just made the statement, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, hon. Okello Oryem, came out to speak in the same way the Prime Minister is speaking; he is not being very clear as to what the government position is. In as far as Uganda is concerned, there is a law but you do not seem to be very clear. Are you with us or with them? You need to come out very clearly. (Laughter) Thank you. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member of Parliament, hon. Paul Mwiru, is not very old in this House. I am talking about Uganda as a whole including you; so I am with you definitely.

The simple point I am making and wish to reiterate is that hon. Bahati had the right to present the Bill under our constitutional provisions as a private members Bill and this House has the right to debate it. No one in the whole world has the right to stop us.

Therefore, I want to inform this House, particularly hon. Mwiru, that I actually rang you, Madam Speaker, to express my full support for what you did in Canada. (Applause) I want him to know that I rang the Speaker out of happiness and gratitude for what she did because she did the right thing in defending Uganda as a leader of Uganda when Uganda came under attack in Canada- (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I have been obliged to seek further clarification when I heard the Prime Minister meandering on a matter of great importance. While in Canada, the Speaker spoke about very many things. Instead of picking a point of relevance to us, in terms of support, you are saying, “I go by what she said; I stand by what she said.”  What are you talking about? (Laughter) Since our law is very clear and you are a very important person in terms of law, why don’t you openly come out to say that you equally share the view of the Speaker that homosexuality must be condemned in the strongest terms.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I am sorry my honourable colleague, Ken-Lukyamuzi, did not understand me but this is not the first time. Nonetheless, I am ready to help him as I have always done in the last 40 years. (Laughter)

I am talking about the defence of Uganda’s sovereignty, the defence of the rights of hon. David Bahati and the rights of every Member of Parliament to raise a private members’ Bill. I am, therefore, defending the right of hon. Bahati to present the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. That is what we are talking about, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, and that is what I am supporting.

Madam Speaker, as I said, I did ring you and I expressed my support for what you did because that was the right thing to do. We all obviously should stand up very clearly to defend the sovereignty of this country to make its own decisions. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that the motion as moved be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

4.23
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. I also wish to express my gratitude to you for making this nation and the world proud. We are behind you.

When you were away on Government duty, last week we had a fatal accident along Mubende-Fort Portal Road, which claimed 20 lives. The accident came as a result of over speeding. The research I have so far done shows that Uganda - this was from a report of the World Health Organisation – is now ranked 19th as far as road accidents are concerned, at a rate of 34.71 per 100,000 of the population.

As we talk now, 400 children die in this country as a result of road accidents. To make things worse, Madam Speaker, this comes as a result of the boda boda riders making wrong decisions. At the same time, most of the driving permits are wrongly or improperly issued. When this accident happened, it was very emotional – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: I will add you half a minute. What is your request?

MR SSEMMULI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My request to the Minister of Works and Transport is that he should at least come up with a statement because accidents are apparently becoming a normal occurrence. There have been very many accidents on Masaka Road and just last month we had another one in Kayunga. 

THE SPEAKER: Do we have the transport minister here? Perhaps the Chief Whip will inform him that there is concern about numerous accidents and he should come here and make a statement.

4.26
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, we are always proud of you and thank you for the good work done. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On 17th October, Amuru District Local Government received a letter from the Government of South Sudan, which was written by the head chief of Nimule, claiming that one of the villages in Amuru, Ilego, belongs to them. He said that they would like to re-draw the boundary. That is the same village where the Uganda Government is setting up a border market. So they have stopped the construction from continuing in that market. Moreover, all the people who had bought land in the same place were stopped from going on with construction. As we speak now, soldiers from South Sudan are patrolling deep inside Uganda’s territory and are scaring the citizens who are living there. Over 10,000 people are affected and some of them have started to flee. 

My prayer is that our Government should take serious action; let the 	Minister of Foreign Affairs and other stakeholders take this seriously. Should action be delayed, I think bloodshed will occur because the local community is organising to face the South Sudanese. We do not want war because we prefer co-existence as border people. I pray that this august House takes serious action.

Finally, I think the issue of land in Amuru District is reaching extreme levels. Most of our fertile land is being claimed by very many agents, causing us a lot of pressure. Parliament should help us. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope the Minister of Lands and the Minister of Defence have heard the fears of the Amuru people.

4.29
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT: (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Olanya for raising this matter. It is true we have been having serious international boundary issues with our brothers and sisters from South Sudan. We are presently preparing for bilateral discussions. One of the most urgent issues that we shall be discussing is the boundary issues between the Republic of South Sudan and Uganda. We shall keep you updated on the progress we shall be making.

Regarding the land issues in Amuru; yes, there have been many land issues in Amuru. Under the chairmanship of Ministry Of Local Government, we shall be coming to Amuru so that we can be in a position to attend to the issues within Amuru District and those concerning your neighbours. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There was another matter from hon. Okupa and then we shall invite hon. Nakabale. There are some children who are leaving. I do not know where they are from but you are welcome.

4.30
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I bring to the attention of this House an issue of national importance regarding the running of public affairs. It is about two years since the term of office of the Managing Director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation came to an end and one gentleman has been acting, that is, Mr Gisagara. 

The board of National Water and Sewerage Corporation got KPMG to recruit a replacement but unfortunately, KPMG withdrew because there was pressure on them after they had done interviews and they fronted a candidate who had not passed the interview. After the interviews were conducted, the matter was referred to public service and then later on, the second interviews and the third were conducted by the board. Mr Gisagara -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I have just found out that these children are from Wakiso and they are represented by hon. Sseninde and hon. Ssebunya. They are from St Theresa Littleway Preparatory School. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, Mr Alex Gisagara was the best candidate after the interviews were conducted and after averaging all the marks for the interviews that were done. Unfortunately, since 2nd August when the board forwarded the name of Mr Gisagara to the minister then for appointment, up to date no action has taken place. 

People are behind the scenes trying to manoeuvre, typical of what happened last time in the National Forestry Authority. There is a lot of manipulation going on. They have even written to the President saying they need security vetting of Gisagara who has worked with National Water and Sewerage Corporation for almost 30 years. We do not know whether he has become a terrorist now after working with National Water and Sewerage Corporation for 30 years. 

The board, on 2 August 2012, after this resolution where they approved and forwarded the name of Gisagara, wrote to the minister forwarding the name for approval. The letter to the minister is here, showing all the marks. Alex Gisagara got 69.31; Dr Silver Mugisha, 69.16; Mr Patrick Byabakama Kaberenge 61.76. This was forwarded to the minister but up to date, nothing has been done. 

I know the ministers have changed. So now I think Prof. Kamuntu should go ahead and direct the board to issue an appointment letter. Otherwise, we are going to see Ugandans being manipulated, people who have served with dignity being maliced because of some people who are interested. I got to know that originally they had preferred somebody called Kyobe but when KPMG pulled out and said they could not be forced, they are now pushing for the second person here, Silver Mugisha, to take the position and yet there is a person who has passed, who has acted, who has worked. So, I think the Minister of Water and Environment should go ahead and appoint him. 

The other unfortunate part also is that the board’s term has expired. If they appoint a new board, they can go ahead and manipulate and change the decision of the previous board’s resolutions and this Ugandan will be maliciously edged out. So, I beg, Madam Speaker, that you direct the minister to go ahead and issue an appointment letter because these are the facts about that gentleman called Gisagara. I want to declare interest. I am neither an in-law, a brother or related to him but I am a concerned Member of Parliament who feels that injustice to one is injustice to everyone. I think people must be treated fairly.

Madam Speaker, I want to lay this resolution of the board forwarding Mr Gisagara’s name to the minister for appointment on the Table. It is dated 2 August 2012. Also the second letter to the minister by the chair - (Interjection) - I am just laying this on the Table then I will take information. This is a letter addressed to the minister, reference ADM 02, 2 August 2012, and signed by Christine Nandyose Kasirye (Mrs), chairperson of the Board of Directors, National Water and Sewerage Corporation. I want to lay these documents on the Table. Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, what is being presented here is very important and Parliament should seriously take note of this information. We have corporations, commissions and bodies that are mandated to do a specific job particularly in the field of appointments - Public Service Commission, Education Service Commission and others. We have noted with great concern that whenever many interviews are done and people pass, there is much interference under the cover of security. 

I am ready to present on the Floor of Parliament a number of anomalies ranging from the heads, the permanent secretaries, down, where the state has interfered and then other people are appointed. A person who has scored lowest is upgraded and he takes charge and this has caused a problem. So, what my colleague is putting across is very important. Parliament should take keen interest in this so that Ugandans take up the right positions and serve the country without outside interference to elevate those who are not capable to run the affairs of this state. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.38
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Okupa for raising this matter. As part of the Committee on National Economy, immediately after the swearing-in of this Parliament I went to the first meeting of the Committee on Natural Resources to raise this very concern. In absence of a substantive ED and now that the board’s term has expired, we have projects which Government, through approval of Parliament, funded in National Water and Sewerage Corporation that are affected. Without the board and management, they are limited in what they can handle. 

What moved me last time was that I had got evidence that land supposed to be used for the Kampala Sanitation Project - below the former mayor Ssebbagala’s place - had been given by Uganda Land Commission to an Indian  “investor”. The very board members who were trying to follow up this land are now no longer in the picture. 

The other project, like the Lubigi project, which is under Kampala WATSAN, has a problem. The new source at Katosi where we visited in the last Parliament, which is supposed to be used, has been completely deforested and yet the intention of using it was to find a catchment area - There are big problems. Without discussing the names of Mugisa, Gisagara, the corporation is at risk because the right people supposed to make the right decisions are not there. 

I really think, Madam Speaker, that Government should have taken this decision yesterday. We do not want to have a repeat of NFA. Those of us who have been to the natural resources committee know what happened in NFA. The new management is just trying to start from a big crisis. Let something be done immediately so that National Water and Sewerage Corporation can at least continue running in a professional manner. Right now, there seems to be a lot of politicking and there is a lot of risk if we do not act yesterday. Thank you.

4.41
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Okupa for raising this matter. We send our children to school in the hope that in future they can compete and be employed on merit. I hate to live in a country where I cannot access an opportunity based on merit. 

Sometime back, an honourable member raised a similar matter under National Forestry Authority, which falls under the same ministry, and I think the matter was referred to the committee. I am not quite sure whether the committee conclusively handled this matter. National Water and Sewerage Corporation also falls under the same ministry. Do we have problem with the minister concerned with this sector or not? Maybe before we conclude this matter, can the minister tell us what exactly the problem is? Is she saying she has no capacity to act on recommendations of the boards? 

As you give guidance, Madam Speaker, I just wanted to hear from the relevant minister or the Prime Minister because these are very serious issues which the Executive should not sweep under the carpet. All Ugandans are watching and they would want to compete on merit and fairly access some of these jobs. That is the concern I just wanted to raise.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that we shall ask our Committee on Commissions and Statutory Authorities to take an interest in this matter. However, we also want to know from the government what is happening. Water is an essential service for the population. What is happening in the bodies under this ministry? Lack of decision-making is really making us ineffective. You can let us know when you bring an answer about the failure to act on the resolutions of the board.

4.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of Water, that is, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu, had told me that there are a few problems in office, which he was seeking to share with me relating to a matter arising out of a report he found there. Therefore, I want to urge this House to give him that time. Let him sort out whatever matters there are and then the necessary action will be taken and this House will be duly informed. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: I know, as the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy has stated, that there are so many issues but they are as a result of non-existence of the board and substantive executive director. This is a very simple thing. The board had done its work, it had written to the minister for his approval of the managing director; what is complicated there?

Secondly, appoint the board. The other issues, as stated by the chairperson of national economy, will be sorted out by these people. Without them, the acting MD and management cannot bring the laws here and cannot go ahead to discuss with the World Bank. So, I think let us do the first things first; have the MD substantially appointed and then the board and the rest can be sorted out.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, we appreciate that the minister is new and maybe settling down, but I hope this will not be an occasion when a qualified Ugandan is edged out under flimsy security reasons as has happened in other cases. We hope that the right person will be given the job according to merit. So, we hope you will give us an answer. We will expect an answer from the Prime Minister next week. Now I would like hon. Mwiru to table that audit report.

4.46
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report on a special investigation on the allegations of financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. The report is dated 19 October 2012 by the Auditor-General of the Republic of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts to expeditiously handle and report back to this House.

PETITION

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nakabale is accompanied by the youth of central region whom he represents. You are welcome, the youth of central region. (Applause)

4.48
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure. I have a petition from the youth of central region. The subject matter of this petition is the hurdles to access the Youth Venture Capital Fund and the resultant few employment opportunities created and the strikes in the country. 

The youth fund, otherwise known as the Youth Venture Capital Fund, has been a major subject of debate since its inception. There are four components of the youth fund:
1. 	Qualification for the money; 
2. 	Taking the money by qualified borrowers;
3. 	Using the money as per the aims and objectives of the borrowers;
4. 	Paying back the loan. 

Some of the bottlenecks arose from these components. The young people are saying, whatever the other interventions of government, the youth fund is getting us started on interventions and measures of solving the unemployment problem and poverty among the young people.

However, Government should have widened the scope of engagement as a change of strategy to include established business people. What our youth need now is not only money but opportunity to work, and this opportunity can be found in partnership with established members of the private sector; say in salons, agri-business, small cottage industries, restaurants, IT, transport, education, entertainment etc. 

The point is not to keep the youth permanently employed by these selected private people but to keep them there for a brief  period of time to enable them run schemes of business, adopt the right work ethics and attitude, get to see how things are done by fully getting involved, and then move on to open up their own businesses with Government support. This is friendlier to a number of youth other than channelling money only through commercial banks, given the ordeal it would take for the youth to get the money from the bank, if the current restrictions are anything to go by.

The humble petitioners pray to this Parliament to resolve as follows:

1. 	Government sets aside actual funds at the Treasury from where they will channel money directly to the participating banks without depending on the goodwill of banks.

2. 	Government signs partnerships with established business people to create for the youth employment opportunities. These young people have realised that the youth on their own, despite availability of money, do not have the capacity and skills to initiate businesses. So they pray that you bring on board small business people with a proven record of success and task them to employ a given number of youth in accordance with the money allocated.

3. 	A committee or council of eminent youth follow up on the entire project and report quarterly to the legal authorities of the project from time to time.

4. 	Parliament notes and supports the 23 resolutions made at a joint meeting of the private sector and the youth at Protea Hotel Kampala, organised by hon. Nakabale Patrick, on the 10 February 2012 where also a gateway was opened up for the youth open day, which  happened on the 15th, 16th and 17th March 2012 at Nakivubo Stadium.

5. 	Any administrative relief deemed necessary to maintain order, clear monitoring and evaluation such that it is done.”

Your humble petitioners have dully signed. I beg to lay on the Table the petition of the young people of central region. 

Madam Speaker, I also wish to lay on the Table the resolutions of the private sector and the young people. However, I request for a few minutes to go through them quickly – 

THE SPEAKER: Just lay them on the Table. 

MR NAKABALE: I beg to lay on the Table the resolutions of participants at the CA business Dinner held at Protea Hotel Kampala on 10 February 2012. It is dully signed by the following: as chief witness, Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Rebecca Kadaga; the Executive Director of Private Sector Foundation, Mr Gideon Bagadawa; the National Chairperson of Youth Council, Samuel Kavuma; and the coordinator. I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on the Table the list of companies that attended that sitting. There were 91 private sector led companies from Uganda and there were also representatives from Government, including from Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Information and Communications Technology, Ministry of Defence, URA and Uganda Police. Thank you very much. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you know, the Youth Venture Fund has become a recurrent headache to the country. So I direct that one of those sets of documents be given to the Prime Minister because the youth are asking them to consider their proposals. I also direct another set be given to the Ministry of Finance. I also direct one to be given to the Ministry of Trade and another to our Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. We want an expeditious answer because the youth have been waiting for more than one financial year for this money. I think we shall soon fail to explain why they have not yet received that money. Thank you very much. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance particularly on the matters on the Order Paper. You might be aware that when we were sent on recess, we had an important matter on the Floor. We had the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Bill and as a matter of fact, we had covered one clause on the commencement and then Parliament was sent on recess. Looking at the Order Paper, since yesterday we were on item No.8 and even today we are on item No.8, well aware that there is a lot of business in between. 

This matter was partly covered and we had reached the committee stage. Now you can see it is being put aside. I thought that the reconvening of Parliament was to handle that matter and get it out of the way before we proceed on equally important issues of national importance. How are we going to go about this, bearing in mind that the debate that ensued at the second reading and all this with time will elapse? The issues that were captured then get lost along the way. We had a retreat, harmonised our positions and now when we go this way, the entire process will still end in futility. That is why I am seeking your guidance on when we can have this matter prioritised and disposed of accordingly as we proceed to other business.

THE SPEAKER: It will be disposed of today. It is on the Order Paper. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME 
AS PER RULE 34 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this rule has been asleep in the text of our Rules of Procedure but members felt that it was time we started invoking it. However, it would appear that we have not yet formulated the details on how it will be handled. In some parliaments, I think members just get up and ask questions for 30 minutes while in other parliaments I understand they notify the Prime Minister about the areas that they want to talk about so that he can come when he is ready. So, I do not know whether the Prime Minister is ready to take some shots. (Laughter)

5.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, as you know, I always answer questions here but you are absolutely right; I think it will serve this House and this country best if we can expand our rule so that we give it specifics. 

In the UK, the rule is that any member of the House asks what they call “an open question”, which is a simple question, for instance, “What is your schedule for this week?” Once he answers it, then that opens the opportunity for supplementary questions which could touch on obviously many interesting issues that are current. However, it is also the case in the UK that issues, which especially the Opposition wants to raise with the Prime Minister, are indicated so that the Prime Minister can, as you correctly stated, get the answers and then the Leader of the Opposition has a right to reply. Our rule is also very clear on that, but this is also the practice in Britain. 

This is a very short time – It is 30 minutes in the House of Commons but here we say not more than 45 minutes. So, if we want to use it optimally, I think I agree that maybe we should meet and see whether we can have some kind of regulatory framework that defines it in a greater form than what it is in the general rule that we have now.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Honourable members, I now direct the Clerk to formulate additional guidelines that will guide item 4 and 5 so that when we commence, both the Executive and Members are aware about the parameters of how they will operate.  

MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, in addition to the guidelines for the Prime Ministers question time, I seek more guidance even about the ministers’ questions. One time I wanted to ask a question concerning security matters in the constituency I represent and I took the question to your office but it has never appeared. Later on, I was told that the correct procedure was that I should have taken the question to the Clerk to Parliament. So, I think even for the questions to the ministers, we need to get proper guidance and procedures to follow if we want questions to be on the Order Paper. To which office should they be taken? 

In fact, somebody had told me that when you have a question, you should take it to the legal counsel so that they can formulate it in a legal manner or something like that. I thought that all of that was a bit very bureaucratic. If I have a simple question about security, does it need to be legally formulated by the legal counsels? Madam Speaker, that is the guidance that I seek.

THE SPEAKER: I just want to assure you that when the questions come to the Speaker, the Speaker directs the Clerk but you would be surprised to find that a member can ask a question with a preamble of two pages – one question. They start with a preamble and then finally the question comes at the end. So, the question has to be edited before it is sent to the ministry for response. But ideally, they should answer within two weeks. So there is no vacuum in the manner in which questions are handled. You send them to my office, they will be handled.  

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, these issues were raised by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday and they are important issues that touch on the lives of our people. Issue No. 1, for example, is about our armed forces entering Congo and the fear in the neighbouring districts at the moment. We have received many delegations from the elders of the area asking us what is happening. There is fear of impending war and catastrophe in that area. If you look at what has appeared in our newspapers, the President of a country has stated that our country is directly involved. 

Madam Speaker, this is a matter of great importance for which I think we can use our Rules of Procedure, maybe 50 or 60 or any other rule, so that the Prime Minister explains what is happening here. We are under pressure from our population. So, this really is a matter that we thought the Prime Minister, who was a minister of defence and is now the Leader of Government Business, should be equipped to inform this country about. He should inform us about what is happening around our region because we are under pressure from our people.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, on the Order Paper of today, I see that the next item No. 5 is the response by the Leader Government Business on matters of national importance raised by the Leader of the Opposition. I think that is one of the items.

MR SSEBAGALA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Item No. 4 is question time to the Prime Minister and I was getting ready for question time. There are some issues that need urgent answers, for instance, Umeme is selling shares right now and yet we know that there is a probe committee investigating the energy sector and before the report comes out, Umeme has fronted shares. 

We would like to know whether the Government owns what Umeme is doing. We cannot tell our constituents to come and buy shares before we know this. They are asking us whether they should go and buy shares and yet we know that 100 per cent of the assets of Umeme are Government owned and Umeme was only privatised in terms of business. 

So, those simple questions need to be clarified. I do not think, Madam Speaker, that as leaders we can stand out and tell our constituents, “Please, go and buy shares” and yet at the same time our committee is probing the energy sector and I think Umeme has the biggest portion. 

The Minister for Energy and the Prime Minister are here; we are receiving various complaints that Umeme is selling shares. What kind of shares? They have given us some literature but that is not enough to convince Ugandans that what we are buying is going to be safe-guarded by Government. We have never received any official statement from the government or the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate what you are saying but it is for those very reasons that I said item No.4 must be refined further. Would the Prime Minister, for example, answer in 12 hours, in 24 hours or in 36 hours? What is the timeframe we would give him? How quickly should he bring an answer? These are the things we want to refine. 

He has heard the question and we shall give him time. However, we still need to agree; do you first give him the question so that he comes with an answer or you surprise him? (Laughter) This part of the rules has not been put into practice before. That is why I am saying, can we refine the methodology so that we are all on the same level.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if you are to borrow from the House of Commons, I think there are those questions which are on-spot and there are questions which the Prime Minister is given time to answer. I think we could have it that way. There are those questions which you can bring to the Prime Minister, like in the House of Commons, and you just ambush the Prime Minister and ask and then there are those which you write and give the Prime Minister time. We can have them in two forms. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is what we need to refine in our modalities and decide on. Is it on security which we must ask without notice? Is it the economy which requires notice? We need to refine. We cannot just operate ad hoc. Therefore, let us agree. Clerk, I have instructed you to do the refinement on Prime Minister’s question time so that we all agree and all members are informed on how to proceed.

RESPONSE BY THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS ON MATTERS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE RAISED BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION DURING THE SITTING OF 30TH OCTOBER 2012

5.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, these issues were raised yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition as the sitting was about to end. They were brought to my attention today. For most of them I need answers from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and I have asked the minister to prepare those answers. We shall answer them as soon as possible; if you want, we can answer them even tomorrow.

On the question of DRC and the accusations against Uganda on DRC, it is true that there was a committee of experts set up by the United Nations, which committee has issued a report. The Government of Uganda has responded to this report. We have taken a certain position. We have sent a delegation led by the hon. Dr Rugunda who is in New York today. He should have presented this position to – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, earlier on after your communication we were debating the issue where Uganda came under attack and hon. Reagan Okumu had a statement that you presented. This is also an attack on Uganda because the UN report says that we were involved. As we travel, we are being attacked by people who come from that country, saying that we have invaded their country. 

I think it would have been procedurally right for the Prime Minister to go and bring a categorical statement to read to the country about the position of Uganda because we are being attacked. I thought you had started well, that you were going to bring a statement. I think it would be right to put it in a statement such that we receive it from you other than us having it presented casually here. I would beg that the Prime Minister does it in a formal way because it is the country under attack.

THE SPEAKER: Let him explain what he is going to do.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am glad my honourable colleague from Kasilo has listened. I was saying that we have sent a delegation to New York led by Dr Rugunda. He is due to make a presentation to the Secretary-General of the UN, to the United Nations Security Council, on the position of Uganda on this. We have sent delegations. We have, as you all know, the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region, which is chaired by the President. These positions reflect the position of Government on those accusations. 

I seek the indulgence of this House, Madam Speaker, to give us a day so that these people do not hear of our position through the public media but directly. It is important for diplomacy, it is important for effectiveness of our message that they receive this message. At that time, we will deliver that message to Parliament, which means it would have become public. We certainly have a position on this and we are ready to make a presentation. 

I would have done it now had it not been for these heavy rains in America, Hurricane Sandy. As you know, New York was shut down yesterday and it is still shut today. I am happy to say that Rugunda and his delegation are still alive. They will be able to present this, hopefully today or tomorrow and then by tomorrow afternoon we should be in a position to make this presentation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us have that statement tomorrow. Members need to be armed to respond because they are    confronted with issues they cannot answer. It is important for Members to know what to say on those issues. So, we will have it tomorrow. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW KUWAIT DINARS 3.5 MILLION ($11.9 MILLION) FROM THE KUWAIT FUND FOR ARAB ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

5.11
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present the report on the request by Government to borrow Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million, equivalent to US$ 11.9 million, from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development for financing the reconstruction and equipping of four technical institutes in the Technical, Vocational Education and Training Programme. I request that the report is circulated together with the brief to Parliament and the responses from the ministry for Members to be able to follow.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a committee report on the request by Government to borrow the Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million, which is the equivalent of US$ 11.9 million, from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development for four technical institutes in the Technical, Vocational Education Training Programme. It was brought to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance before the House referred it to the committee. The committee has considered and scrutinised the request and I now beg to report.

The committee held meetings with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education and Sports officials. It also held meetings with the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Education and Sports. We further studied and made reference to the following documents: 
•	The project appraisal documents. 
•	The minister’s brief on the loan request, which copies should be with you. 
•	A funding proposal to secure funding from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development; and 
•	The draft loan financing agreement.

We also undertook field visits to selected BTVET institutions in the districts of Mbarara, Ntungamo, Bushenyi, Oyam, Alebtong, Tororo, Iganga and Busia to assess the state of the BTVET service delivery and the functionality of the BTVET systems in these districts.

Madam Speaker, you will realise that this report has got many scratches. We have been conditioned to have Members sign on all the pages. We had a-not-so-familiar job yesterday because this rule had not been put to practice. Anyway, I hope that we shall cope with the rule. I hope nobody will complain about the untidiness of the report because of the scratches; that is how it was supposed to be done.

Background 
Investments in human capital are central to microeconomic performance and long-term growth. At micro-economic level, human capital in form of observable skills associated with investments in education and training raises productivity, wages and employability. It also largely works through the effect of human capital on productivity.

The education sector –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you do not need to read the background; members can read that.

MR MUKITALE: So, I will summarise. Thank you so much. Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

When you move to the last paragraph on page 2, we say that Uganda’s school age population of 4 to 18 is expected to grow at a rate of 3.4 per cent. We also give figures on the number of children reaching school age, which is expected to increase to 37 per cent beyond the current enrolment. If you go through that paragraph, you will realise that we have a real demand for BTVET education to vocationalize our education and provide skills in Uganda. That is basically what is in that paragraph.

On 4.0, we talk about the project objectives. The overall objective of the proposed project is to contribute to the expansion of equitable access and quality at post-primary education and training as part of the Universal Post Primary Education and Training (UPPET). The specific objective of this project is to improve access to quality education in the selected districts.

The next paragraph, 4.1, is about the project rationale and I think Members can read through. I hope queries will not emerge from that. At the bottom of page, we note that the prevalence of poverty exacerbated by high illiteracy rates and lack of skills among the rural population clearly justifies the need for a rapid expansion of Technical, Vocational Education and Training (TVET). 

In Uganda, the currently available skills and training opportunities for primary and early secondary leavers meet only about 40 per cent of the demand. So, there is a 60 per cent deficit. Government has come up with a deliberate effort to promote the quality of TVET and appropriate skills to enhance capacity to create jobs and increase productivity at household and local community levels.

Section 4.2 is about the project scope. On this, I would like to state that four post senior 4 technical institutes in four districts, selected countrywide on a regional basis, will be rehabilitated, expanded and equipped. The selection criteria will take into account the following: 
•	Regional balancing, that is, eastern, central, northern and western; 
•	Availability of public land with title deeds; 
•	Wide catchment areas, that is, the districts should have many secondary schools that will feed the proposed technical institutes with senior 4 leavers.

Sub section 2 of the project scope elaborates the outlined criteria. In here, we state that the selected institutions are:  
•	Kalongo in Pader District in the North.
•	Tororo Technical Institute in the East. 
•	Kibatsi in western Uganda; 
•	Ahmed Seguya Memorial in central Uganda.

The proposed technical institutes are situated within reach of the expected students for purposes of limiting costs for provision of, as well as easier access to, utilities. The institutes will provide multi-skilled training opportunities for lower secondary school students who will have failed to proceed to upper secondary education.

Every institute will have planned capacity for accommodating at least 540 trainees. Every institute will also offer six out of the following nine courses: 
•	Building and concrete practice 
•	Carpentry and joinery 
•	Metal fabrication and welding 
•	Agriculture 
•	Motor vehicle mechanics 
•	Plumbing/pipe fitting 
•	Painting and decoration 
•	Home economics and tailoring.

The selected courses will be provided in each district in a bid to respond to practical skills. I can skip that. The training equipment and tools will also be provided. The project will focus more on capacity building, institutional management and the inclusion of ICT programmes in the technical institutions.

The proposed project will finance the construction of new facilities including classrooms, workshops, dormitories, administration blocks, library and ICT rooms, multi-purpose science rooms, staff houses, multi-purpose halls and sick bays - indeed in the areas we visited, we met challenges relating to the above - including offices and stores. The non-training equipment to be provided to every institute will include: a tractor with a trailer, a 30-seater bus and water supply equipment. We actually came across some water challenges in some of those institutes, which make their work very hard. Each institute will also receive assorted text books for the selected six courses.

In 4.3 we present the project components. In here, we give the details regarding every beneficiary. It starts with the central region under Ahmed Seguya Memorial. In there you can see that we have talked about classrooms, workshops, the administrative block, etc, as listed. I hope I am allowed to proceed since the list is elaborate.

On page 7, we state that Eastern Uganda will benefit through Tororo Technical Institute and they will receive, among others, 18 classrooms. On page 8, we have Kibatsi Technical Institute in Ntungamo District. The facilities it will receive are listed. In Northern Uganda, still on page 8, we have Kalongo Technical Institute in Agago District. So, the components are clearly mentioned.

On page 9, you can see we have component B and it includes furniture, equipment and tools. Component C will include an assortment of sports equipment and a seven-tonne truck for each of the four institutes. Component D will cater for the project coordination unit. Component E will cater for consultancy services for detailed designs, preparation of tender documents and supervision of construction works.

On page 10, we give the project costs and financing. The initial project cost, as you can see from the footnotes, was proposed in September 2010. You remember that at that time the dollar rate had gone very low, just above Shs 2000, and our exporters were screaming that they were being pushed out of business and KACITA – the importers - were celebrating. I am giving this background to explain what exactly has been happening - the turbulence and volatility of the shilling versus the dollar in the last two years as a second round effect of the global turbulence in the economic crisis. 

Page 11 shows the project costs as appraised. Remember that one year after, in September last year, inflation hit the roof and the dollar was threatening to go to Shs 3000. That is why the exchange rate then was Shs 2815 per dollar. But honourable colleagues, this is good for us as a country because if it been the reverse, this project would suffer cost overruns from the beginning. But because the shilling has since appreciated and we are around Shs 2,500, it gives us solace that the problem is not as big as it should have been.
 
On page 12, the terms and conditions are given. The figure as already mentioned is equivalent to US$ 11.9 million. One clarification I would like to make here is that the project is contracted in dollar rates. From our inquiries with the ministry, the problem we had with other projects, like the World Bank projects, is that contracts like our school management based contracts were contracted in shillings and those who were in the first phase had problems. By then, the prices had gone so high and the dollar rate was unfavourable. Those who have done the second phase have enjoyed because things were more acceptable. So, this volatility in the economy affects individual projects.
 
The maturity period is 23 years after a grace period of three years. The interest charge is one per cent per annum on disbursed and withdrawn funds. The administrative charge is 0.5 per cent per annum. The loan conditions are listed in the report. 

Paragraph 6.0 on page 12 is about project implementation. The implementation arrangement is based on the existing structure of the Ministry of Education and Sports’ relevant departments and units namely: 
•	Business Technical 
•	Vocational Education and Training 
•	Education Planning 
•	Construction Management Unit; and 
•	Public Procurement and Disposal Unit. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports will spearhead the procurement process using the guidelines from the Kuwait Fund for Arabic Economic Development. 

Point 6.1, page 13; the monitoring and evaluation specialist within the Project Coordination Unit shall coordinate, monitor and evaluate the activities. Reporting will be to the monitoring and evaluation working group, the sector planning and management working group, the education sector consultative committee and the annual education and sports sector review. The Fund will supervise the project by fielding at least two missions per year in addition to regular project support from the Uganda Government. A midterm review mission will also be contracted after two years of implementation. 

Observations and Recommendations 

1. 	The committee observed the low pace of implementation of the earlier BTVET subsector loan projects that were approved by Parliament in 2010. This was due to pre-implementation and post-implementation delays related to procurement of infrastructure related services and finalisation of complete architectural and engineering designs as well as the procurement process for civil works contactors. 

The committee urges Government to consider finalisation of architectural and engineering designs before loan negotiations and to find means of curbing the lengthy procurement process as these impacts heavily on charges accruing from the undisbursed funds. 

Honourable colleagues, if you get the responses from the ministry, you realise that the Ninth Parliament did pass some important loan projects where 14 districts in this country were beneficiaries of complete technical institutes; unfortunately, there have been a lot of delays. We would like the Prime Minister and the Minister of Education to fast-track those projects. This also includes the three traditional institutes, which were supposed to be rehabilitated in Mbale, Lira and the teacher training one. 

2. The committee noted the perennial small budget for BTVET subsector as compared to other subsectors like primary and secondary education. In addition, BTVET has not been able to attract adequate funding from development partners since it has been considered to be low on Government’s priorities. 

	The committee recommends that Government increases financial support for the BTVET subsector. Government should also consider supporting private BTVET institutions to provide the much needed skills through sponsorship of students. Supporting practical skills development of priority sectors such as oil and gas, tourism, construction, agriculture, manufacturing and industry through the Private Public Partnership (PPP) arrangement could be explored. A programme to support internships, industrial attachments and apprenticeships should also be developed. 

In line with Government policy of at least having one technical school per district, much as the earlier NRM Government promise of one per sub-county was not achieved, the committee has always been disappointed that neither through Government funding nor donor funding are we getting money to skill Ugandans. The last loan request we had for secondary education was US$ 300 million. When it comes to technical education, which is more important than secondary education, we come up with less than US$ 10 million. We are once again saying that as Parliament, the relevant committee and Ministry of Finance should really walk the talk, stop the rhetoric and stop killing Uganda. 

3. 	The committee observed the existence of insufficient   infrastructure and equipment, a lack of adequately skilled instructors and a general shortage in learning/training materials in the majority of BTVET institutions, particularly in the public sector. This has made the conducting of up-to-date comprehensive and relevant skills training practically impossible especially when it comes to the practical side of learning. We are talking of plumbers, electricians, fabricators and welders and if you lack the tools, you can imagine the product you are going to get.  

This is all happening at a time when we are talking of integration. Kenyans and Tanzanians will come here and we shall have a problem when it comes to competition. We shall end up giving jobs to those who are more skilled.

The committee therefore recommends that Government expedites the implementation of the reforms in the BTVET strategic plan in order to strengthen existing BTVET institutions through upgrading, modernising and sufficiently resourcing existing training infrastructure in order to raise the quality of training.

4. 	The committee further observed the lack of reliable and continuous baseline data on the key aspects of BTVET delivery, that is, the labour market and employer surveys.

The committee recommends that Government establishes an effective BTVET management information system focusing on BTVET training delivery and labour market demands. Today, even if you are starting a farm, it is not very easy to get people who can help you in the very easy areas of water harvesting and soil conservation because there is a mismatch between the actual demand in the market and what we seem to be churning out.

5. 	The committee observed that there are irregular and non-existent interactions between training institutions and potential employers for ensuring market relevance. 

The committee recommends that Government intensifies and strengthens cooperation/partnerships between training institutions and industry in order to ensure relevance of training and up-skilling of teaching staff. In other words, even if there is a problem of financing, it is possible for the private sector to directly fund a component which it badly requires for them to increase their productivity.

6. 	The committee observed that there is lack of information on relevance of current BTVET programme offerings. The BTVET programmes either have little or no offering on technology driven future labour demands like ICT, mobile technology, science, environment and others.

We recommend and urge Government to embark on a demand-driven review and design of all BTVET programme offerings and curricula in cooperation with the private sector and indeed the market. Rather than focusing on theory, future programmes must focus strongly on the equipment with broader skills set, for example, in the application of knowledge, computer skills. All programmes should include a compulsory component of practical learning as most graduates are likely to become self-employed.

It is without doubt that upgrading BTVET training institutions to modern industrial levels and standards is key to an efficient and effective future of BTVET delivery in Uganda. The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the Government request to borrow Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million (US$ 11.9 million) from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development for financing the reconstruction and equipping of the four technical institutes in the Technical, Vocational Education and Training Programme of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, once again, on behalf of the committee, I want to emphasise that we should get serious through direct budget Government financing, and if we are to get money we should think of the whole country. If you go through the responses, we tasked the ministry to give us how much of Uganda, which is now over 120 districts, they have covered. You will see on that map that we still have a long way to go. We are supporting this drop in the ocean but what we should be moving for is to request Parliament, as the appropriators of the budget and Government, to make sure that we target the whole country. That is the prayer of the committee.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and your committee. Honourable members, the report has been signed by more than 50 per cent of the Members. It has also been initialled by the members of the committee. Just to allay the fears of the chair, initialling means ownership, so those who initialled must associate with the report. I hope that we will just abide by our rules.

5.44
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report, particularly for visiting Kyamuhunga Technical Institute in my constituency during their field visit. I have three short comments. 

One, surely the chairperson of the committee and your members, when you visited Kyamuhunga Technical Institute, you must have noticed that there was a big demand for vocational technical training. However, the big number of students there was not in consonance with the accommodation requirements. You must have noticed the congestion of the classrooms. You must have noted the lack of water in that institute. I am sure you must have seen the poor kitchen and poor sanitation facilities, the lack of equipment in those workshops and the motor vehicle department, which has no vehicle at all for training the students.

I understand the comments you are giving - the inadequacy of funds - but this is the very committee which interfaced with the ministries and you should have raised this issue. I am not proposing changing the beneficiaries but Kyamuhunga Technical Institute requires consideration so that we meet the government objective for technical training.

Secondly, I have a comment on the figures you have presented to us. On page 10, I appreciate what you have given as a comment down there, that these were figures of September 2010 subject to changes in the dollar rate. I would understand that, but we still have to answer a few questions. One, you are telling us on top there that the Government of Uganda’s contribution is 10 per cent but on page 11, you are giving us a table which is showing 15 per cent; which is which?

Much as you say that the figure on page 10 is only for September 2010, I am looking at the relevance and importance of this table. It really does not help our discussion. I do not think we can look at this table and say we are now approving US$ 15.6 million. It was not just a change in rates; I think it was subjected to a lot of discussion because you see contingency provision at that time was US$ 1.1 million and in the revised figures it is only US$ 680,000. So, my point is that the chairman has given us a table, which is really confusing and we want to be sure of what you are actually requesting of us.

Finally, I have observed that you keep on presenting to us multiple small loans - US$ 7 million, US$ 10 million and so on. Mr Chairman, why don’t you discuss with your ministries as they present their requests about the possibility of Government providing or requesting single sizeable loans. The economies of scale of managing single loans cannot be equated to managing these multiple small loans.  What do we see in future? Also, is it possible, at a later date, to give us an update of the current debt situation of all these loans we have been approving? I thank you for your report.

5.47
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have a few comments to make on this report. We are looking at borrowing money to construct four polytechnic institutions in Uganda. I would like to agree with the objective of borrowing this money and also look at the rationale. 

I appreciate this but I have noticed with concern - and I will refer more specifically to Kasese - that we have many institutions, and by many I mean three. All these three are in a situation that is wanting. Shall we continue borrowing money to set up institutions that shall not operate? I would like to point out here that there used to be a giant institution in Kasese, Mubuku Youth Institute. When NRA was in the bush, they used its facilities like the lorries and generators. Since then, it closed and has been lying idle, but today we want to borrow money for the design of new technical institutions. There is another one just within the municipality. Government has put in money but it is non-functional. Even the one in Katwe; Government injected money into it but if you look at the capacity under which it is operating, it is inadequate. 

My question to the committee chairperson and the Minister is: shall we continue to borrow money to put up structures and infrastructure that will not be used? At one time, Government constructed health centres II without a programme and now we can see that they are lying idle in those areas. If we do not have a strategic plan to manage these institutions, they will also lie idle. We should bear in mind that we are borrowing this money. Thank you.

5.50
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. Any expenditure in promoting business and technical education is worth incurring for any country. However, I notice, like my colleagues have pointed out, that we go piecemeal in borrowing money to support a good cause. At the end of the day, this may not be very effective for us as a country. 

I have two technical institutes in my constituency but the level at which they are operating is not very useful to us. They started as farm schools but were upgraded to technical institutes. However, they have no workshops, no laboratories and very few classrooms. I wonder what kind of graduates will come out. The issue of value for money comes in; has the ministry got an organised plan of different grades of technical institutions that train people for different levels of technical skills? If so, let us have it and then decide on how to fund them and how many at each level based on what the economy can accommodate. Right now, I think it is piecemeal. 

I have just seen in this report that there is only one institution picked from each region; one is in the constituency of my neighbour, Kajara County – I studied there, so I support it. However, when you look at the technical institutes that we have, the kind of equipment provided and the programmes run do not give value for money. So let us sit down, organise a plan of the different levels of technical institutes that we need to train the kind of skilled people that we need. We should even design how many we need at what point and then we fund them in an organised manner. 

Right now, the technical institutes which I have talked about were originally farm schools. People are now asking where the farm schools are because P.7 leavers who used to go to farm schools have no institutions to go to and there is no policy addressing that section of people who are being trained at that level. So, I am uneasy about borrowing this money which will almost make no impact.

The science and technology committee went to Bushenyi Technical Institute. We discovered that they have equipment of 1956. (Member timed out)

5.53
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to address the point of dynamism of education. It seems our education is static. When you look at the courses which are going to be offered – building and carpentry, carpentry and joinery, motor vehicle mechanics – they were all there the time I was born. But everybody in this House has got a mobile phone and yet no course related to its repair is being introduced. We have men on the street that repair our mobile phones and we have bought them expensively but we have to give to people who use guesswork. Sometimes, you take a phone that is working half-way and at the end of it he spoils it completely because he does not know what to do.

Why can’t the education system be dynamic and consider the present market? We are now getting a loan; why doesn’t it go to train people who repair telephones and computers instead of competing with villagers. (Laughter) The people I left in the village are teaching people carpentry and joinery on the job and as Government, you are getting a loan to do the same thing. I suggest that we keep updating ourselves on what we want to do if we are to develop. It is now 50 years since Independence; we should move ahead in terms of technology. Thank you.

5.56
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those who support the motion. Specifically, I associate myself with the committee’s observation on page 13, where the committee observes that there is very low implementation of earlier BTVET projects approved by Parliament in 2010. Among those projects, a technical college is supposed to be built in Kiboga District at Bukomero. Whenever I go back to my constituency, people ask me when the institute is going to be built. To make things worse, I looked at the technical report made by the consultant hired by the Ministry of Education and it said that in order to properly build that technical school, it will require US$ 8 million. However, the budget apparently provides for US$ 4 million or less – I stand to be corrected on that. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minister of Education to come and inform the House what is going on as far as the other institutes are concerned. You are now asking us to approve four more technical colleges, which is very good and I support it, but others had already been approved but nothing seems to be going on. Can we get a report updating us on the progress of implementation of those other approved BTVET projects; the people I represent in Kiboga are very anxious. The people in Bukomero want to see this technical college set up. However, I would like to see also that it is set up properly with the proper facilities so that it will not be a white elephant. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am constrained but I must rise on a procedural point. The committee conveniently reports that a loan request was received without telling us when. Hon. Magyezi and other colleagues have pointed out pertinent issues in the report. The figures being quoted are more than two years old and we are likely to be dealing with stale figures as we are debating here. Everything that was captured was as per September 2010 and since then, a lot has transpired. A lot of interventions have come in and many price changes have occurred. This means that if we go ahead with this, we are likely to have either a shortage or some problem during the implementation. 

Secondly, the committee makes very grave observations and recommendations. The committee observed the low pace of implementation of earlier BTVET sub sector loan projects that were approved by Parliament in 2010. Those approved as early as 2010 delayed due to pre implementation and post implementation issues related to the procurement of infrastructure related services and finalisation of complete architectural and engineering designs as well as the procurement processes for civil works and contractors. The insufficient infrastructure and equipment, lack of adequately skilled instructors and general shortage-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, you are now smuggling. You had a point of procedure but now you are continuing -

MR SSEKIKUBO: No, the points I am raising are these: If, indeed, we are lacking even the instructors in these technical institutes; if, indeed, those that were approved as early as 2010 are still pending and the figures we are quoting are of 2010, and then the committee recommends that this House should go ahead and borrow, is it procedurally right, Madam speaker, to contradict ourselves fundamentally as it is in this case? But then we yield and say, “okay, we go ahead and approve” knowing that these are the problems which ought to be sorted out first, streamlined, then you can recommend to Parliament that now everything is set, we can move on. 

So, procedurally, are we following the right procedure, for us to sit here and even pile another stale loan when already more is stale?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, is it worthwhile for us to pass this loan? Shall we get the four?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, this committee is a subordinate of plenary. When we go to the field, we go with the intention of informing the House of the state of the sector. Some of our findings are specific to the loan because we are talking of four beneficiaries who are in a bad state, but we have also told you that the others are equally badly off. Some of our observations are for the sector committee which is responsible for the daily running of this sector.  For some of the recommendations, we are praying through the House which is our superior, that we prevail on Government to take action and address the state of our technical education. And what Members are saying largely is the spirit of the committee, but we would not want the four beneficiary districts that needed this help yesterday, to be bogged down because others are equally badly off. This is a debate we have been having here on the health sector. So, my prayer -(Interjection)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you, and thank you, Mr  Chairman. I was also in a bit of a dilemma on the beneficiaries. I was wondering, did the committee make a mistake or is it my memory making the mistake? The last loan we approved, I think had beneficiaries - Nakaseke, Ntungamo and whatever. Now, I see Ntungamo again. Is there a mistake? What is happening here? Just a bit of clarification, then I can make my submission later, Madam Speaker.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, hon. Alaso. I request that we are given the copies of the responses. If you get the copies of the responses – please, check, we had them yesterday; some people got them, but we still have enough copies - that will help you realise which institute is benefiting from which loan and actually, Ntungamo is not a beneficiary from the previous loan. The 14 districts - Bukedea, Kiboga, Hoima - are actually presented and I would like to request that Members are availed these copies because we have enough copies. 

Clearly, what I am saying is that we are speaking the same language. I think this is the fourth report I am making on technical education, and in the committee, even before I became chairman, we have been praying that Government should increase funding to this very crucial sector. 

What we told the ministry during our interface was that this was going to be the last loan under the NDP, that we are going to accept, of this small magnitude. When you look at the map - we challenged them to give us a map to show them how much deficit they have. They are in less than 35 districts out of 120, and the committee is bringing this to the committee. Let the education committee act; let the Ministry of Finance listen; let education stop telling us of skilling Uganda when they have nothing in the budget for it. We are talking about the sector. But should we punish the four beneficiaries whose negotiation was yesterday? 

And just to address the concern of hon. Ssekikubo, the project was - let me first explain the earlier one. For example, hon. Ssekikubo’s and hon. Mr Raphael Magyezi concerns – indeed, the project was proposed in 2010. The dollar rate was different. The appraisal was in 2011, and for those of you who have been following the dollar rate, that was what was prevailing. So, the committee is only bringing out the oscillation and the volatility of the currency at that point in time. (Interruption) 

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker on that point, I just want the chair to be very clear on the request he is making to Parliament. On page 10, he is saying the Government of Uganda’s contribution is 10 percent. Let us go to page 11. These are the revised figures. The total figure is $13.9 million. Ten percent of $13.9 million must be 1.3. It cannot be $2 million. So, the question becomes, what exactly is this committee requesting of Parliament? And then when you look at the figures and the variation in the exchange rate, the first table is September 2010, and the figure then was $15.6 million. Now one year later, September 2011, the figure changes to $13.9 million. One year later we are beyond September 2012. Surely, you are not presenting to us the figures of September 2011. So, the question becomes, as we sit here to approve this loan, what exactly are you requesting from Parliament?  It is not yet clear.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to make a prayer once again to colleagues. A loan approval of figures we are dealing with; figures at the proposal stage; figures at the appraisal stage. The committees of Education and Finance will deal with the finals in the budget. When we discuss a loan request, we are not discussing annual budget releases. For example, the loans we passed in 2010 have not been included in the budget. I do not know if I am making the point. The figures we discussed in the technical schools in 2012, are going to be dispensed in the next budget, when they are ready after procurement. So, at implementation stage, the committees of Education and Finance which deal with the budget will be the ones to - actually, there are also reviews of the project at that point in time.
 
So, for now, we are discussing between Government of Uganda and the development partner in terms of figures of what we get. The details of the costing will come at implementation stage.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable chairperson, you have listed 19 components for each TI. What Members are asking is, does this money facilitate all the 19? Classrooms, principals’ houses, two bed-roomed house, water harvesting. Does this money satisfy all the 19? That is what they are asking you.

MR MUKITALE: I hope I am not answering for the ministers. I would want to -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to raise a clarification or question to the Chair. When you look at the brief to Parliament prepared by the ministry, it talks about money in terms of dinars and US dollars. So, the question I would like to ask the Chairperson is, what business do you have to start converting into Ugandan shillings? Because I have a suspicion that you are putting the money in Uganda shillings and basing on a conversion rate which is very old so that at the time when money is transferred, there will be a difference and this is where corruption comes in. The difference will be eaten. So, what business do you have trying to convert the money using old rates and you put it in the report? Why don’t you just leave it in dollars and dinars because that is the currency we are borrowing? Why do you put it in Uganda shillings?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, unfortunately, I do not see the Minister of Finance here. The loan agreements are not in Uganda shillings. The source of our information is the project proposal and appraisal document and it is giving the exchange rate as per that date. The Committee of National Economy has no interest whatsoever in what will be the exchange rate.

HON. MEMBERS: It should.

MR MUKITALE: No, we do not command the exchange rate. If tomorrow it is lower, so much the better. If it is higher, it is not for us to decide. Colleagues, I will be laying on Table the project appraisal document as I mentioned in the report and -(Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Honourable members, I think we should put emphasis on the currency we are borrowing. We are borrowing 3.5 million Kuwait Dinars. For the simplification and trying to give information to Members, that is why we translate the figures in Uganda shillings for you to have a picture of the global figure of what we are going to spend locally.

Otherwise, in having a safeguard for the loan, we have what we call a contingency fund, which caters for the harmonization, where our currencies keep changing. The contingency fund caters for that, but what we are borrowing is what we should put emphasis on, which is the 3.5 million Dinars. It may even change because Parliament has sometimes come back here to say, the dollar has changed so much that we need to either add more money or – in the last session, we came back here to add more money because of the oscillation in the currency. However, what we should consider first and foremost is that currency in which we are borrowing, the Kuwait Dinars. I thank you.

6.13
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): I thank you very much Madam Speaker, for once again giving me an opportunity to contribute on this debate. I thank the committee for coming out with a report.

This is a right step in the right direction by Government to go for technical training. I was in South Korea a few months ago, and South Korea is now the 10th biggest economy in the world and yet we were at about the same level of development about 40 years ago.

One of the factors that has contributed to this enormous growth was about two or three things. One, imparting the right skills and education - having universal primary and secondary education, but most important also and relevant to this debate is, also having quality universal technical education so that almost everybody that gets out of school has the relevant skills to earn himself or herself a living. 

The problem we are facing today of unemployment and of people going onto the streets is because they go and get education that is not relevant to get them jobs to the extent that we are funding institutes to equip people with skills to employ themselves and employ others. I think that is the right direction that we should take.

In the same direction, may I also suggest to Government that much as we put up these institutions, I think we should also have a critical policy review? For example, we are talking so much about UPE and USE which are not very well funded, but we are not giving the right messages in terms of technical education. Besides, we are still restricting admissions to technical institutions. Whereas we have free education secondary schools, we have quarters; we have restricted entrance in technical institutes. Can we also have universal free education in technical schools just as we are doing in secondary schools?

May Government also reconsider this policy of converting tertiary institutions that were equipping people with skills into turning them into universities? For example, Busitema and many others, which were imparting very important and relevant skills to people and have now been turned into universities to teach history and political education. So, Government should reconsider this matter.

I now turn to my friend hon. Magyezi. I agree this is a small part of what we need. Kyamuhunga, for example, I am aware is a big technical school but with limited resources. Can we get a bigger loan that can cover a wide scope of the country so that we go in a systematic manner to equip our people with technical skills? Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I want to ask the minister, are you moving together with the National Development Plan (NDP) of this country in this? I hope you will be able to tell us. Are you moving together with NDP?

6.17
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this loan request and also agree with the committee’s observations, especially when it comes to the slow pace of loan implementation. In 2010, I think I was one of those who participated and wholeheartedly supported this loan request regarding BTVET mainly because I was a beneficiary - I should declare conflict of interest. 

Iganga Technical Institute was one of those to benefit from the Korean loan under ADB, but as of now and as we talk, there is nothing that is going on. People are wondering; it is coming to three years down the road and there is nothing taking place. Are we marketing air to our people? Do we begin having reservations when it comes to approving loans? If you approve the loan and things end there, I think we begin thinking otherwise? I was debating with my conscience whether to support this loan request. But for the sake of Uganda, I will support this loan request. Otherwise, I would have put a very big no to this loan request. 

The responses given to the committee state that Iganga Technical Institution is to be upgraded yet we passed that in 2010. So, Madam Speaker, I appeal to Government, especially the loan negotiators and implementers, to always ensure that we work within the timelines when implementing our loans. 

Secondly, the key objective of this loan is to improve access to quality education. I agree and salute that. But like hon. Tashobya said, some of these schools have got only 20 students who are benefiting from Government sponsorship. The rest like in Iganga Technical Institute has got 600 students. Out of those, only 25 are on Government sponsorship. So, what do you mean when you say we are increasing access to quality education when people are being compelled to pay for them to acquire these skills?

So, I propose that we walk the talk by saying that as we promise access to quality education, we should make it universal so that it is accessible to all Ugandans.

Finally, on classification of civil works, under ADB, we passed a loan for construction of secondary schools. But so many sites are abandoned as we talk. I have moved to so many districts, but sites have been abandoned because the contractors quoted different figures and as of now they cannot break even; they cannot recover their costs. So, they have abandoned the sites. And who is losing, it is Government. That implies that we have to look for other resources to fulfil our dreams to ensure that these structures are completed. 

So, I call upon Government, especially the Ministry of Education, to focus on utilising the contingency fund which we passed to ensure that we complete these structures. 

6.21
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan request. Uganda as a country lags behind in technical education. As Parliament, we must consider the importance of this loan. Other procedures can be rectified later. 

I also want to urge Government, especially the ministry that has brought this loan. Government has three arms; Parliament, the Judiciary and the Executive. Parliament always carries its mandate especially in approving these loans –(Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Isabirye Iddi is a member of the committee. We have Members who wish to contribute to this debate yet they are denied a chance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not tempt me by standing up when you are a member of the committee. 

6.23
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Hon. Isabirye has been denying the people of Kinkiizi East from making a contribution. (Laughter) I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I also want to thank the committee for the report. I support the request, but I would like to make a few comments. 

First, in the science of population growth, there is what we call “a demographic transition”; how the population grows overtime. When you look at the structure of our population today, we have a huge segment of young people and children, and the population is continuing to grow. 

Unfortunately, we characterise our population as a burden, because we have not been able to convert it into what we call a demographic bonus; to make the huge population an opportunity. Countries which have transformed their population, particularly the Asian Tigers, have over a short period of time invested in the quality of their population, particularly in giving skills to young people in order for them to be productive. 

Therefore, the decision to invest in business, technical and vocational education and training (BTVET) is extremely important. When Government came up with the policy of USE and UPE, which included BTVET, we did welcome it. But I think Government has had challenges on how to finance that sector. Because, even when most children go through UPE and USE, the dropout rate is very high. We have very many young people all over the country that are either not in school or are dropping out of school and we seem not to have a clear programme for them. So, we should really urge Government to take BTVET education as extremely important.

Therefore, I agree with the Members who are saying that Government should have a strategic plan and comprehensive arrangement on how to support these various institutions. Otherwise, you will tempt us to ask what criteria you are using to pick out only four institutions in the whole country. 

I am sure, if you ask Members of Parliament, we have very many institutions in our respective constituencies which are in bad shape. So, why don’t you have a consolidated loan request which will accommodate several institutions in the country so that we can have a big push to our technical and vocational education in Uganda?

Secondly, is on the issue which has already been raised; the slow pace of implementation of these loans. I have been here since the previous Parliament. We have passed very many loans in this House. But if we are to ask the ministers how far these interventions have been implemented, I think there is a very big problem. So, I urge the Leader of Government Business, that when we grant these loan requests, the ministers should supervise the implementation.


I was a beneficiary of the previous loan requests; one of the technical institutions in my constituency was to benefit. But nothing is going on; several years after Parliament passed the loan. 

Lastly, I would like to revisit the issue of the figures which was raised. I asked the chairperson why the committee put the money in Uganda Shillings here in the report. The import of this is that the records will capture that Parliament has approved money worth Shs 31.2 billion at a conversion rate of Shs 2000 per dollar. But by the time this money is transferred from Kuwait to Uganda, it will be at the rate as of that day. And the question is, “What happens to the difference”? 

Today, the dollar is about Shs 2600. Now, if we maintain this figure, the records will show that Parliament approved Shs 31.2 billion at a conversion rate of Shs 2000. This is a window for corruption. 

Therefore, my request to the committee is that you should have maintained the figures in the foreign exchange so that when the money is transferred to Uganda, then the conversion rate in Uganda on that day is what will obtain. That is why I wanted the chairperson to explain this matter. The note from the Ministry of Finance does not indicate the money in Uganda Shillings; but the committee gives us this money. I wanted to suggest that we expunge the record in Uganda shillings so that we maintain the money in Dinars and US Dollars as what we are approving so that when the money comes into the country, it will be converted then and that will be the money that we shall have received. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before the Member for Mpigi comes, I want to remind Government about the Bukungu Landing Site. We approved a loan in the Seventh Parliament under ADB and it has never been completed. In fact, it has been abandoned. I shall want to know from Government what has happened because the Badiope are asking for their landing site.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, can I give information just to guide? Just for guidance –(Interjections)- colleagues, this is in your interest. The committee took a lot of trouble to make these attachments, and actually, if you care, you would appreciate what we have done. We have lined up all projects that we approved but are not on the ground. We have given you a document to follow as a Committee on Education or as the Ministry of Finance to know what exactly is happening. That is beyond our mandate as a Committee on National Economy, but we have given you sufficient information and at what stage the project is. So, you check page 8, and see that we have given you exactly what project is at what stage and we are also at pain – we agree with you and we have the same voice.  

On page 9, we have given you a map and Buliisa is in the eclipse like those of you who are complaining. We are clearly showing that the shaded area of Uganda is less than 35 districts out of the 120. We have given you that information. We have presented on other pages - 14, 15, 16 and 17 - where we have listed every district and we show which project you are benefiting from; is it running, is it proposed? And those that are eclipses like Buliisa are also indicated. That is why we would want to use this document to really bring out the issues of how much we need to push Government, and as we have said, for us we told the ministry that we hoped this was the last loan request because these loans were negotiated under the PEAP and the Speaker is spot on when she says, “Under the NDP are we continuing with this piecemeal borrowing?” 

But as for the figures raised by Commissioner Baryomunsi, I have said that those were proposal documents - appraisal figures at implementation stage - the budget comes back to Parliament through the sessional committee and they will deal with the figures. I thank you very much.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am just seeking guidance and I beg to learn. We have always passed loans in this Parliament and definitely, I have no objection with this particular loan, but probably, we do not even get to know whether the money has come or not. 

Secondly, it also worries me because I have just listened to the chairperson indicating that we have put down where this money will go and so on and so forth. He has even advised that Parliament can go ahead and try to check value for money, but we sometimes never even know whether the money has come or not because we have passed several loans. I do not want to go back to indicate some of the loans that we have passed and even up to now we have not seen value for money. I think time will come when this Parliament may move a motion not to pass any other loans until value for money has been indicated and until accountability has been laid in Parliament. If we do not do that dear colleagues, it is very sad, Madam Speaker, that we are fighting corruption, but it seems like we are simply talking about it.

The money we are passing every now and then is the kind of money that is swindled and nobody is there to ask, and nobody is even there to bother. We try to bother through paper work, but at the end of the day, there is no physical accountability.

Allow me, Madam Speaker, as I am seeking your guidance; I remember that in the last Parliament we passed a loan of $30 billion and this money was specifically to go and deal with issues of maternal health. Some of us wanted to reserve our comments then, when we were discussing the budget, but it is so hurting that even as we speak now, we wonder where other things are. Why is it that even up to now women are still suffering in health facilities? Why is it that up to now, women are still dying when we passed the $30 billion loan? 

As we pass this loan, I think we need to be guided. How do we go ahead to pass loans all the time when there is no accountability? It is my concern. We are encouraging corruption instead of fighting it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, fortunately, the loans we have passed are really on record in the Hansard.  I want to direct the Clerk to give us a breakdown of the loans since the Sixth Parliament; piece by piece, sector by sector so that we can ask the government – you know, the landing site is not there. So, I give the Clerk one week to tabulate the loans since the Sixth Parliament so that we can ask for accountability. 

6.35
MRS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. These are good projects for our communities most especially the youth. It is good that this time round solar power systems were considered according to the components in the project, but in districts where such projects have already taken place, solar power systems were not thought of, and in some districts in some areas, there is no electricity. For instance, in my district, Mpigi, there is a technical institute called Nindye, which was a Presidential pledge and it was constructed, completed and fully facilitated. 

It is now two years after the completion of that institute, and this year they registered students, but the facilities are not being used because there is no power.  My prayer is that the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Energy ensure that they put into consideration the issue of electricity in case they are to put any development programmes in an area. We may be borrowing money, which will be wasted. I thank you.

6.36
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, and Kabarole): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan, but with a few observations. 

The first is that I agree with hon. Magyezi about the borrowing in bits. This is why you cannot realise value for money in the first instance, because when we keep borrowing in bits, we may not see a substantial outcome; and so, I would beg Government that when we are borrowing, we borrow reasonable amounts of money and we move on. 

The other issue is about the shift from the original sub-county model to a regional model. Initially, we promised this country that we were going to have the vocational institutions at sub-county level. We have now moved to regional level, and of course, Government may bring up the issue of money, but I do not believe that this is true; it is lack of seriousness. We could have started with a few of the districts and then we move on, because when you talk about a region, considering the young population we have, we are not going to do anything reasonable.

The other issue is about equipping the institutions. We are putting up the institutions, but the existing ones do not have equipment. You find in some institutions where they study say, agricultural engineering, they do not even have a tractor. I do not, therefore, see anything much that we are doing. 

The other issue is about the irregular and non-existent interaction with the training institutions and the potential employers. It is like producing goods without studying the market. This is why Kenyans have come here and taken over the tourism industry. It is because we have not studied the market correctly. 

People talked about the slow pace in implementing the project; this is correct, and I believe our technical people do it in order to divert us so that we cannot follow what they are doing. 

In conclusion, I have been trying to analyse the loans, grants and our own local revenues. When you look at these three components and you see the development in the country, they do not tally - meaning that we have borrowed much; we have got many grants and our local revenues have increased. This may lure the country into thinking that we are moving when we are not moving, because the level of development is much lower than the monies talked about. 

Madam Speaker, I agree with you that Government has a duty to show us the performance of all the loans, at least starting from the Sixth Parliament, as you have guided. If we did this, we would understand the level of corruption in this country. People benefit from these loans. When we pass a loan, people clap their hands because they know they are going to benefit, and we are putting the future generation at risk. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

6.40
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will join my colleagues in emphasising the need to support the business, technical, vocational education sector; most importantly, in a country where the completion rate of Universal Primary Education is now only at 30 percent. Of all the children that are enrolled in our primary schools, only 30 percent sit their PLE. The other 70 percent drop out. 

Some time back, I asked that the Minister of Education comes to this House to inform us about performance and completion. Unfortunately, that statement was never to be made in this House. So, given that type of scenario, it is very important that we support the BTVET sector. 

I would like to propose two issues that should be addressed in this support. First, because the need is enormous, I think the Ministry of Education and indeed the Government of Uganda should consider public-private partnership in areas of vocational education. It is the private sector that appreciates best the technicians, the artisans and the needed skilled labour force that is required in this country. 

The failure to bring to this House a law governing public-private partnership is something that is really undermining progress even in this particular area.

The second area you should harmonise as Government, particularly the Ministry of Education, is the training. Who are the instructors for whom you are building these schools? There is a lot of disharmony. There are graduates who do bachelors and then they do a diploma in vocational training. They do not have the capacity that you require to ground the learners in vocational skills, but they are the ones you prefer to hire. 

So, you need to harmonise the question of training the trainers in these schools so that they give this country the best output. 

I would like to tell the Ministry of Education that even when they are urging, and the committee has observed that there is no money, and no partners are willing to support the sector, there is a lot of money in Ministry of Education given by donors and being used for the wrong reasons. And we will be ready, if you put us to task, to submit to this House that there are donor funds going to wrong areas. Imagine money is being borrowed for quality education and you reduce it to only research. What research do you need to know when Ugandans have already submitted to you that our children can barely read or write or count to the level of competence required at their level in education. 

So, I think that instead of you complaining that you do not have money - you actually have the money and you must put it to good use where it matters most.

Lastly, I will support this borrowing but with a lot of pain in my heart because previous loans have not been put to good use. Their implementation is not timely. Look at the money we borrowed; what was it for?  Something in Public Service? Government came here, Public Service came here, everybody came here, and quarrelled; and now you are sitting on the money 10 years down the road. 

Madam Speaker, about the money for landing sites, we were supposed to be beneficiaries in Kasilo. I went there with hon. Ruth Nankabirwa only to be told that you see we are now doing one landing site; and that Kagwara landing site was so shoddy that the minister even refused to hand it over. The other three disappeared in thin air. 

So, if loans committing Uganda’s children 40 to 50 years to come are not going to be put to good use, then we should not even borrow in the first place. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.45
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a few remarks. I have been looking critically at the document and the signatures right from the first page up to page 16, and the appended sheet of signatures. I do not see the logic in them because they are not matching, and I do not know whether this is a genuine document. (Interjections) Yes, there are initials, but I am comparing them with this sheet which is attached, but I do not see the logic.

Secondly, there is this aspect of regional balancing. The regional balancing that we are talking about here, which the chairperson has pointed out, to me, does not come out clearly.  

We have districts like Kibale, Kamwenge, Kyegegwa and Kyenjojo where I know practically that there are no such institutions that children there are benefiting from. 

When I was looking at Kibasi in Ntungamo - Madam Speaker, I happened to work in Kigezi region, and I know that in Kabale, there is an institute that can at least be a catchment for these children from Ntungamo. I know that there is also one in Rukungiri. I also know that there is one in Mbarara, and another in Bushenyi. You can see that even the regional balancing which you are talking about is not even balancing the region itself, but going to an area which I do not understand. Therefore, this is not likely to benefit the children of Uganda. This is simply political, Madam Speaker. 

Secondly, I thought –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving me way. Much as you have elaborated the spread of technical institutes in the region that you have mentioned, I want to inform you that first of all, it is the policy of Government to have a technical institute per district. But also and most importantly, Ntungamo has a population of about 800,000 people. We have been resisting the idea of having many districts. We are interested in services. To the extent that we are very many, and we have about 50 secondary schools spread out in Ntungamo district; some of them are Government funded but the bulk of them are private. So, I would like to inform you, honourable colleague, that we should not only look at the sizes or the number of districts to determine the need. The need should be based on the population and the capacity of the area to provide students for that institution. I thank you very much.

MR NGHOZU: I think, Madam Speaker, the information that my colleague is giving is misleading. I am saying this because as far as I know the population of Uganda, the most highly populated district in Uganda today is Arua. The next one is Kasese. So, I do not know how Ntungamo jumps Kasese when I very well know that Kasese is the second most highly populated district in Uganda as of today. So, I would like to say that the Member should correct that information because that is not true.

Secondly, we have institutions that already exist which we need to focus on first. And painfully, Madam Speaker, let me present to you Mubuku Institute, which by 1986 was in existence and functional. However, when the NRA soldiers came, they stole almost everything that was in it. They stole the generator, the lorry and many other facilities that were in that institute. 

I can inform you that to date, the President has been making several pledges since he captured power, but forgetting what he stole before he took power. It is painful –(Interruption)

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that they even stole the human resource. The principal who was there then was appointed an SDA together with some of the staff. But also a lot of material was taken. They even operated a radio called Katebwa, but also carried the two generators that were there to operate that radio station to disseminate information to the NRA.

MR NGHOZU: Thank you, hon. Mbahimba. You know, we have been coming here and shouting on this and that, but why forget history. And you know, people keep asking, why has Kasese District failed to understand what the President is doing. It is because the President stole what belonged to us, but has not returned it. I can tell you that for as long as that situation continues, we are not going to have peace in this country.

Finally, I do not concur with the approval of this loan because I can see a lot of controversies some of which have been pointed out by colleagues. For example, there is no regional balancing, as I have already said, and there is also no economic effectiveness in this whole arrangement of borrowing this loan.

Thirdly, I would like to say that we must be considerate of who is going to pay back this loan. We have always borrowed, but the majority of the people who are requesting for these loans do not even pay directly. If they do so, it is Government that pays for them. It is the poor people who really struggle to pay back these loans that we usually approve here.

I want to say that this loan needs to meet the minimum requirements that colleagues have pointed out for it to proceed. Otherwise, I do not concur with the approval of this loan.

6.52
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to page 3, point 4, which talks about the project objectives. It states that the overall objective of the project is to contribute to the expansion of equitable access and quality at post-primary education and training.

The catch words here are “quality education and training.” But I am wondering whether it very possible to have quality post-primary education and training without having quality primary education. I am very concerned because I find that UPE, which is giving rise to this, has led to serious deterioration in education in Uganda. 

Anybody who comes from Busoga could have heard about Mwiri Primary School, Namalemba Primary School, or Kaliro and Budini Boys Primary School. All these schools are completely rotten. The quality of education at primary level – and we cannot really over emphasise this – has surely gone down. We must address the issue of quality at primary level before we talk about quality at post-primary. And this is how we have been doing things haphazardly by jumping from this to the other. Before you finish this or you lay a strong foundation or even make something take off well, you are jumping to another one. I am very concerned that we are now jumping from primary to post-primary before doing anything very good to strengthen the education base at primary level.

Madam Speaker, I would like to think that it is important to have an evaluation report on UPE in order to assess how it has been performing, and how the quality of education is vis-a-vis the time it was not there. And I think it might be a negative report.

I heard colleagues talk about bringing bigger loan requests. But I think we are constrained by the lenders because if we are borrowing money from somewhere, then we cannot decide on the amount to borrow. The lender has to limit for us on the amount of money to borrow and it is for that reason that we have to bring it; it is dependent on the availability of funds and who is willing to fund. 

Finally, some colleagues talked about how the exchange rates have been fluctuating. But now that we have identified who is going to benefit from this loan at the current rates when we are costing the project. I can see a danger; we shall have this money completely absorbed into the four institutions that have been identified even when we have more shillings gained from the dollars that we are borrowing. This foreign exchange is something we should address seriously because many people gain out of it.

We have $15.6 million, but this money has now changed figures at the moment. And now that we have these four projects earmarked, the technocrats are going to play with these figures to ensure that all this money is absorbed within the span yet they would have had a surplus fund arising out of foreign exchange. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.56
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to oppose the borrowing, not simply because I have a problem with this technical education. I know there is need for technical education. But I have two reasons. I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee. When we had the Minister of Finance before that committee, the Auditor-General raised a query on non-performing loans. Among those was the money that had been borrowed in 2008/2009 and 2009/2010. That money was supposed to be for the construction of Kimaka and Napuya markets.

When we asked the minister where this money was – actually, part of these loans are supporting the Microfinance Support Centre –(Interjections)– yes, the officials of Microfinance Support Centre even advised us off record, that the thing should be disbanded and turned into an agricultural bank. Article 159(4)(c) of the Constitution requires that the President should report to Parliament on the utilisation and performance of these loans.
 
When you read the Auditor-General’s report for 2008/2009, 2009/2010, you realise that he raised these issues. He clearly stated that money was borrowed for a particular purpose, like for those markets. It was because we put them to task to show us where the money was, that they eventually told us that it was supporting the Microfinance Support Centre. It was established, not as a business entity - it only lends money to people, but which people have also defaulted. So, they cannot recover.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I oppose these loans because there are two legal opinions by the Attorney-General’s Chamber. One advised the public servants that the process of bringing these loans to Parliament is a mere formality. It was written by the former Attorney-General and there is another which has been written by the current Attorney-General, hon. Nyombi. When you ask the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance - since there are queries - as to why he spends the money and then comes to Parliament; he told us that there are two legal opinions. So, they apparently operate according to the convenience of the day. 

Unless Government comes up to account for the loans we have passed in this Parliament, and the Attorney-General’s Chamber comes up to clarify to public servants which legal opinion is actually in force, I stand to oppose this loan. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Mwiru, I just want clarification, did you say that the money this House appropriated for Napiya and Kimaka markets was diverted without authority? 

MR MWIRU: That is the position. When we asked where this money is, they told us that money for those markets and most of the ADB loans is the money supporting the Microfinance Support Centre. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think it is the loans under ADB that are the most abused.  You remember the loans for the 29 landing sites, which we passed in the last Parliament? They were supposed to build 29 landing sites, but as of today, only nine have been built, which are even faulty.  

Hon. Nankabirwa came to Kasilo to receive the so-called landing sites, one in Kagwara – in fact the honourable Minister was embarrassed and ordered that the contractor should be arrested because what is on the ground is different from what was expected. But up to today nothing has been done. 

So, the abuse is too much and we need to carry out a special forensic audit on the ADB loans. There is a lot of abuse going on and nothing is being done; instead the people who mismanaged, for instance, the commissioner in the ministry at the time, who mismanaged the loans was instead given another job to handle a big East Africa region project under LAPEM with headquarters in Jinja. It is very unfortunate. 

7.00
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Biraahwa Mukitale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and Colleagues for all the concerns. First of all, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you so much for requesting that these loans be monitored from the Clerk’s office. But you remember, every year, the minister while reading the budget presents a booklet of that nature, including the past budget. 

And, Madam Speaker, you had made a very good attempt by clearly discussing who is responsible for following up loans at implementation stage. When some of us appeared before the Rules Committee, the impression we got then was that every sessional committee was going to come up and tell us how the loans in their sectors have performed annually.  

Actually, I remember the landing site report in 2009 was the worst performing loan according to the list I brought here, and the best and worst performing loans came out in the press. So, the attempt of creating a Loans Implementation Committee, which was lost in the Rules Committee, was under an understanding that every sessional committee, which looks at the annual dispensation of these loans through the budget would  do a follow-up. So, I agree entirely and I would like to support that this is done.  

Secondly, for us as a committee, what we do is debt sustainability - the general picture because we cannot slap mistakes of one ministry onto another ministry. That is why in the data analysis you find some ministries are doing well; even within a particular ministry, some projects do well and others don’t. So, it is important that this is done. For us what we are going to do as a committee is to give our annual debt sustainability of the country. 

Madam Speaker, when we were closing last time I requested that we have two reports to present. One, on the state of the economy, which is ready; it is on business to follow on the Order Paper, and the next one, if we are to be allowed in two weeks, is the debt sustainability of the country because it varies depending on how much is being paid. Fortunately or unfortunately now, Uganda is more credible because you have more receivables coming in, in the form of oil. So, I thought that I should give that general picture. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Chair, I would like to know from you when you say that you cannot slap the mistakes of one ministry onto another, do you consider the fact that Iganga Technical Institute falls under the same sector that is borrowing tonight? Would you then like to advise the House on the basis of failing to take off on the previous loan for Iganga Technical Institute and other technical colleges to withhold approval for this one tonight? 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I am afraid I am being pushed to answer the minister’s question. The Minister of Education is here. I have brought the matter to the House; we are a subordinate committee who have brought to this House the issue that there is a problem in implementation; and if you check our last submission, I mentioned that. I don’t want you to blame the committee for bringing out the truth; unless you are saying in our scrutiny we should start hiding the findings so that you say, “Aye.” We are saying that there are challenges out there which the ministry can handle with the Committee on Education, and parliament can make recommendations. 

7.05
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, in view of all that has been said by the Members, and in view of the explanation the honourable chairperson is expressing before us, and in view of all that we have identified as loopholes, I beg to move a motion that we stay over this, because even as we speak now, the Minister of Finance is not here and even the Minister of Education, much as the Minister of State for Primary Education is here, we may not get satisfactory responses. 

I am sorry to say, but I beg that we stay over this because it is important and Madam Speaker, since we have been advocates of fighting corruption, we need to first understand this before we pass this loan. I am not objecting to the passing of the loan, but let us stay over it until we are convinced.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, there is a motion, what do you have to say about it? 

7.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform this august House that I am the in0charge of the technical institutes in the ministry, and I am here. When she says that the Minister of Education is not here, I would like to clarify that I am the one in charge and that is why I am here, and I am going to respond accordingly, though I have not yet been given a chance. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for the support on the loan. I don’t see why we should stay over this when most of the Members support this loan as a noble cause for this country. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think hon. Muwuma raised a very serious matter that he has been expecting money in Iganga Technical Institute for three years and it hasn’t come. So, should we continue when the others in the pipeline have not got it? 

DR KAMANDA: Madam Speaker, if you look at the responses, we answered this question before the committee and the committee has provided an attachment to all the Members. They should all look at it on pages 4, 5 and 6; that is what we provided to the committee as our response. That is the status of the loan, effectiveness of the loan, the current status and the ground-breaking will be next year in January for those projects, which are under - where Iganga institute belongs; and that is OPEC.

The Saudi Fund will also be in January - That is what we are saying and you should look at pages 5 and 6. The responses are there.

Madam Speaker, I stand to oppose the motion brought by my colleague that we stay over this. I am suggesting that we conclude the matter. Yesterday it was here, they asked the committee to go back and rectify this report, and they have come back. The matter was raised yesterday by hon. Okupa and the Leader of the Opposition hon. Nandala-Mafabi; so this is the second day.

MR OKUPA: The reports were on preliminary objection, but now we have received the reports, and there are issues, which need to be answered. You are telling us that you had responded, but are they the right responses or not? Because you can give a response, but are Members satisfied with the response? If we are not satisfied, you cannot continue; first satisfy the Members because they have raised issues. What Members want is satisfactory responses and if they are not there we cannot proceed. However, if you want the report to be passed, give us the right responses on the issues raised by Members. We are not against your report or the borrowing of the money. Let us first address the issues that have been raised and need to be addressed. Can we address them?. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I have been following the discussion quietly, but I am greatly disturbed. At one point I even lost the direction that the House is taking. The situation as I can read shows that there is a lot of inconsistency –(Interjection)– Yes, in the House. Whatever you say, it is as though you were seeing this paper for the first time. You are now mixing up issues – the implementation of these loans – but this is the problem; implementation of the loans is a different issue. This House is responsible -(Interjection)– Listen! This House is responsible –(Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I disagree with the Deputy Leader of Government Business that we have lost track. Madam Speaker, as we discuss this serious issue, the people concerned, especially the ministers of Finance. In the Ministry of Finance there are six ministers but currently, none of them is here, and this is a serious issue we are discussing. The ministers of Education – I am surprised to hear my colleague, hon. Kamanda Bataringaya saying that he is the chairman (Interjection)I am coming to the point of order – 

THE SPEAKER: Let him complete his point.

MR MUGUME: Order, General, I respect you. Please! Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that I am surprised to hear hon. Kamanda Bataringaya saying that he is in charge of institutions. Now, my question is: Is the Leader of the Opposition in order to say that the House is lost, when actually he is the one who is lost?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am not the Leader of the Opposition! This is exactly what I saying: These people are confused. How can one call me the Leader of the Opposition? And how capable are you to discuss issues of this nature when you cannot differentiate between the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition? 

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, I think I was clear. I have addressed him as the Leader of Government Business. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason why reports come here for debate is for Members to express their views. So, I do not accept that there is confusion; Members are expressing their reservations about the loans that were earlier approved vis-a-vis their performance. There is no confusion in this House because I am in charge.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: No, let me explain – 

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no. There is no confusion in this House.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: No, Madam Speaker, excuse me. Let me explain because I sat down for a point of order –(Interjection) - I am appealing to you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: General, there is no confusion in this House; Members are expressing their views about the loan performance, especially when you have asked us to approve another loan.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Now, Madam Speaker, am I talking to you or the whole House? -(Interjection)- That is why I said there is confusion. Don’t you see for yourself that there is confusion; when I am still talking to you, people are shouting “Order!” What is that order for? And when I say there is confusion, you dispute it; can’t you see for yourself? (Interjection) Now, which order am I going to take? I am still talking to the Speaker. Madam Speaker, I also wish to raise a point of order. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, which point of order are you raising?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: The point of order is this: I am still speaking to you and so they should give me the chance to speak to you before –(Interjection)- Don’t you see, Madam Speaker? This “order” is not proper.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no confusion in this House; Members are expressing their views on the basis of the report presented to them and the information they have concerning previous loans that have not performed. It is their role to oversee the implementation of the loans or whether we are borrowing for nothing. So, they are perfectly in order; there is no confusion. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. May I continue, Madam Speaker? (Interjection) How many chairpersons are here? They are saying that I should apologise, but are they chairpersons? That is the problem I have. May I continue, Madam Speaker? 

What I am saying is that this House is responsible for following up the loans they have approved since the Sixth Parliament. This report shows the status of Arab-financed projects which were approved by Parliament. But nobody seems to have received this at the time it was submitted. And if they say they do not have, maybe we will have to ask the committee chairperson or the minister to provide this information to Members again. It was provided before but probably Members lost it or they do not remember. They should now be re-informed so that they are given time to read and come back when they are informed. So, if you do not act on the information given to you, whom do you blame? 

7.19
MRS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Leader of Government Business for concurring with Members that we actually refer the document and get further guidance by the information given to us. And I think it is in harmony with the motion raised by hon. Seninde that we stay the document until we are satisfied that the loans approved by this Parliament have been put to proper use and that the money borrowed – actually, my point of concern is that the money borrowed is too little like other colleagues have said. If we are to borrow, we should borrow enough to fully equip the institution to enable the beneficiaries to get the worth of the money we have borrowed.

And Madam Speaker, you will remember that in 2010 we hurriedly passed a loan to go and rehabilitate our original secondary schools. I think you remember. Up to now, nothing has been done to those schools - the centres of excellence. Up to now, nothing has happened in those schools. It is very proper for this Parliament to be guided by the Ministry of Education. 

My dear colleague, the Leader of Government Business, even as we acquire loans now, banks will give you a financial card which will link you to the Credit Reference Bureau so that they can know your indebtedness. It is in the same spirit that we are saying, look here, first show us the performance of the previous loan so that we can be able to go and borrow. It is not a matter of borrowing without performing even with the little we have so far received. This is being done in good faith so that the Ugandans who are going to service these loans get the worth of the money we are borrowing. We should not just borrow for the sake of borrowing when we are not fulfilling the requirements for which the monies were borrowed. 

I, therefore, wish to suggest and propose, Madam Speaker, that we stay the approval of this loan for purposes of getting clarity.  It is in good faith and we are doing it to unveil the suspicion that is being created in our different ministries and specifically in the Ministry of Education as proposed by the General and the Leader of Government Business. 

7.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker, I told this august House that we gave the responses and on page 4, it is indicated that Parliament approved it. For example, the Saudi Fund which is meant for five districts, that is Adjumani, Lyantonde, Kiboga, Kyenjojo and Bukedea. This was effective July 2010. After that, what we did - when you go to page 5, we are saying, in 2011 procurement processes for infrastructure and training supplies and related services. Those are the activities for that particular loan. The same applies to the OPEC Fund which also became effective 5 July 2010. That is what we were giving. In other words, in terms the status now. 

Then we went on to talk about ADB or IDB Phase II, and this became effective on 14 September 2010. We have given this information to the committee which has also given it to the House. So, that is the status now -(Interjections)- yeah. Performance? Yes. Finally, we said that in 2013, construction will start in January. That is what I said and that is what we reported to the committee. The chairman can testify and confirm to that. That is what you said.  

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from hon. Kamanda Bataringaya, the State Minister for Primary Education, is that you heard hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi when he was talking to the Chairman about the fluctuation of the interest rate. You borrow money in 2010 and you want to start using it in 2013; of course you also know that it can easily be affected by the interest rates. 

Actually, why we are raising this issue is because we want to address you on the performance of these loans. Do you get these loans when you are not ready? Like for this particular loan we are talking about, you are giving us assurance that for Iganga Technical Institute you are about to disburse money yet this loan was got some three years back. This is what we are saying. Where is this money as it is actually disbursed? That is what we want you to show us. What is the performance of these loans?

7.25
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You had earlier on guided us well by giving an instruction that the Clerk should produce all the loans that have been approved by this Parliament, and from that point, Parliament would find out and appraise itself on what loans are performing and the reasons why some are not performing. I think that would be the good starting point. But to say that we should stall Government programmes, is to say that we are not going to approve any other loan before these ones come up? I think that would be – two wrongs do not make a right. Madam Speaker, I want to submit -(Interjections)- you have so many this side. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Tashobya knows that the Constitution requires that they must report to Parliament about utilisation and performance. The ruling of the Speaker was actually to the effect that they bring to our attention the loans which we have got. The Clerk will not show us the performance of these loans. The people to show us the performance of these loans are the people who took these loans. We are not opposed to the borrowing, but we are only saying that since we are borrowing this money and we shall have it even for three years without utilising it, let us correct these few errors before we come to approve. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think that we have a good starting point in that I have instructed the Clerk to give us an update on all the loans from the Sixth Parliament. It is when we have all of them to which we are committed that we can ask about the utilisation from the President. Once we have our list we shall say, “Your Excellency, you comply with the Constitution and tell us what you have done with this money.” So, I think we are making a stand. I think we should proceed like that.

Let us approve that loan. It will be one of those on the final list and then we shall ask the President -(Applause)- “Since the Sixth Parliament we have given you this. Can you explain how it has been utilised?” Then we can take it from there. 

Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the request to borrow as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

So, Clerk, in one week I want that list. It should be available to all the Members. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON A REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 10 MILLION FROM OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OFID) FOR FINANCING THE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT AND ACCESS EXPANSION PROJECT IN SEVEN TOWNS IN UGANDA

7.29
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would request that Members get the report, the brief to Parliament and responses which is an attachment from the Ministry of Energy. Madam Speaker, as you earlier guided, I will try as much as possible to summarise.

On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I want to present the committee report on Government borrowing for US$ 10 million from OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), for financing the energy development and access expansion project in seven towns in Uganda.

Page 1, gives you the introduction and methodology, including the mandate of the committee. Page 2, gives the background: The current rural electrification programme was established by the Electricity Act, 1999 of this Parliament and stipulates the following:

1.	A programme implemented through public-private partnership;

2.	Preparation of sustainable and coordinated rural electrification strategy and plan to guide the programme; 

3. 	Establishment of a Rural Electrification Fund by the ministry responsible; 

4. 	Maintenance of the national rural electrification database;

5. 	The Rural Electrification Strategy 2001/2010 identified the following primary objectives intended to reduce inequalities in access to electricity and the associated opportunities for increased social welfare, education, health and income-generation activities; 

6. 	Achieve equitable regional distribution and access to electricity, maximise the economic social environmental benefits of rural electrification subsidies, promote expansion of the grid and development of grid electrification and stimulate innovations within suppliers;
 
7. 	The strategy was also to promote power generation from renewable energy sources for projects of capacity up to 20 megawatts for both grid connection and off-grid supply; and 

8.	 Then also prescribed a target of 10 percent rural electrification access by 2010, which was yesterday.
 
The project linkage to country strategy is as you have seen it; to meet the energy needs of Uganda’s population for socio-economic development in an environmentally sustainable manner. 

Project Rationale

You will realise that only six percent of our population can access electricity. The demand has grown to about 350 megawatts at peak time and the main grid areas are centred along Jinja-Kampala-Entebbe axis resulting in regular load shedding which has been a problem. Therefore, one of the most important projects for the Ugandans is to improve electricity access and connectivity and in this regard, successful completion of this project will contribute to improved access to electricity and connectivity in the countryside and hence, better and sustainable living conditions for Ugandans. 

Project description is as stated above, but clearly, to mention the seven rural towns in the districts of: Mukono, Buikwe, Apac, Oyam, Lira, Dokolo and Masindi.

Project components

There is a component of construction of district networks which includes civil and electrical work aspects. I will not go into details.

Engineering design and construction supervision 

The second component which consists of preparation of projects design, tendering documents, supervision and physical implementation. 

•	The criteria as usual attempts regional balance of course in contrast with other existing projects as you will see in the responses;
•	Growth centres having no access to electricity and no connectivity to the existing power grids;
•	Sufficient clientele to us electricity in the area;
•	Availability of clients for future expansion;
•	Availability and accessibility to existing power grids; and 
•	Key economic activities including SMEs and social services like schools, health centres and mineral processing.

The costing is as given below. Most of the money really is for the supply, for the erection of the lines, and distribution of transformers and service connection. It is only 0.9 which goes to the consultancy fees which we said includes tendering, designs and others, and it is actually below 10 percent of the total figure. 

It is proposed that the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) will provide a loan of US$ 10 million and that the Uganda Government will do counter funding of US$ 2,171,000 and the table graphically illustrates the components; 76 percent of the project is funded by the development partners and 23 percent by Government of Uganda. 

The terms as you can see the figure of US$ 10 million; the interest rate is 1.25 percent per annum; service charge as given - one percent; maturity is 20 years including five years of grace period.

Submission of Government conditions of the Attorney-General’s legal opinion as usual to OFID, that necessary environmental clearance has been obtained. These are some of the details they always go for - the compensation plan to the people affected; the land acquisition; part of the cost-financing; and that Rural Electrification Agency (REA)  submits to OFID quarterly progress reports containing information on technical and financial status of the project progress.

Project implementation

The Rural Electrification Agency (REA) under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development will implement the project. REA will be responsible for the planning, implementation, management, supervision, accounting and coordination of the project plus forwarding relevant reports to OFID. The project monitoring and evaluation department established under REA shall be directly responsible for the implementation. 
Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development will cause REA to appoint a qualified engineer as a project coordinator.

Honourable colleagues, I would like to request that in the other attachment I have given you, please follow up and see projects which happen to fall in your areas so that you regularly get in touch with - there is a response from Ministry of Energy addressed to the Chairman, National Economy. That is the one which gives details of different projects in different areas. The brief is a different document, but there is also that attachment.

Observations 

On page eight, the committee did observe that although a number of major milestones in the implementation of the rural electrification programme had been marked, the government target for electricity for all by 2035 might not be realised at this pace mainly due to the inadequate and inconsistent appropriated budgeted funds for this programme.

The committee recommends that Government commits adequate funds to support the rural electrification programme through accelerating efforts of adequate resource mobilisation to develop the required infrastructure and scale-up access to meet the target. This will also give confidence to development partners about Government’s seriousness about rural electrification, and also take care of the ongoing pressures for electricity access to the whole country. 

The committee observed that way leaves and land compensation costs consume valuable resources which would otherwise finance additional infrastructure to provide services. It also delays and drags the implementation of projects, and threats of litigation are invoked and quite an amount is spent on seeking consent for use of people’s land thus negatively impacting on rural access.

Colleagues you remember that in our Constitution, land belongs to the people and even if your community requires a utility, Government has to compensate adequately, promptly and prior to the taking of possession and that creates a difference in some areas. 

The countries we are benchmarking like Ethiopia where Government does not have to compensate anybody, they move faster. For rural electrification we now appealing when it comes to the village lines for distribution, we recommend that Government and the ministry, Madam Irene, that you make more enhanced level of awareness including involvement of political leaders like district leaders, sub-county leaders and MPs. 

If they popularise the project, the community will not be very aggressive on lines going to their villages or going through the neighbourhood. What has caused this? We found areas where project contractors go to the site without informing LCs or MPs and at times they get harassment from the community. So, we need more involvement of leaders.

The third observation is that while connection rates on rural networks continue to grow slowly, there was a reported improvement in electrification over the last 10 years from 1 percent in 2001 to 6 percent today. This improvement is, however, not fundamental to realise the required scale-up and aware that we promised energy for all by 2035. This challenge is mainly due to the relatively high connection costs and house wiring that are not easily affordable to many people living in the rural areas. More needs to be done to realise many more connections. 

Colleagues you remember the last loan for transmission on Masaka line was providing a step down for the people along the project. You remember the cases of the earlier reports we made where people who got power during Amin’s time for Nakasongola Barracks, the neighbours right after Luweero had no power until recently. They would target a barracks, an industry but the community is left in darkness. There is now a new shift that at least when a line of transmission is going to any direction, those under it must benefit.

The committee recommends that Government works out other mechanisms, for example, consumer credit, to supplement the community contribution introduced by REA, and output based aid programme on the ERT project already in the pipeline to ease the burden of connection and house wiring. This innovation has been done on the line from Bujjagali – the Kawanda connection to Masaka. So, we think that is the right direction.

The committee further recommends that the lessons learnt and experience gained by the various institutions involved in the rural electrification programme, especially the agency, are used to put in place the right mechanism for a successful rural electrification programme.

Observation No.4 is that there is a lot of pressure from leaders and communities to have electricity extended to their areas with focus particularly on grid extension; whether it makes financial or economic sense that is a different matter; yet much of the demands could be met by other means like solar electrification if solar panels are given to those people who are a bit scattered. Given the set-up of settlements in the rural areas where homesteads are scattered, grid access will remain a big challenge.

Much as the last Parliament did make a law making the whole of Uganda a planning area, we are moving very slowly into urbanisation, and the costs of extending power to people who want to live on their own hills and at their own burial sites is still a problem.

The committee recommends that Government should not only promote foreign private sector participation in the area of increasing hydropower generation capacity, but also explore mechanisms of promoting their participation in solar electrification, especially for areas fairly far away from the grid. Solar PV connections have a potential for acceleration and even in overtaking these connections.

This will contribute to addressing such pressures as long as reasonable financial resources are committed to the extension of grid power extensions, not forgetting that not everybody who is connected can afford the Bill, so solar becomes in the end cheaper much as it is initially very expensive.

The committee noted the inadequate local private sector capacity in the power industry to invest and undertake construction of infrastructure. This has resulted in the bulk of the renewable energy projects supported by programmes being undertaken by foreign developers; limited credible bids for construction work; and limited bids for operating built networks; and late project development process.

The committee recommends that Government finalises the national construction policy and undertakes increased training of local contractors and provision of technical advice. Colleagues, we still have a challenge; we have very few citizens and local companies which have the capacity to build the transmission line so you find many foreign companies are coming in to fill that vacuum. We think that there must a deliberate policy by Government to build local capacity either using a national company or enabling our private sector to be able to compete and have a local input in order to benefit from this.

The committee noted that in all the project areas, rural towns, small and medium industries, fish landing sites, community centres and social service centres like schools and health centres will be connected.

The committee further noted that Government plans to enhance electricity utilisation and improve rural access through provision of subsidies for electricity connection for households.

We even found that the project of landing sites actually has to have a component of rural electrification and it is unfortunate that even for the few landing sites which have been completed, some haven’t even got the power connection. So, it is a challenge and yet the funder of the landing sites was also funding the component of rural electrification.

The committee welcomes the initiative of provision of a subsidy, connection for poor households, and recommends that the selection process should be transparent and eligible persons be determined through an independent poverty mapping exercise.

The committee has further noted that in the context of Uganda economic development poverty reduction strategy, the Government is aiming at massively increasing access to electricity to the country’s population.

This proposed project is, therefore, part of Government of Uganda strategy to improve access to electricity and connectivity in the country. The project is in line with Government of Uganda priorities in the energy sector and all proposed actions are to take into account Government priorities and objectives.

The project is technically feasible, socially desirable, economically relevant and environmentally sustainable. Basically, the committee is saying, how we wish there was a bigger project to reach much more than the seven towns mentioned.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House the approval of the Government request to borrow US$ 10 million from OFID to finance the energy development and the expansion on the terms and conditions set above to benefit the seven towns of Uganda without power. I thank very much and I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable chairperson and your committee. The report has been signed by more than 50 percent of the members, and it has also been initialled.

MR MAWANDA: I would like to thank the committee for a very good report and I would also like to support the committee in its bid to seek Parliament’s approval for Government to acquire this loan, however, with the following observations: 

One, the capacity of the Rural Electrification Agency to execute its work. In my constituency, we have various projects that had been promised to us by the agency to be executed, but up to now, no action has been taken. So, if we add more work to it, I am wondering whether it will be able to execute those jobs.

Secondly, we have of late heard of the blowing up of transformers, mostly in my constituency. I wonder what quality of transformers they are installing these days. They install a new transformer, and after one or two weeks, it blows up. And it takes time for this agency or the ministry to replace these transformers. So, as we approve this money, they should be able to check the quality of transformers. 

Madam Speaker, as we promote education for all, it is good we are seeking for this money to extend power to rural areas. I would suggest that we also look at installing this power in strategic places like in health centres and schools. Computer science is now a compulsory subject –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute to finish.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, Computer Science is expensive for all children in the country, but in some schools, they do not even have any form of power. So, I suggest that we look into it to ensure that schools which do not have power do get it; either solar or hydroelectric power is extended to these schools to enable our students study Computer Science and compete with other institutions. I had more points, but finally –(Member time out.)

7.52
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are areas which are already connected to the power grid and they only need transformers. For example in Gomba, we have places like Wanjeyo and Malele, which were connected to the power grid a long time ago; about three years now. But they only lack transformers. So, as we approve this loan, let the minister consider giving transformers to the places which are already connected to the grid. 

You also said that among the criteria used in selecting the seven project areas, you said you considered balanced regional development. But we should not consider that. In a place like Gomba, electricity coverage is less than five percent. If you compare it with places in the central region, then a place like Gomba will not be considered. So, I request that you consider districts, especially the new ones. Thank you very much. 

7.54
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I give my comment, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker for coming up openly and respecting the African cultural values against western cultures. I want to go on record on that.

Having said that, I would like to support the loan request and also add that the amount of money requested for is very little. When you look at the global trend today, the potential is in rural communities; and if you want to create a robust economy, we have to provide rural electrification for those areas to develop. That will help also help to reduce rural–urban migration. Areas which have benefited from rural electrification have done a lot in terms of job creation; they have sawmills where their people work and get income. 

Therefore, Ministry of Energy should intensify this process because what is happening now is that anybody who is not involved in production is going to become a misfit. And, how are we going to produce at a cheaper cost? We can do it only with electrification because power is a major element of production and when we produce at a low cost, you help the economy to grow. So, I support the loan and the target should be the rural communities. If you want people to get jobs in the areas where they come from, then that is the best way to go.

Another observation is on 2.8; one coordinator for the project - I do not know how many engineers were assigned –(Member timed out.)

7.56
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the chairman for the work done. As you indicated, this will also form part of the loans; the constituents will have to verify the performance. Chairperson of the committee, take note of that. 

I am a member of the Natural Resources Committee and they gave us a huge list of schemes to be accomplished in the whole country. 

We allowed them to look at the financing; but now if they ask for this small amount of money, I do not know how they are going to cover the entire country. I, therefore, wanted the ministry to at least give us the strategy they are going to use to accomplish all those schemes. 

Secondly, there was support from the World Bank, which they indicated to us. That was to help with connections for those people who cannot afford. But let us also look at the nature of houses – the shelter – the Ministry of Housing should help those communities to have better shelters. For some of those rural areas, you might want to give power to some homes but the nature of shelters is appalling – grass thatched. So, Government should help people to get better shelters – (Member timed out.)

7.58
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, mine is on 2.2, on the issues of regional balance. If you look at the North, I represent 34 districts and none has been picked. So, which regional balance is there? The whole of Eastern Uganda has not got any. Do you mean we do not have these centres in my region?

Honourable minister, you come from the East. Do you mean to say Bukwa is not a good town to share this? I can see in the North there is Apac, Oyam, Lira and Dokolo – four districts, and yet there isnone of all my 34 districts. So, please sort me out before I support the project. 

7.59
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start from where hon. Peter Ogwang ended. But first of all, I want to go on record that I support the loan request. But I think we need to delete the phrase “regional balance” before we approve, because early this month, I was in Adjumani District and there is no single pole of electricity. So, as we begin thinking of concentrating in some places, what plans do we have? We visited some prisons to try and save the situation in prisons, but they are in total darkness. The entire town is in darkness. So, it is my prayer that we spread out these opportunities if we are to use the phrase “regional balance”. 

I also want to remind the minister that as she uses the Tirinyi Road back to the land of the wise men and women – after Tirinyi–Nakalama junction, all those trading centres do not have power despite the high voltage power lines that are passing them. In Nawangisa, you just get some power in Busembatia and then after Namutumba, there is no power. Can we just request the minister to avail us with transformers such that these people can also enjoy the national cake? I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

8.01
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also once again in support of the committee’s proposals and recommendations and I fully support this loan request to be approved. 

However, I do note that in the committee’s observation, they were saying that solar power can work for some of the rural areas, which is quite correct, but when it comes to the smaller towns in the rural areas where people may want to set up small-scale industries like maize and coffee mills and so forth, that is not a proposal that can work because you cannot use solar power to power a maize mill or a coffee hauler. Therefore, that can only work for isolated rural households to provide lighting and low energy requirements. 

Also, through you, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Minster for Energy maybe through the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) to put into effect or to fulfill the President’s pledge to several sub-counties in Kiboga District like Muwanga, Kibiga and Ddwaniro. The President promised to have power supplied to several towns in those sub-counties – growth areas - about 10 years ago, and up to now, we are still waiting. Actually, honourable minister and through you, Madam Speaker, the people in some of those areas told me that if they do not get power in these years, there is no vote –(Member timed out.) [HON. MEMBER: “For you or for the President?”] 

8.03
MR YORAKAMU KATEIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their work. I support the loan, but I have a few observations. 

One, this is again an example of piecemeal borrowing - small bits and you cannot plan sustainably. In my constituency, just as my colleague said, I have the President’s pledge to install power in Buraro Parish, Kasaana sub-county where I come from. I know that of course you cannot deal with every situation at the same time, but it would be very good in this kind of presentation if you make your criteria on how you select these areas clear. For example, you have got four areas in one sub-region as somebody raised - Apac, Oyam and Dokolo in one region and then you have completely nothing from other regions and so you cannot apply the phrase “regional balancing”.

The second point I wanted to make was that you should give us a comprehensive plan and we budget and then decide that if we want to make an impact, let us borrow a certain amount of money. If it is US$ 500 million, let us do that and we know that we have done something and it has an impact like in Ministry of Education on secondary schools. That loan has made an impact on secondary schools in that we now have books in the libraries, there are computers in schools, they have built structures and you can see it on the ground; but this little piecemeal borrowing we will approve, but grudgingly, and I think that it should improve our planning –(Member timed out.)

8.05
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for this good report. I would also like to commend REA because wherever we moved throughout Uganda, we have found that in many areas they are doing some work. So, I hope that when we give this money to them, the agency will do good work. However, this is little money given –

THE SPEAKER: Information from the chair.

MR WERIKHE: I thank you, Madam Speaker and also my colleague for giving way. I am a member of this committee, but I am just giving information. We had asked the honourable minister to come up with a comprehensive plan so that we can really support her to actually cover the entire country. This money is very little, and by the way, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance as we talk now - between Finance and the regulatory authority in the electricity sector, there is money that is being withheld meant for the purpose of actually extending rural electrification. So, as a House, we need to come up and support this cause and make sure that Ministry of Finance gives these people money. I thank you.

MR SSEMUGABA: I thank you. However, we emphasise quality assurance when they are giving specifications in these tender documents, because somewhere, the contractors use poor quality transformers. As you have heard they blow up within a short time like in my area where they had just installed it and it blew, but they took it because they had not yet commissioned it.  So, they should emphasise quality assurance and at the same time, the Minister for Energy should implore UMEME or whoever is in charge, because the electricity going to Hoima – many towns have grown along the road, but they are not connected –(Member timed out.)

8.07
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I find good reason to support this programme and the loan although with a huge complaint about the amount of money provided. I do not know what the minister was trying to do, whether to attract trouble to herself before you signed this money? We have got the United Nations environmental programmes to support non-use of firewood, which you even do not have and protection of the environment. So, that is more reason that we should support this programme. 

My question to the minister and the committee is that there are those programmes that have been in place like the Buhweju programme where electricity only entered eight kilometres in the whole of Buhweju District and yet it is 79 kilometres from one end to another of Buhweju. The district headquarters is not served with electricity. Tumo Hospital, which is a private hospital, does not have electricity. Butare Parish and the health centre IV which is also private, does not have power and these are pledges that were started on and abandoned about two years ago.

So, what I wanted to know is what is the programme? Where does this loan application put those places? I know it is not only in Buhweju and they could be in other areas where they stopped half way and now we are starting on another one. How can we move on without doing it wholesale and yet with power we develop the economy? 

We know that with power, we eliminate diseases, improve everything and even stop rural-urban migration so that people can stay in the villages where they can work and operate from. 
  
I thank REA for the eight kilometres that they have done as there has been a lot of impact in that small part of Buhweju –a very big impact and actually people once said that it was not part of Buhweju because Buhweju is known for darkness, and that made people to claim it and take it to either Sheema or Igara. 

So, please, save Buhweju to remain as Buhweju by providing power across in those areas that it is required, and we can promise that we have the capacity to utilise it. We are generating dollars for this country in those eight kilometers from our tea factory. So, please, we need power –(Member timed out.)   
      
8.09
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to go on record that I am supporting the loan. However, I also have problems like my colleagues. The President while campaigning in my area promised power step down. These people have been very patient. The line last passed there in the 1960s. In one of the towns there is a power station. People see light at a distance of three poles, but they cannot get power. Of recent, power killed a person there. The towns are Kyakasa, where there is a sub-station; Kubiri; Nakawala, Ndeeba, Kirumi, Ntungamo, Kisalaba, Kiwogo and Lusalira. In Nakawala, the President promised a secondary school. He is building it, but they don’t have power.  

Madam Speaker, the other problem is extending power from Kasambya town to a place where water is pumped from, called Nakasagga. The President promised it in 2009, but up to now it is not yet done. 

Madam Speaker, I came to Parliament because I took power to Kasambya Trading Centre. We paid Shs 9.4 million as capital contribution to UEB. Now it has turned to Umeme and they are selling shares. Where is our share since we paid a capital contribution? (Laughter) Our share must be given back. A capital contribution to a company is an equivalent of a share. We still have our receipts. 

Finally, the transformers. If the transformers are of low quality, let us –(Member timed out.)

8.12
MRS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and the good recommendations that they have made.

Mine is about Kapchorwa District. In the last campaigns and elections, REA delivered very many poles, almost in every sub-county. The poles are just lying there and rotting away. I request –(Interjection)- 2016? But they are now rotting. They are rotting and I request the ministry to kindly come and erect the lines so that those poles are not wasted.

Recently, we buried three people who died as a result of illegal connections. In fact, they were connecting from Bulambuli to Kapchorwa using barbed wires. You can imagine that. Many people are using that and I think in the near future we might lose very many people in our district. Minister of Energy, kindly do something about our district. Thank you.

8.13
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to raise a question to the ministry. There have been so many installations that have been taking place in some districts, but I am wondering, how long it takes for the ministry to put into operation the power lines after installation. 

I am speaking from experience. I have a line in my constituency that has now taken two years, from Masafu to Bunyadeti. The wires are there, but they have not put installations. So, we want to know how long it can take for people to access this power.

The second question is whether the ministry puts into consideration in its plans the Presidential pledges. I have pledges that the President made in Busia since 2005; areas of less than 15kms -[HON. MEMBER: “Procedure.”]- and I have also been making requests to the ministry in letters –

THE SPEAKER: Is he a member? Honourable, you should not have stood. You are a member. 

8.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Chairperson, can you give us the correct figure for the maturity period because we have in words “forty” and in brackets the figure 20. What is the correct maturity period?

Secondly, you promised us a list. We have not yet got the list up to now. The issue of wastage; can we avoid wastage? The honourable colleague has talked about these poles which we dump during campaign time, which just end up rotting. People fear to go and remove them because they will be attacked. So, they end up just rotting. 

Honourable Minister, thank you for the work you have done in Kasilo, but there are concerns about the compensation promised when REA came and addressed the people before the project started. They are still asking for it. 

There were landing sites which were built in Mulondo and Kagwara; when is the line reaching there. It is just a short distance of about 10kms on both sides. 

Secondly, you have not completed the work in Kasilo, but the poles have already fallen down. I was talking with Eng. Werikhe yesterday and he told me there is a problem with the quality of the poles. The contractor should come and rectify that problem. I think there is much to be done on quality assurance. We may need at one point to shift to concrete poles or metallic poles. But we have challenges with metallic poles because people vandalise them and use them as scrap. So, can you look at that.

As I conclude, honourable minister and Members, we need to look at the challenges REA faces because you find Finance saying that the performance of this organisation is 100 percent, but when you look at the releases, it is less than 20 percent of what REA receives. How do you expect them to perform effectively? We must look at that chairperson of the committee and deal with it. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to close.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. I know Gen. Ali may not speak about this, but can we provide power to his area. I have been there, but there is total darkness; even the road network is very bad. So, can we help the General? (Laughter) Thank you so much.

8.17
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. 

On the first page, on methodology, I want to thank the committee that at least now they have recommended to involve MPs especially when the planning process is ongoing in our constituencies. Sometimes you see people working, but you cannot tell which project they are working on. So, I am happy that we are now included in the awareness when the programme is ongoing.

Secondly, the rural electrification strategy and plan 2012-2021. Can we get a hard copy of this strategy and plan so that each MP can tell where he or she lies. Otherwise, as my colleagues were saying, we need to know. 

I promised most of the wards in my constituency that they would be connected, but I don’t see anything. I don’t see Rukungiri here. I want to see it between the period 2012 and 2016. 

Lastly, about the solar connection; recently, Kanungu and Rukungiri were connected. There is hydro in Kanungu but electricity is still too expensive. I think solar connection is the way to go for this country. If you connect to solar it is cheaper; to install and maintain. I think we should look at this venture, especially –(Member timed out.)

8.20
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am in total support of the approval of the loan. However, Madam Speaker, there are some two projects on power lines in the East. These two are the line from Musita to Namayingo, under JICA, and Mayuge to Bugoto Landing site, under BADEA. These projects have been on. We have sung and told the voters and done everything we can. I have been moving to REA and met Engineer Werikhe here; they are almost mistaking me to be a staff of REA. However, up to now there is nothing coming up. I would like to ask the minister to specifically comment on the power lines in Musita, Mayuge to Namayingo, and the one from Mayuge to Bugoto Landing Site. I thank you.

DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. I think the Rural Electrification Agency is one of the few Government agencies that have actually tried to do work on the ground. We should register our appreciation to REA.

However, I think hon. Elijah Okupa raised the issue of financing the activities of this REA. It is true that most of the money allocated to REA, as a unit, is usually diverted by either Ministry of Finance or even the mother ministry. 

In the circumstances, I want to suggest that we should move to create a vote status for REA in order for us to insulate and protect the allocations to the agency and in order for them to do their work. (Applause) I am saying this because their money is usually cut. You will recall that sometimes people called it the Road Electrification Agency instead of Rural Electrification Agency because they just connect power along the road without bringing on board the concerned institutions. So, I want to request that the responsible minister works with the committee to create a vote status for the agency.

MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to thank the committee for presenting this very well done report. But I would like to re-echo the comments of my colleagues, hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, in regard to REA by saying that this is one of those rare Government institutions where we go as MPs and get a feeling that they are serious with what they are doing. I suppose that if they are given more resources, we would see much more work being done in the country and in our constituencies.
 
I would also like to emphasise the fact that it is important for us to look at rural electrification in a wide context because the country is very big, yet we are supposed to connect power to the ten districts that have been given to us. But that is nothing compared to the 120 or 150 districts we are going to create.

So, I think we should have a national plan and all of us should support it so that we go - even if we do it in a phased manner - we will be sure we are moving from point A to B, for us to do the work in a systematic manner.

Madam Speaker, yes we should thank REA for the work that has been done, but there is this problem of commissioning. They will do the work to completion, but that work will take time to be commissioned, yet I suppose the contractors will have been paid by then. What is the problem? Why can’t the power be commissioned as soon as the work is completed? I also have some lines in my constituency that were completed but have not been commissioned for some time. (Member timed out.)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I rise to speak on behalf of those who come from the mountainous areas. Some of us have referred to REA as the Road Electrification Agency, like my brother hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi said. But I would like to suggest that they should do solar connections in the mountainous areas than erecting the poles. Erecting poles will be expensive for them to satisfy the rural areas that are mountainous.

There was also a pledge of lighting Bukungu Landing Site in Kamuli, which connects Kamuli to Kasilo. I would like to request that this pledge be taken over by REA. I am saying this because I know the Speaker, being the Chair, cannot talk about this, yet Bukungu Landing Site is in her constituency. So, for the Madam Speaker to talk big and be able to come back and preside over this House, this landing site must really be taken care of.

I also wish to state that yes, REA is doing a good job. But to really help them perform even better, they should have a vote of their own so that the ministry does not tamper with their money. If it is money for REA, the agency should be accountable and it should show us where it has put that money other than them going through the ministry. The ministry has a lot of work to do. So, let the agency control its resources and be answerable to Parliament in its own right.

I thank you, Madam Speaker, but before I end, I wish to say that the loan should be passed, only that like I said before, we are asking for smaller monies. Are the lenders giving us a limit? If they are not, why are we limiting ourselves yet we know that we have a lot of work at our disposal –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to conclude.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you. People are talking about poles that have been in their constituencies – these being Presidential pledges – the President goes to an area and says let power be wired to this place. The poles are carried there, but eventually there is no power. What is that? You make the President look helpless. It makes him look like he is not in charge. 

If we are to borrow money, let us borrow it in big sums, and make sure we fulfil the Presidential pledges or else, some of us will have every reason to tell the public that he is a liar and they will believe and give us the votes. Let us strive to fulfil the Presidential pledges so that our people can get the services as promised by the President of the country. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues, for the support and the appreciation they have shown to my ministry, especially the Rural Electrification Agency, for the work they are doing. It is an encouragement for us and I know that with your further support I we can do a great job for this country.

Madam Speaker, Members have raised a lot of issues. Everyone wants to know what is happening in their areas. But let me make a general comment that it’s Government’s responsibility and commitment to ensure that electricity is connected throughout the entire country. We are actually striving to make sure that by the year 2035 –(Interjections)– as Government, the plan is that by the year 2035, we have electricity for all. 

Let me also inform the House that this year was declared UN year for electricity for all, and Uganda was nominated as one of the countries for piloting. So, we have embraced it, and we will take full advantage of the projects and programmes so that we can see how best we can advance rural electrification in this country. 

I would like to thank the committee for its report and the recommendations, and I would like to take this opportunity to go through a number of issues that have been raised. We shall need to share with you our strategic plan so that we can borrow a larger amount of money in order to be able to extend electricity throughout the entire country in a systematic manner. 

The important thing that I would like to share with you is that it is important that if we are to borrow money, we have to be prepared with our feasibility studies and all the consultancies so that when this money comes, it is really put to work and that way we shall be able to maximise the benefits from it. 

Madam Speaker, there is concern about the quality of transformers from a number of Members. Of course, the requirement for any contractor is that there is a warranty period after your work has been completed. Should the transformer fail during that period, the contractor replaces it at no additional cost. So, that ensures that the kind of equipment they are installing onto the network is of good quality. 

But I should also share with you some of the causes of transformers blowing from a technical point of view. One, is illegal connections -(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: I would like to hear from the honourable minister, if she says that they have a warranty for these transformers, then why does it take them long to have them replaced? Because the moment they report that the transformer is faulty, I would have expected them to replace it immediately. So, can the minister clarify to us why it takes long? Thank you.   

MRS MULONI: Okay, thank you. I will explain that. So, from a technical of view, what causes transformers to blow? One, is illegal connections, especially when the installations where they are connected to are tapping into houses which are not properly earthed. And should there be a fault, because there is no earthing at the end, the fault goes to the transformer which makes it blow. 

At times through the illegal connections, the unscrupulous kamyufus – the so-called technicians who do not have adequate knowledge of what theft issues are put into consideration - go to the extent of using nails instead of fuses. Now, a nail is so thick that when there is a fault, the nail will not feel it and, therefore, the transformer will end up blowing up. So, it is important that if we can minimise illegal connections as leaders - as MPs - by sensitising our people about the dangers of illegal connections. 

People are dying because of illegal connections, one honourable member said because they don’t know the safety aspects to it. What they want is to enjoy power which is free, but the end result is that you lose life and access.

The other issue that makes the transformers blow is that people siphon transformer oil. This oil is sold on the open market and is used as a coolant in welding machines. So, again, we have to sensitise our people so that they guard these installations because they are our assets as a country and we need to guard them jealously. When a transformer blows, the whole area is inconvenienced because it will not receive electricity for a very long time.  So, it is very important that we sensitise our people.

On the issue of warranty, once a transformer blows, it is very important that you, the customers within the vicinity report to Umeme immediately. Once you have given them a report - they have now opened telephone lines and even a toll free line 0800 175 175 –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: The clarification I would like from the honourable minister is, given the modern technology that we have, surely, if a transformer blows, isn’t it reflected on your switchboard or wherever? I would like to assume that once there is a problem in the system, it should be reflected and your engineers should be able to trace it other than them waiting for the community to report. 

MS MULONI: The technology that we have can see those transformers to a certain extent. The entire network requires investment if you are to pick each and every transformer so that you monitor it remotely. It is possible, but it requires a lot of investment and time so that you are able to see what is going on remotely on each transformer. 

But also on the other side of the customer, once power has gone off, the best thing and the quickest thing that you have to do is to report that there is a power failure in your area. The toll free line is 0800 175 175. So, you can call that number from any network. UMEME has a customer service centre, and they will be able to pick you, get the details from you and the location, and they will give you a reference number. That reference number helps you to monitor their quality of service - how long they take to respond to your need;

This is because Umeme is regulated by the Electricity Regulatory Authority. The quality of service is one of the parameters that is considered. So, if they take a very long time without responding, you have a right as a customer to report to the Electricity Regulatory Authority so that it can deal with them.

The first point of call would be to let them know that there is a problem. At times there could even be broken conductors which are dangerous to human life. So, it is always important that you complain and they come to address the issue.

On the issue of warranties, yes, as I said, you report and Umeme is supposed to come. If the transformer has blown, it takes slightly longer. Smaller faults take a shorter time for rectification, but for the transformer, and I think based on their quality of service, the maximum should be one month because they need to come and establish what caused the transformer to blow. They have to remove it, take it to the workshop, and then get another transformer. So, it takes time and that is why it is always important that we safeguard the blowing of transformers because of the period it takes.

The other issue that I have heard largely from Members is on step-down transformers to the various trading centres where we have high voltage lines passing. Yes indeed, and as I said, this is much in line with what our plan is for the future to ensure that every place has electricity. And so, along the lines where electricity is passing, we should be able to plan for step-down transformers because they generate economic development in the rural areas. We have seen how rural populations have all of a sudden - you know business picks up and their economic activities are accelerated because of electricity.

So, every effort is going to be made to try and address those requests, but I will request a bit of patience from all of you. Everything needs planning and money, but slowly and surely we shall get there to ensure that all of you are served.

As I said, it is a commitment of Government and we are committed to ensure that we roll-out electricity throughout the entire country. Of course you will also appreciate that this electricity we are connecting throughout the country must be generated. In the past, since June, when we said farewell to load-shedding, we were grappling a great deal with load-shedding. It was the most frustrating thing not to you alone. Now if you get it, it is a technical fault. We have sufficient electricity since Bujagali came on board; it is generating full capacity during the peak hours and even during off-peak, some of the machines are not operating at full capacity. So, right now we have sufficient electricity, but we have to strive to ensure that we increase the generation capacity because of the accelerated development that is taking place in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to conclude. Others will follow the minister to the canteen.

MRS MULONI: I will bring a detailed report - the plan and the budget - so that as Parliament you can get to know the plans that we have so that we can get the support to borrow much more money to be able to address our issues.

I know there are a number of areas where you wanted me to comment about the power situations. I don’t know, Madam Speaker whether you want me to. It is a long list and there are many areas.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you could have them typed and distributed to the House.

MRS MULONI: Okay, I will do that, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, I want to thank you very much for your support and I am looking forward to more of the same. 

Adjumani? We have a thermal generator. The Deputy Leader of Government Business is connected. It is an isolated grid, but we are planning to connect them on to the main grid because of the limitation of the generator, which is serving them. They have maize mills and that requires much more electricity on a full-time basis, but because of the limitations of thermal, they are not served adequately, but there are plans to connect them onto the main grid.

Some of the big schemes - I know the East where I also hail from, my brothers and sisters including the Rt hon. Speaker are wondering what is happening to the East. For this particular loan and the area that was considered, we did not bring on board the other areas that have been served, but when you look at the report, you will appreciate that there is effort to try and distribute throughout the entire country and a good number of schemes are going on in the various parts of the country. I will circulate all this information and I think you will be able to appreciate for yourselves.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to thank you very much for your support and I look forward to your further support. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister, and I want to thank the Chair and all the Members of Parliament for staying up to this time. I now put the question that this House do approve the loan request as presented.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable members, I want to thank you for really staying -

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I did mention and it should be on record in the Hansard that it is 20 years. I want to lay on Table the Rural Electrification Status Performance report of all the projects in your area and possibly request that the Clerk’s Office avails Members with copies in their pigeon holes so that they can follow up. 

We also made REA and Energy generate maps for different projects. We requested that they make small A4 copies so that we can follow up the projects.

The ERT performance was also talked about in particular, as well as the responses to the committee. I beg to lay on Table the loan agreement from the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID). 

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for supporting us in this business, but let me put it on record that I represent a constituency, which does not benefit from a lot of these loan projects I bring here; not a tarmac road, electricity or even water. If you hear that Buliisa is about to benefit from any project, you must be pretty sure Government wants something from Buliisa. We do not get anything for our people; we only get projects because Government wants something from us. I thank you so much.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for persisting up to this hour, and the Speaker for the stamina that you have always put into ensuring that we deliberate and bring to conclusion some issues that have stayed long.

Madam Speaker, I would wish to emphasise that every time we pass loans here, officials from the Ministry of Finance are never present and the ministers themselves are not present. The officials can be present, but they do not speak in this House. The ministers are always put to task but are not here. 

It is very important, Madam Speaker, that these ministers are present to capture the concerns of Members and ensure that they report every time an issue arises. They hurry to come to the Floor to ask for loans and they leave it all to the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and to the Members of Parliament.

It is unfortunate that when we are passing these loans, they are not here. The next time you see them, they will come to apply for another loan and will leave it to the committee responsible. 

So, we really feel concerned and we are worried that they are not bothered, and they do not have these loans at heart. I think that is why they are not even performing. Let them understand that we are concerned and that we shall not pass any further loans next time if the ministers are not in the House because this is about them and their ministries, and it discourages the Members who sit here the whole day to ensure that work is done. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concern of hon. Kiiza. This is a serious concern and I really feel pity that what she has said cannot be challenged. I have tried, but we shall perhaps try to improve now that we have more ministers. We need to do more on attendance because we are very few here indeed. However, I also want to thank colleagues for persisting and sitting up to now and also for your patience. 

I am glad that you have at least seen that insisting on not passing the loan because it is not being implemented is irrelevant now. I think these are two different things. If a child was born two years ago and is stunted, you do not punish this one, which is going to be born now. This is the problem.

So, I think we should take the government to task as to why the loan approved is not implemented instead of stopping this loan because when you stop this loan, you are actually making the situation worse.

I am glad that at least these things have been seen through your guidance. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and we are always available to see and solve these problems. Actually, it is not the House which is confused, but it is some Members of the House who are confused. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Honourable members, I have kept you this late because I wanted you to be free tomorrow to do the Petroleum Bill. So, tomorrow will be dedicated exclusively to the Bills. Bring your Bills, reports and amendments in your heads and on paper. House adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 8.49 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 November 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
