Wednesday, 8 October 2014

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I want to congratulate you upon a very successful prayer breakfast which we hosted this year and also to wish you a very happy Independence Day celebration tomorrow. I do not know whether you are going to be in the constituencies or in Kololo where the main celebrations will be. I will be in Kololo myself and so why don’t you join us in Kololo tomorrow and we commemorate the big day. 

“Honourable members, on the 17th of this month, Uganda will commemorate the Safe Motherhood Day in Tororo District. The theme of the day is, “Mobilising men as partners and champions in prevention of teenage pregnancies; a strategy to promote safe motherhood.” This year’s celebrations will be held in Nagongera Sub-County, Tororo District. This is therefore, to invite Members of Parliament through the Speaker, to participate in this important event. 

The World Health Organisation has committed to support 20 Members of Parliament. The Ministry of Health recognises and appreciates the important role that is played by all of you in championing promotion of the health of mothers, adolescents and children in Uganda. We will be honoured by your presence.” 

It is signed by Sarah A. Opendi, Minister of State for Health (Primary Health Care). 

So the 17th will be a big day for safe motherhood. It’s a commemoration day for the whole world and so let us participate in that for those of you who can make it to Tororo. 

Honourable members, you will see that under our rules, today is a Wednesday and at 3 O’clock, we are supposed to have Prime Minister’s Question Time. But for the purposes of today’s business, we will defer that particular item so that we can complete the task that is before us because as you all know, I will be sending Members on recess today so that we can come back fresh to begin the Christmas meeting of Parliament. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CLOSURE OF GLOBAL TRUST BANK LTD

2.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (General  Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Yesterday, the Member of Parliament for Zombo raised the issue that following the closure of the Global Trust Bank and it being taken over by Dfcu Bank, a number of customers were not getting their salaries and pensioners were not getting their pension. So immediately, I got into contact with the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda to see as to why these people were not receiving their salaries and pensions.

Mr Speaker, it is true that this bank was taken over and from the 1st of July, some accounts were not receiving money that is pertaining to them. One of the reasons is that Global Trust Bank was a micro-finance bank and some of the accounts that were in that bank were actually in groups and they have been advised to open new accounts with Dfcu Bank. 

We have also checked to ensure that this money is corrected and paid to them by Monday 13th of this month and everything possible is being done to ensure that this is rectified. I thank you.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO $482,578,200.143 FROM THE EXPORT IMPORT BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 183 MEGAWATTS ISIMBA HYDROPOWER PROJECT AND THE ISIMBA-BUJAGALI INTER-CONNECTION PROJECT

2.21
THE MINISTER OF  STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Honourable Speaker and colleagues, I want to lay before this Parliament the proposal to borrow up to $482,578,200.143  from the Export Import Bank of China to finance the construction of the 183 megawatts Isimba hydropower project and the Isimba Bujagali inter-connection project. I wish to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the Committee on National Economy to look at this proposal and come back to the House within the time frame allowed by the rules. 

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.23
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri):   Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. 

    i. Alebtong District Local Government
    ii. Oyam District Local Government
    iii. Nwoya District Local Government
    iv. Amudat District Local Government 
    v. Kamwenge District Local Government
    vi. Masindi District Local Government
    vii. Hoima District Local Government
    viii. Kabarole District Local Government
    ix. Kyenjojo District Local Government
    x. Buhweju District Local Government
    xi. Nakasongola District Local Government
    xii. Gomba District Local Government
    xiii. Kanungu district local government 
    xiv. Ngora District local government 
    xv. Kiboga District local government 
    xvi. Moroto District local government 
    xvii. Rukungiri District local government 
    xviii. Bukomansimbi District local government 
    xix. Mpigi District local government 
    xx. Kasese District local government 
    xxi. Buvuma District local government
    xxii. Bushenyi District local government
    xxiii. Kisoro District local government 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those statements and report on the opinion of the Auditor-General in respect of those districts they stand committed to the appropriate committee of the local government accounts to handle within the law.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach) Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to withdraw the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011 which was read for the first time on 19 September 2013 and gazetted as Bill No. 2, Gazette 27, Vol. C, of April 2011. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The minister of state for Finance, minister of state for Energy.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, the motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011 was read for the first time in the Eighth Parliament and saved in the Ninth Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS on 19 September 2013, Government tabled the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011, which Bill was read also for the first time and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development;

NOTING, however, that there was a mistake with the printing of the Bill, which resulted into the omission of keeping records of the Bill saved in the Ninth Parliament from the Eighth Parliament, thereby rendering the reintroduction of the reintroduced Bill substantially different from the earlier introduced Bill to the Eighth Parliament;

AWARE that the omission means that Parliament has two Bills on the liberalisation of retirement benefits sector;

RECOGNIZING, therefore, that there is urgent need to withdraw the latter Bill and allow the House to continue with the original Bill as was tabled in the Eighth Parliament and saved;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is being moved under rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012) that this House approves the withdrawal of the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation, Bill 2011 that was read on 19 September 2013 and maintains the one submitted in Parliament in April 2011 on which all the amendments will be mapped. I beg to move.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion before you. I propose the question to the motion seeking leave of Parliament to withdraw the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011 which was read for the first time on the 19 September 2013 and gazetted as Bill No.2, Gazette 27 Vol. IV, of April 2011. That is the motion for your debate and if there is any debate on this matter we could have it. Yes honourable member from Lwemiyaga

2.30
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga, Ssembabule): Mr Speaker and Members, I have listened in to the minister but the reasons given are wanting because these are Bills that were presented from Government; they are not Private Members’ Bills. Yes, there was one that we tabled in the Eighth Parliament and now in the Ninth Parliament but to the best of my understanding, Government ought to have kept the record and it’s not a question of publishing the Bill and it is rushed to Parliament. I thought it would have given more ample time to the ministers who are the movers and even the technocrats to scrutinize the same Bill to find whether it is relevant or not. But now for Parliament to be dilly-dallied in this fashion, Mr Speaker, I find it unacceptable. 

What justifications do you have? Where did you and how did you obtain the financial implication certificate? Did you consider the details of the first Bill you presented? What was lacking in the second Bill? 

I would imagine in such circumstances that the minister would have interfaced with the committee to find out indeed if the inadequacies he is talking about are real. What are those provisions that were omitted in the second Bill and well knowing that there was a list of the Bills saved from the Eighth Parliament? They knew very well that this Bill had already been tabled. Maybe there is something hidden but from the face of it, nobody can believe that we are having a government that is proceeding to lay Bills, that takes Bills for publication and this serious House of Parliament sits to consider the same and now it is withdrawing without ceremony. I find it unacceptable unless there are other hidden reasons but you can’t say there is innocence and clauses were omitted. We must be told which particulars and specific clauses that were omitted in this second Bill but are prevalent in the first Bill and then with that, we can say, yes. But also, we cannot let it go without a reprimand. 

We are a serious House; there are many items to consider; there are many Bills to consider; there are many issues of national importance but for us to be crowded with duplicated Bills is quite unacceptable and if you don’t take your business seriously, were are not there to play the ping pong. 

Mr Speaker, let them tell us the specifics that were in this Bill that they found it pertinent to be withdrawn but those very clauses are present in the Bill that they want to remain on the Floor of Parliament. We need that strong clarification. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chair of the finance committee here? Honourable members, this matter came before the Speaker’s desk; a complaint was raised by the chair of the committee handling this particular Bill. They said there were two Bills that they found themselves confronted with on the same subject and they documented that the minister should withdraw one Bill. This is the best way of withdrawal; it has come through the Speaker’s Office in order that the committee only has one Bill to handle. If there are clauses that were omitted in one, we need the mandate of the committee to look at it again and come back to the House to report on the Bill that is now before the committee. So that is why this request is being made. 

On the second question of a reprimand, I think it would have been out of courtesy of the minister to have started with an apology to the House so that this matter is settled properly. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, may I end with apologising -(Laughter)- because Mr Chairman, we did apologise to the committee and we also apologised in the presence of the Speaker where we had all the chairpersons of the different committees of this House and conditionally, I also apologise for - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, you are on record.

MR OMACH: On record, apologising for duplicating the same Bill and as you have rightly stated, there was a letter that was written to the Speaker on 7 July 2014 by the chairperson of the finance committee and the Speaker responded to the chairperson on 27 July 2014, directing that we should withdraw the second Bill and with your permission, I will table these two letters for the record. I do apologise with that condition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the record capture that. Honourable members, we have business to do; this one is no business. Let us get rid of it and we move forward, they will add a thing to it. Leader of the Opposition; on this subject f withdrawing a Bill? (Laughter)

2.36
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You can’t have a title without a job -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, have your job now. 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the apology which has been offered by the minister but I thought it is the responsibility of this House to take note of that serious error. Now if the committee had not recognised that there were two Bills on that same subject, what would have happened? So it means that in the same office done by the same technocrats, they write two Bills with different years and bring them to Parliament hoping that we are too dumb to know. So, we are trying to do what the bureaucrats should have done and that is why I feel it is not just a matter we should sweep under the carpet. It is something which the ministers, particularly the new Prime Minister, this is part of your new job - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no new Prime Minister; there is just a Prime Minister. 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you. The new Prime Minister – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: The Prime Minister who has just recently taken up office -(Laughter)- and I think it is important that he should note that maybe for a while, the Cabinet has been in slumber and it is important that he should wake up the Cabinet from slumber and we should start doing serious business. So, that is the statement I want to leave on record. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, that is why we have committees of Parliament. Point of Procedure!

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When we had a workshop on retirement benefits liberalisation matters, the two Bills kept on appearing but I think it was intended because if you followed the text of the two Bills, you would find one is defeated in purpose by the use a stronger legal word and the other one is weaker. So if we are moving to withdraw one of the two, would it not be procedurally right for us to actually ask the committee responsible to recommend which Bill should be withdrawn because there were many issues that really came to the fore that we disagreed on and I think it would be prudent if the committee recommended that this one be withdrawn and maintain this one in order to discuss the enactment of the Bill on the liberalisation sector. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a committee Bill; it is the minister’s Bill. He has the right to choose which one to withdraw but it is up to the committee on examining the Bill to look at those provisions that could possibly have been withdrawn with the other Bills if they were appropriate to have been accommodated in this other Bill to bring it on board. So, nothing is lost.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of St Kizito Nalinya Primary School in Kalungu District, represented by hon. Vincent Ssempijja and hon. Kintu Florence. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. 

Honourable members, I think it is now appropriate to put the question to this motion. I put the question that leave of Parliament be granted for the withdrawal of the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011; which was read for the first time on 19 September 2013 and gazetted as Bill No. 2, Gazette No. 27, Volume C 1b, April 2011. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE FINANCE BILL, 2014 AND THE EXCISE BILL, 2013, WHICH WERE RETURNED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT AS PROVIDED FOR UNDER RULE 132 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that a letter was indeed received by the House and the Speaker communicated to the House the content of that letter as required by law. The letter dated 29 September 2014 in respect of those two Bills - the Excise Duty Bill and the Finance Bill, 2014. The Excise Duty Bill is of 2013 and also the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 for reconsideration by this House. Honourable members, the committee has now come back to Parliament and they are ready on the first two Bills which have implications on the budget, but they have not been able to handle the Public Private Partnership Bill of 2012, which has been also submitted for reconsideration. 

The rules provide the timeframe within which this matter should be handled; it gives at least two weeks and these two weeks is likely to be exceeded should the House go on recess today. But the same rule says if Parliament is in session. But now that we are here today, I am granting the committee an extension of time appropriate for them to handle also the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 for reconsideration and reporting back to the House at an appropriate time when the House resumes. That is the motion. Mover of the motion, are you moving the motion or just giving a background of how we come to this motion?

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, did return the Finance Bill on 29 September 2014 and in the case of the Finance Bill, I would like with your permission, to read what is stated: “I am also returning to Parliament the Finance Bill, 2014 to reconsider clause 2 of the Finance Bill, 2014; which sought to amend section 68 of the Uganda Communications Act to provide for further transfer of half of the revenue collected by the Uganda Communications Commission from the licence communication operators to the Consolidated Fund. The revenue out of this measure is estimated at Shs 8 billion.” 

The approach to transfer half the levy collected by UCC is consistent with the fact that we need in the Consolidated Fund, sufficient funds to manage the expenditure that this Parliament has already appropriated. Mr Speaker, these measures that have been returned by His Excellency the President, including the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2013 takes away a total of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is the Excise Duty Bill.

MR OMACH: The Excise Duty Bill takes away up to a total of Shs 68 billion, which is very much required to ensure that the budget that has has been appropriated is ably financed. And, as indicated in His Excellency the President’s letter, the revenue collection as at the end of August, was short by Shs 68 billion and, therefore, if these Bills are not passed as requested by His Excellency the President, the financing of the budget that has been appropriated would become a problem. I beg to submit.

2.46
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Speaker directed, the finance committee sat and reconsidered the Bill and I wish to report back to the House. Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, since this report is very brief, I beg to read it as it is.

This is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Finance Bill, 2014. You will recall, the Bill was referred to the Committee on Tuesday, 30 September 2014, after H.E the President returned it to Parliament for reconsideration in his letter dated 29 September 2014, in accordance with Article 91 (3)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Methodology

Given that the committee had already consulted extensively on the Bill, it held an in-house meeting to consider the clauses in the Bill as pointed out by H.E the President for Parliament’s reconsideration. 

Reconsidered clauses

The committee reconsidered clause 2 of the Finance Bill to amend section 58 of the Uganda Communications Commission Act to provide for transfer of half of the revenue collected by Uganda Communications Commission from licensed telecommunications operators to the consolidated fund. The revenue out of this measure is estimated at Shs 8 billion.

Observations

The committee re-scrutinised the provision in the Bill and agreed that the proposal is acceptable since the revenue will be available in the consolidated fund for Parliament to appropriate to unfunded priority programmes. The committee recommends that this part of the Bill be passed as approved.  Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, was there any minority report that was brought to your attention? 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a minority report by hon. Ekanya. Would I go ahead and read it? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not your report. It would be hon. Ekanya to read that. Did he say from hon. Ekanya or hon. Ogwal?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, the minority report is prepared by hon. Geofrey Ekanya.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Geofrey Ekanya; but what I am seeing now is the one from hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara, Woman MP Dokolo District. That means this one is not known to the committee. Is this different? So, do we have the one that the committee received, of hon. Ekanya, presented?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, the one that hon. Ekanya prepared is attached to the main report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can they proceed with that, hon. Ekanya? Is he here or anybody on his behalf? 

2.52
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will seek your indulgence to pass on the copies, which are attached to the report 

Mr Speaker, I am not inventing the wheel. This is another time we are actually doing the same thing. In accordance with rule 194 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda (2012), hon. Ekanya hereby presents the opinion on the Excise Duty Bill, 2014. He took part in the examination of the Tax Bill 2014. However, his opinion deferred from those of the majority of the members of the committee for finance and planning, especially on the Excise Duty Bill, 2014. He strongly opposed the Kerosene Tax of Shs 200 per litre on Schedule 2(b).

Justification

In some areas of Uganda –(Interruption)


MR MUSASIZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report I presented is a report on the Finance Bill, 2014 that is seeking to amend section 68 of the UCC Act and the honourable member is reading something to do with Excise Duty, which I have not yet presented. Is it procedurally right for him to continue reading the report, which I have not presented to this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, because the motion is for both of them, maybe you present both.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Mrs Cecilia Ogwal rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Let the committee present both reports because the motion is on both reports. Then we will receive the minority report.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, these are two different Bills; there is the Finance Bill and there is the Excise Duty Bill. The report he presented is on the Finance Bill, which is section 2 of the Bill, which we are amending. It is not the Excise Bill and when we are passing Bills here, we pass them in their entirety. I do not know whether it is procedurally right that all the reports should be read at the same time. How shall we pass them because the Bill the chairperson is reading is the Finance Bill not the Excise Duty Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is presented together because the letter came as one communication to the House in respect of two Bills. What we are doing at this stage is examining the motion for approving the President’s recommendations or not approving them. So it is on both. Let us receive both reports but when we agree that we go to committee stage, we will handle the Bills separately. Please present. Let him present both reports then you present both minority reports if they are there.

2.56
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Excise Duty Bill, 2014. You will recall that the Bill was referred to the committee on Tuesday 30 September 2014 after H.E. the President returned it to Parliament for reconsideration in his letter dated 29 September 2014 in accordance with Article 91 clause 3(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Methodology

Given that the committee had already consulted extensively on the Bill, it held an in-house meeting to consider clauses in the Bill as pointed out by H.E. the President for Parliament’s reconsideration. 

Reconsidered clauses

The committee maintains its position that as proposed in Schedule 2 of the Bill paragraph 8, an excise duty of Shs 200 be levied on every litre of kerosene.

The committee further brings to the attention of Parliament the following amendments to Schedule 2 of the Bill, which were inadvertently omitted during the committee stage of the Bill:

    (a) In paragraph 9, Shs 50 be levied on every kilogramme of sugar.
    (b) In paragraph 14, a 10 percent duty on mobile money transactions be levied specifically on withdrawal fees.
    (c) A new paragraph 14 be introduced for a 10 percent levy to be charged on financial transactions except those on bank loans to read as follows:
    • Ledger fees, ATM fees, withdrawal fees and periodic charges and other transactions and non-transaction charges excluding loan related charges periodically charged by financial institutions.

Observations

The committee reconsidered the provisions enumerated above and agreed that the provisions highlighted are in line with the committee position and that there is no objection to the proposed excise duties. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a copy of the minutes of the committee that sat on 3rd October 2014 to reconsider this proposal. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes. You said there was a minority report?

2.59
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. There are two reports and I am proceeding on the one on kerosene because hon. Cecilia Ogwal is the one who presented the one on the levy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MWIRU: Thank you. Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 194 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda (2012), hon. Ekanya hereby presents the minority report. He took part in the examination of tax bills of 2014. However, he differs with the majority members of the committee and this is the justification for his differing opinion.

In some areas of Uganda, hospitals use kerosene lamps to perform operations on patients; midwives use these lamps to deliver babies and doctors to treat patients. Children in rural schools use kerosene lamps to read and do their homework. In agriculture, people use kerosene fridges.

The current price of kerosene is already high for most of its consumers. Kerosene lamps are used to sell produce in markets and on streets at nights.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I pray that you support the opinions in this minority report and discard the proposal on the Excise Duty Bill, 2014. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR CHEMASWET: Mr Speaker, having looked at the report of the committee, would it be procedurally right for us to proceed when the same document does not have the signatures of members on each and every page of the Excise Duty Bill? If so, then the chairman should confirm with the members of the committee that the report is the right one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is possible that the one uploaded did not have signatures but the hard copy that I have actually has signatures. I do not know what happened. Did they upload the one that was not signed?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report we considered was duly signed on every page. When it comes to uploading, I do not have much to answer because I do not control the database.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but you confirm that the report we are dealing with is the report of the committee?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, the copy I have is signed on each and every page.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed. There was another minority report. Did you have a minority report on the second report?

3.02
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I beg to apologise. We have all been involved in this prayer breakfast. I had given an urgent call -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, it is a practice of this House that a minority report must be attached to the main report. Is it procedurally right that anybody with a minority report can have it debated in the House? Is it our new practice?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, rules are rules and they are meant to be followed because they give guidance on how we handle business of the House and they also give certainty about what to expect. For a member to show up with a report on the Floor, which was not brought to the attention of the chairperson of the committee is irregular. But that does not stop the member from presenting the view in the course of the debate. It would be irregular to now show up with a minority report, which was not brought to the attention of the committee but that does not stop the member from raising those same points by debate. However, we cannot entertain a minority report at this stage. No.

So are you now going to debate? Okay, can I now propose the question for debate first? Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for the reconsideration of the Finance Bill, 2014 and the Excise Bill, 2013, which were returned to Parliament by H.E the President as provided for under rule 132 of the Rules of Procedure. I now propose it for your debate. Debate is now open to this particular motion. 

3.05 
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I just want to apologise for the mix up. I thought I was going to delay so I had asked one of the colleagues to raise this point. But hon. Geoffrey Ekanya had already communicated this to the chairperson of the committee and I am surprised that the chairperson is not aware. Anyway, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya has a minority report to raise on the levy. I am surprised that the chairperson did not inform you. 

Mr Speaker, we don’t have much difference on the matter but you will recall that we sharply disagreed on a couple of two recommendations and one is about the irregular transfer of half of the levy collected by Uganda Communications Commission to the consolidated fund and the second is about the inadequate funding of the information and communication technology sector. These are views over which we sharply disagreed and I feel that, under Article 153 of the Constitution, which stipulates that there shall be a consolidated fund into which shall be paid all revenues or other money raised or received for the purpose of or for - according to what has been captured in that particular article, Mr Speaker. 

It is for this that I feel - and I hope that Members will agree with me - that the commission will need that fund but we are surprised that the government would want to see this fund go to the consolidated fund which will make it difficult for the commission to render the services that all Members have been so much interested in. 

The matter has been debated on the Floor of Parliament and I know that whereas the President might have returned it, it is the duty of Parliament to advise the President that it is in our interest that the commission be adequately funded so that the services we have been demanding for can reach the people. These are the views that we feel must be shared in this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker

3.08
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the report of the Committee on Finance and I would like to contribute on two matters. One is about the Shs 200 tax per litre of kerosene that is now being proposed by the committee upon the suggestion of His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda who has returned our recommendations from this House.  

Mr Speaker, throughout the debate, it was observed that the majority of the users of kerosene are the local folks in the villages; the poor people of Omoro and Kumi. These people are already overburdened by a lot of responsibility. So, to believe that this Shs 200 tax increment is little and therefore affordable, is losing the point all together. It is like thinking that the only responsibility that the local people in our villages have to bear is buying kerosene. I would like to assert that this is not the case. 

We should know that our local people have to put aside money for medicine which is lacking in the health units. They have got to provide for other important things, other than kerosene in the household. Just the other day, we upheld the tax on salt, which is a basic necessity used by poor people. Today, we are bringing back the Shs 200 tax per litre on kerosene. What are we doing to the local people? We are condemning them to go to sleep before dark; that’s what we are doing. 

In our villages, there are people who cannot afford kerosene even at the current price. What these people are going to do is to go in to their houses before it is dark and we are going to condone explosion of the population –(Laughter)– yes, because people will go sleep and begin to do their thing -(Laughter)- for lack of what to do. 

Mr Speaker, we have got to be sensitive to the plight of the local people in the villages. If I ask anybody in this House to raise his hand and say whether they ever used Kerosene in their houses, probably nobody would raise their hands here. You use electricity and in the absence of electricity, you use solar; you use generators that are run by petrol. 

So, I would like to dismiss the argument that if the price of kerosene is left at the level that it is now, the kerosene will be used for adulterating petrol. I have heard this argument going across, you know everywhere. 

Also to say that increasing tax on kerosene will stop people from adulterating other forms of fuel is wrong because that is not the responsibility of Parliament, Mr Speaker. It is the responsibility of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. They should do their job to stop adulteration of petrol and diesel. For now, we should honour the peasants; we should honour the poor. (Applause) I know we can find money from elsewhere to fill up this gap. Look at State House. How much money is going into State House; the big donations; the money being carried in sacks? 

My colleagues, let us stand and be counted as people who represent the poor in our deeds and in our speech. I don’t know what the order is for, Mr Speaker. I am still making my contribution. If somebody does not like my contribution, they should allow me to speak -(Interjections)– I hope the Bundibugyo people are watching you –(Interruption)

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I respect the elders and I respect my elder from Kumi. He is a man who has been in Parliament for some time and he knows very well that Uganda is moving from one step to another. He knows very well that in the villages where the local population lives we need electricity badly. Recently, in Bundibugyo, we got power of 33KV, moving directly from the main grid to Democratic Republic of Congo, connecting us to the next country. 

We need power extensions from the 33KV to the rural towns. We cannot continue failing to look for money. So, is he in order therefore to intimidate the people of Uganda that we need kerosene more than power? Are you in order to continue taking us back into the ancient years where people concentrated on firewood? Are you in order to push us back into darkness?  (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Member from Kumi, you have heard that very passionate opinion on that subject. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I think when we come to speak in this House, we will have to have our facts and figures, and not just whine. We know that 82 percent of our people live in villages and the power connectivity today could be about 25 percent in those rural areas. And so, we are talking about 25 percent of 80, and that is a small percentage my dear friend. 

Let me now move on to the case of money that this House intends to offload from the Uganda Communications Commission, to be taken to the consolidated fund. I come from a science background and I appreciate that this world is a global village. I also note the role that ICT is playing in every sector of life in the world and in what we aspire to do as a country, as indicated in the NRM manifesto and other policy documents of Government. I do not think we are going to move in pace with the rest of the world if we begin shifting money from vital sectors. We will come to a halt if we do not address our minds to advancement in technology.  

I am glad that H.E the President of this country has spoken time and again about the modernisation of our systems; the army, agriculture, you name it. I would like us to walk the talk; they should not feed us on lip service. I want to see us appreciating the role played by the Uganda Communications Commission and leave that money where it is. Mr Speaker, I rest my case. Thank you.

3.18
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and the report of the committee. I want to tell my senior colleague, who has just said that we are not supporting the common person who uses kerosene - we are supporting the middlemen. I say so because it is the middlemen who benefit from this huge profit margin. In the previous financial year, in July, the rate of kerosene was at Shs 2,800. This was the case when we stopped government from collecting tax on kerosene, we did not prevail on the dealer. They continued with their prices and made huge profits, while government was struggling to maintain the roads that they used to transport the fuel. Colleagues, I am urging you to take note of that. 

Today, although Government has not started collecting tax, the price of kerosene is Shs 2,900. My senior colleague was talking about figures, I am talking to the House, and I am armed with facts; I have figures here –(Interjections)- let me finish submitting then you will ask for that information. 

Mr Speaker, I want to urge Ugandans to stop populism, telling Ugandans that they are beneficiaries of this kerosene and yet it is the dealers - unless, we are businessmen, trying to promote and protect our business interests at the expense of this country. 

I want to remind my colleagues that the Government of Uganda must have revenue to run. We should expand the revenue base; let us allow all Ugandans to participate in building the economy of this country –(Interjections)- just a minute, colleague. 

On the issue raised by the committee, I want to differ from the committee on one issue that the price will prevent the adulteration of diesel. I want to urge the institutions like Uganda National Bureau of Standards to take up their roles. The most important and pertinent thing is for Government to collect taxes from the profit of the kerosene dealers. I think that is the most important point. 

Therefore, I want to invite my colleagues to support the report of the committee, let us stop misinforming Ugandans; our rural people that they are the beneficiaries. I have never seen Eng. Amuriat talk to the petrol station owners that, “Why do you sell at high prices? You have not done it even in Kumi. So, please, let us stop this hopeless system, let us allow Government to collect revenue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.21
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): I want to thank the committee for the good work done. It was good, because on my part, I want to assure you that the people of Kole have been paying paraffin at a high price, to the extent that they have abandoned using paraffin because it is so expensive. So, I urge you, honourable members, to face the facts; facts are facts. Even if Government waives taxes on kerosene, these dealers continue making profit and it is increasing the gap between the rich and the poor. Remember, these middlemen are rich, why don’t we handle this matter by taxing their profit, so that we move electricity – hon. Cecilia, you know this very well because you come from my constituency; Aliru needs power, we need to extend power there. Two, -(Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Ebil, who represents the people of Kole, to say that I know that the people of my sub-county Aliru, are now using power, they are now rich enough, they need to be taxed on paraffin? Is he in order to quote me as standing on the side of the rich when he knows very well that the people of Aliru, are the ones who gave him the votes to come here and the people of every household of Aliru are using kerosene? Is he in order to quote me as an example of those whose villages are using electricity? Is this young man in order to use my name as a reference? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I listened carefully to what the Member said; the Member said that even hon. Cecilia who comes from my constituency in Aliru knows that those people need power. That is what he said. 

MR EBIL: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling as usual. Honourable member, before you give me information –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I think it is better I give this information on the Floor of the House because if we are debating this matter with facts and figures, it can help us. In Uganda, the current rate of kerosene is about Shs 2,900; in Kenya it is Shs 2,426, in Tanzania it is Shs 3,223 and in Rwanda it is Shs 2,988. These prices have been changing; you have an iPad, check it. Uganda has that small difference with Kenya in the region because of the crude form of the oil and the transportation. That is why the cost is different by Shs 400. But what does that mean? The moment you put a lower price of kerosene to Kenya, there will be smuggling of that fuel back to the other country and it will cause us a problem.  

Secondly, with economic planning, let us run this House in budgeting professionally. You told Government to spend one third with a statutory collection order and they have spent that money; do you expect again to tell them that please spend the money but do not collect? Yes, because if you allowed Government to spend money in the budget and you are now stopping them - you are saying, “Please, don’t collect the money we told you to spend” How will you collect the revenue? This is what it means; that we can’t run the budget professionally -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Kole, please wind up.

MR EBIL: Mr Speaker, I am winding up. Thank you very much for your information. Honourable members, we are leaders and we come here to represent our people. The reason we are in this backward state is because the leaders of yesterday were playing poisonous cheap politics -(Applause) - and for about 25 years, we have had this problem and I told my people during elections that I was coming to change the politics and that is what I have done. 

Secondly, I want to support the committee on the issue of giving the commission Shs 16 billion to lie there on their account, to travel in first class yet our poor people are suffering. Honourable members, let us be honest. (Interjections) - I will not take it. They have taken a lot of my time. Let me wind up by saying that let us support this report. This report is pro-poor; this report is correct; this report is to balance our budget and a good budget must balance. Thank you.

3:28
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the report of the committee. First of all, on the prices of kerosene, when I look at the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order members.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: When I look at the prices before the budget and prices after the budget, it is obvious that immediately after reading the budget - and it has been a tendency in this country that by 1st July, all businesses make adjustments in the prices and when we come here and reduce the taxes, the businessmen don’t re-adjust their prices. There is only one thing I need to request that this Parliament should also compel - because we had proposed as Parliament to exempt taxation on paraffin. At first, we thought that perhaps we were doing it to the benefit of the population which we represent here but we are finding it difficult today that our intended objective was defeated and therefore, we need to propose that we maintain the Shs 200 on paraffin. However, UBOS - the Uganda Bureau of Statistics institution must do the work to which they are expected to do - regulations.

Two, Government must also assure us that the companies which are dealing in the petroleum products do not again adjust the prices upward after our decisions. And we can again regulate them. The Ministry of Energy is responsible for giving and renewing licenses of these companies - (Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. Honourable colleague, you have to know that currently, the price of kerosene is at Shs 2,900. It means if you allowed a tax of Shs 200, the price will go to Shs 3,100, - (Interjections) – let me finish; and it means the poor people are the ones paying the tax – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Please, honourable members, on that price, there is already a provisional collection being done; so, this tax is not additional. It is already being implemented. That is possibly why the figure is like that. Please.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I wish my honourable colleague had really laboured to listen to me, you would not have information to give to me. I had informed you rightly that before the budget, the price of kerosene was Shs 2,850 and after the budget, it was adjusted upwards. We are trying now to devise means to see to it that after passing the budget, after considering this Shs 200, these companies which had re-adjusted their prices upwards do not adjust their prices again and we are saying that we can do this. Government can ably do that. 

One, we are proposing that the Ministry of Energy that is responsible for renewing licenses of these companies can help us to regulate. The moment you increase - government institutions which are responsible for monitoring should help us - definitely if you go outside this, we shall get you at a time. These are some of the issues and regulations we can put forward to see that the prices do not increase again. That one should allay the fears of the members. 

On the issue of UCC, it is very unfortunate if we can find money redundant on fixed deposit accounts and then yet we are saying that no, this is ring-fenced money. What is it for when Ugandans need the services? Mr Speaker, it is the reason I am supporting the recommendation of the committee that a levy of 1 percent goes to the consolidated fund so that we can give Ugandans services. I thank you.

3:34
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank so much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the committee report in only one respect. As a leader representing the poor people of Kyotera, where the majority use kerosene, I can’t dare to support the Shs 200 taxation per litre. 

Mr Speaker, many Members have given reasons, which have not convinced me. For instance, you can’t say that you are levying Shs 200 because you want to stop middlemen from over charging people. In any case, you are also calling upon them to increase. 

As a serious government and as serious leaders, we should see how we can come in to determine minimum or maximum prices much as we are in a free market economy. Then if you know we are in a free market economy, you should not give such reasons because forces of demand and supply determine the prices. 

Mr Speaker, if the committee had come up with a serious reason, for instance, that we are now levying this money so as to subsidise solar then probably, I would have supported because - (Interjections)- Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Member of Parliament from Kyotera has just said that the committee has not come up with any serious reasons and then he goes ahead to talk about the solar, which he very well knows is one of the reasons why this Excise Duty is being levied. 

Is the honourable member from Kyotera, hon. Kasolo -(Laughter)- in order to continue speaking on this matter when he is very much aware that the people of Kyotera are already buying kerosene with this Excise Duty inclusive and I have not heard any complaint from the people of Kyotera to this effect? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kyotera, this tax was already levied as of 1st July this year and the member is saying you have not received any complaint from Kyotera. (Laughter)

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is the very reason I am opposing the committee report because my people are already complaining, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that there is a wrong impression that kerosene is only for domestic use -(Laughter)- that paraffin is only an item for domestic use. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to correct this. Paraffin is a farm input as well. When you go to the rural areas where my poor people of Rubaga survive, many people cannot afford electric power especially those keeping poultry. What they do is that they get paraffin lamps for lighting and provision of warmth to breed the birds. 

What I want to say to my honourable colleague is that we should now treat this as a farm input such that even before we talk of tax exemption, we can talk of subsidy just like we do it for tractors and any other farm inputs. I thank you very much.

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, hon. Kasibante, for that wise information.

Mr Speaker, as I wind up, much as we need taxes and I respect the fact that we need to widen the tax base and improve the taxable capacity, there are so many items where we can fetch good money. As a principle of taxation, you must tax an item which is, first of all, luxurious. There are so many luxurious goods which are not taxed like beers [Hon Members: “Beers are taxed.”] But taxing goods which are used by our poor people is being unfair to them and come what may, I must ‘die’ with my people. I cannot support that. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Bill and Polly Primary School in Busia District represented by hon. Kevinah Taaka and hon. Barbara Oundo, the Woman MP for Busia District. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. You are Welcome. (Applause) 

3.41
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the report – [HON MEMBER: “Minority.”] - not the minority report but the report of the committee and more so, the Shs 200 tax on kerosene. 

Why? Mr Speaker and members, I want to share my experience with you on what I went through when I was using a paraffin lamp to read - the “Tadooba” back in the day. I remember waking up early in the morning with my nose very black, coughing and even up to now, at times I breath like chicks suffering from coccidiosis -(Laughter) - and that is a result of using “Tadooba”. 

When we start debating and say we do not want the tax because our people in the villages especially our children use candles for reading, I really get hurt because the health of these children is at risk and the government has been telling us that if we get this tax, it has got a plan to start introducing solar in the villages. (Applause)   

MS OSEGGE: Order.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you. Mr Speaker, it amazes me to see that my mother from Namutumba, especially after reflecting that not many days ago we just passed a development programme overwhelmingly to support Busoga region.
 
And knowing that Busoga is one of the regions that is known to be infested with jiggers and knowing that paraffin is very useful in the healing of jigger wounds - (Laughter)- Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to advocate for adding a tax on a commodity that will enable the Basoga to heal their jigger wounds and probably get out of the jigger infestation? Is she in order as a representative of people who are suffering from jiggers in this nation? [HON MEMBER: “No, no.”]  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see any violation of any order but the Member has now got the information. (Laughter)

MS MUTYABULE Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling and I am really surprised that hon. Osegge is celebrating over my misery in Busoga (Laughter) and I don’t see any difference between Busoga and her constituency if government is going to introduce solar lighting for the rural community. I think this tax will take us a long way to finance that project and therefore I want to support it because once we have got the solar lighting, it means this tax will go. By the way, the tax is temporary, so why not support it temporarily because it may not even come next financial year? I stand to support it and I would like to see my people in Namutumba using solar instead of using kerosene. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker it is very clear in the rules of procedure of this House that members are prohibited from debating in anticipation. The honourable member cannot give us any written documentation suggesting that Government is intending out of this tax to bring solar panels or whatever other lighting system or power system or source of energy for this country. Mr Speaker, is the honourable member proceeding correctly without substantiating but just suspecting and hoping which is really against the rules of this House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that was a justification even outlined by the committee in its first report.

3.47
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and Members. I have listened in to my colleagues contributing to the report particularly on the Shs 200 levied on kerosene and sometimes we wonder because we just passed this recently. I don’t know what has happened just now; I don’t know whether we have just come of age that we have started realizing the importance of this tax but I wanted to say, looking at where we have come from, I know many Members of Parliament here wouldn’t be in this House had it not been for those lanterns of kerosene and it is a fact really.

Two, what should come first? Do you just have to squeeze the poor of the poor and then you say out of which you are going to introduce solar? I think what should have been done by Government is the rural electrification; you provide the solar lamps, you provide for the solar electrification in the rural areas then you say those who are sticking to kerosene, we are taxing you because it is a health hazard. But right now, this is not the case. We are putting the cart before the horse. One should be pulling the other rather than one pushing the other. And that is where we have gotten it wrong. 

I implore colleagues that on this matter, let us be realistic. The problem is not because of failure to impose the Shs 200. There are leakages in the economy; Members are aware that in this just realized report of the IGG, Shs 650 billion is lost in corruption yet out of fuel, we are just targeting just 15 billion. And we are squeezing the poor of the poor yet those who are well off are continuing to eat and we are losing. In fact, one hundred fifty five is under statement. 

So we should really look back and whereas we all want power, we all want solar, this is not the time. We are condemning the people –(Interruption)

MS KABAALE: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo, for whatever you are putting across but you find that in proper budgeting systems, the way you have said that - if we needed to tax the paraffin, we would first establish solar systems and in a proper budgetary system, you find that when you propose a deduction, you might propose the income. So as you are debating, the clarification I’m seeking is that in case we avoid the tax on paraffin, can you make this debate healthy by giving the alternative so that this country can move? Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you and my colleague knows how highly I regard her. She ought to know that the budget is a macro policy statement and the policy in simple terms is the choice of what to do and what not to do and in that respect, I was saying can we minimize on the leakages through corruption and other wastages rather than twisting up the poor of the poor? It is simple logic, honourable colleague. 

And for that matter, I think you could allow me to proceed by saying we have a lot of wastages. The Shs 15 billion we are targeting, we are targeting the poor of the poor. We should provide the facilities first; the solar equipment, the rural electrification and then we can introduce the Shs 200 fuel tax. 

And lastly, we are privileged we read books and those people who have written books are strong people. I really tell you in the 1970s, the first lady then was in Tanzania and they had a power cut off for six months. She is here she can tell us what experience they were having in Tanzania by that time - (Interjections)- when they had power blackout in their house. So this is to tell you colleagues; you are not from the moon, you are not from Mars, you are here because of the people who sent you.

It really touches me badly for someone to say that we are populists. No we are not but we are realists. Can we please for the first time allow those people reprieve? Once we have got sustainable income, then you can tell people use solar but before you do that, you are condemning them to sleeping with caterpillars. I tell you people sleep with caterpillars, people eat by the fire side, people wait for the moon to rise and they eat and you are here debating as if you are from Mars; as if you are aliens; you are not aliens, Members. Debate things you know are real and factual. 

And for that, I beg to plead with colleagues and request that we can agree to make it a give and take: we can agree on other measures but for the kerosene, Members, please let us insist because this is the only service we can render our people. And it is time now, we either do it now or never and I beg to propose that Members support this.

3.54
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing your eyes to catch me. I’m surprised that there is some level of intensity of excitement over this matter. In fact, it is sounding like this is the first time this matter is being discussed. And what I know for the fact is that this matter has just been referred after it had been passed. There is a saying that the mouth that has tasted milk does not forget the taste of milk. The middlemen that we are talking about that have maintained the price even when there were no taxes are the same middlemen that we are going to deal with after increasing the tax. 

Now, let us build a scenario; this is a man who has been in the comfort zone of charging very highly even where there are no taxes; you have now excited him a bit and pushed him with a tax of Shs 200. For heaven’s sake, let us think backwards and see with reasonable hypothesis what is likely to happen. Is he likely to forget his margin and say, “Well there is a poor man that we now are thinking about, let us allow him some reprieve and lower the rate” or will he now know that after all, the other day even without taxes, I was allowed to charge at this level, therefore, I can push it comfortably to a certain level considering that nobody is going to look at me.

Mr Speaker, I can only agree with those who are very excited about raising Shs 15 billion from the wretched of the earth if they could convince me that after this tax increase, there is going to be a measure by Government to control the middlemen they are talking about to ensure that the middlemen are not going to pass this on to the poor. 

I happen to come from a poor background of Oyam North in Lango sub-region where hon. Ebil, unfortunately, also comes from. (Laughter) Because I come from a more urban place than hon. Ebil, I know the problems of the people perhaps more than him and to hear a person coming from Lango sub-region saying that paraffin is not an important item; it can be sacrificed so that we may have - (Interruption)

MR EBIL: Mr Speaker, I know we are different, our hearing abilities are different but is it in order for hon. Krispus Ayena, the liar, to mislead the House that I said paraffin is not an essential commodity yet I was talking of the middlemen who are already taxing the poorest of the poor? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is true what the member for Kole said is not what the member for Oyam North has said.

MR AYENA: If for some reason, I did not hear well, it is not because I do not hear; it is only that I hear so well that I read even into what he has not said because I know the man who is talking. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I was building a case of reasonable hypothesis. What is likely to be the case when we pass the increase of this Shs 200 on the paraffin? The most likely thing is that from Shs 200 -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much. We had the same challenge with sugar when the government lowered tax on sugar, I think by Shs 50. The middlemen did not decrease the price even by half a shilling. I remember Government went on radio warning the middlemen that if you do not comply with the tax regime, we are going to deal with you but nothing happened. The middlemen continued to sale at the price they wanted because the economy is liberalised. I am going to buy this food and sell it at Shs 10 million; the price I am selling it is less of government business. So, we really have to think seriously about the point hon. Ayena is raising. Otherwise we shall increase the tax, those men will increase again to Shs 3,500. So, we will get to a real disaster. This is the information I wanted to give.
 
MR AYENA: So Mr Speaker, for those of us who stand in the middle about important national matters, I want to indulge my colleagues on the other side who were together with us on this matter only a few days ago to come back and think together with us so that we protect the wretched of the earth; the poorest of the poorest. My brother who talked so well about where else we can raise the Shs 15 billion plus my brother from Lwemiyaga; I wish l could say it more easily - that you know there are certain quarters that the government has not focused on either to plug them in to make sure that Government does not lose a lot of revenue or even to open the taps for Government to get revenue from. Can Government actually tell us that they are going to be proactive in matters of - (Interjections)– again? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, hon. Ayena, for giving way. Mr Speaker, a year ago, we identified Shs 360 billion - the money that is returned to the consolidated fund. There is no ministry or department of Government that uses 100 percent of the money given to it in a financial year. The money is returned to the consolidated fund and we located Shs 360 billion, why can’t the government get that money instead of taxes? So there is a way the money that is returned to the consolidated fund, which was Shs 360 billion last year, can be used to offset the Shs 16 billion to be charged on the poor people for the kerosene.

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, with the due respect to my former student at Mwiri who is now a minister, I decline to take his information, but I will proceed to say that if we actually belong to the majority of the wretched of the earth who voted us into this House, please for once, let us speak for them. Let us speak for them and save them the Shs 200 because there is no magic science that is going to be used to make sure that the Shs 200 will not be passed on to the man in the village. 

And when you talk about rural electrification, I am one of those and I thanked the government only the other about rural electrification. But if my memory serves me right, the farthest rural electrification has gone is to the trading centres. And there are people in the hinterland who are more than five miles away; I don’t know how soon rural electrification will reach them so that they will not need paraffin. Paraffin is still an essential -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Oyam, please wind up. People would like to debate as well, please.

MS ALICE ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Member for Oyam and thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give you is that as we await the coming in of the electricity to some of our villages, over 60 percent of the households in Serere use paraffin but the greatest pain that we have as this House moves to pass this tax is that our children from Serere going to sit PLE next week will not be able to afford that paraffin. Thank you.

MR AYENA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will now wind up by saying that paraffin, like my brother suggested but did not complete, is not only used for light in houses. What I know for a fact is that quite a number of traders, people in the villages, are now using paraffin for purposes of refrigeration. So, the use of paraffin is much wider than we can say in this House. I plead with my colleagues, please, we should not sacrifice the interest of more than 82 percent of the population of Uganda in order to raise only Shs 15 billion, which we can get from somewhere else. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.05
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, BUNYOLE COUNTY EAST, BUTALEJA): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the committee. I am surprised that many honourable colleagues have confessed that they represent peasants and they are reasoning as such and they would want to keep people in peasantry. This is not the way and the responsibility of a Member of Parliament. To come here and we celebrate that these people should continue using candles? And that is the best we can offer? Mr Speaker, I should not be part of that and that should not be part of our generation. (Applause) Mr Speaker, I want to tell you, I stood here last week - (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, “procedure” was a courteous way of talking to my colleague without forcing me to raise a point of order. I have heard him saying here, just now, that people representing the peasants and they continue thinking and reasoning as such. We all represent peasants, but our level of understanding and debate is not peasantry as such. 

Is the honourable member procedurally right to regard Members who are opposing the Shs 200 increment as being really peasantry minded? And thinking as peasants? And, therefore, we have no business being here? We are more or less like peasants, yet even in Butaleja itself, where I am proud to have been many times, he is surrounded by more than 90 percent of peasants, whose electricity he enjoys alone and on an island surrounded by the peasants who cannot afford this electricity? 

Mr Speaker, is my colleague really procedurally right to tell us that those who sit on the opposite side, we have a peasantry mind and logic, is he right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I heard what hon. Dombo said. He said we represent peasants and the way we are arguing, we are arguing as if to maintain that status quo - of peasantry. That was my interpretation and I think this House should take that positive interpretation.  

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I did stand on this Floor last week, during the time of passing the budget, in this same place and I told Members that I observed, on two occasions, when we removed VAT on water, the price of water did not change. When we change the prices of fuel, the price of fuel does not change to the benefit of the fuel users. And I am surprised Members are talking as if there is going to be a new tax.  This tax is already being charged. Those children who are going to sit exams tomorrow are already paying that price. And, the prices in Uganda are psychological. Once the minds re-adjust and people fix them, even if you adjust the tax, nobody is going to reduce the prices. 

Therefore, if we do not tax, it is going to be to the benefit of the fuel dealers other than saving the peasants. I do accept what my colleagues on the other side are saying. It is true many Ugandans are in peasantry life and they need assistance, but you do not assist them by removing a levy of Shs 200. We need more affirmative policies that can remove people from peasantry other than the way they are arguing -(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Dombo, for giving way. The clarification I would like to get from you is whether you are implying that whenever a minister brings a new change in taxation, we should only take it wholesome - because every time a minister brings an imposition of a new tax here, it is implemented on 1st July and we debate it afterwards. 

So, are you saying that every change in the tax regime should be embraced wholesome by this Parliament or this is the time that we should now stop it such that next time, the minister shall not impose that kind of reckless taxation? Thank you.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, my argument was in response to honourable colleagues who argued that when we re-introduced this tax - there is no re-introduction. That tax is already there; it is being levied. And, one of the things honourable colleagues should know is that Parliament has the responsibility of passing a budget and when you pass a budget, it must be a balanced budget. It is our responsibility as Members of Parliament to hike the demands on Government; what our people want. But the bigger the demands, the bigger the revenue must be. For that, you must pass a balanced budget. 

But most of the times we have debated on the Floor, we have blamed Government for failure to implement government programmes, yet at the same time, we are the people cutting down the revenue measures that should enable government to operate. I want to tell my honourable colleagues that if anybody should fear putting this tax, it should have been the NRM government because we are going into elections. That should be a strong point to go and tell the people that the NRM government increased tax. But because the people know what this tax is going to do, the NRM government will explain why they have put the tax and they have levied it. These are the arguments honourable colleagues should know. 

So, with those few remarks, I support the view of the committee that that tax be re-introduced. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.12
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA (Ms Janet Museveni): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this Bill and I honestly want to take this opportunity to say that as leaders of this country, we must remember that it is the people of Uganda who must build Uganda. (Applause) The people of Uganda look to their government to lead them; to know how to play that role; how to build their nation so that the generation of parents today can build a nation that will be good for their children. The parents and the communities of Uganda, generally speaking remember that this government understands them, understands the burdens they have to transform their lives and to change their quality of life. That is why they took away the Graduated Tax in the first place because they knew that, that was a burden on our people at that stage. 

That is why they have brought the Universal Primary and Secondary Education because they realised the burden the people of this country have had because of the times they have gone through. The people of Uganda know that if this government has put a levy on kerosene, it is because they are teaching the communities that they have a role to play that they cannot abdicate. And, leaders who speak here as representatives of those people cannot honestly stand here and say the people have jiggers and they need kerosene to wash their wounds and therefore –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. While the First Lady and the Minister for Karamoja and the MP for Ruhaama is still giving us a lecture about what has gone on in this country, I wonder whether she is also aware that the Shs 7,000 that the government has been contributing towards UPE has been reduced with this budget. 

I also wonder whether the honourable member appreciates when we give examples that paraffin can heal jigger wounds and whether she is taking this positively. Hon. Speaker, if we are going to debate in this House - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of order.

MRS OSEGGE: Yes, is the honourable member in order to insist that we go ahead and tax poor citizens in this country when we as leaders are not even showing an example -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, that is the motion. What do you want her to debate? Is she in order to debate the motion? Is that the kind of order you put to the House? Is she in order to debate the motion? Please!

MRS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, while my colleagues are heckling because I think something is exciting them; they were the same people debating in the House two days ago. I don’t understand what changes your mind after two days. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MRS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member for Ruhaama in order to be insensitive to the plight of the people of this country without introducing measures that will help them replace paraffin and instead insist that they must be taxed without providing alternatives that are affordable to them? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to review how we use these points of order. You cannot put a point of order as to whether the member is in order to debate a motion. The motion is to put these taxes back and that is what she is debating. Now you are asking whether she is in order to debate it. Really? Now how do you rule on insensitivity? Please!

MRS MUSEVENI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam honourable member, I understand the poverty of our people. I am in Ruhaama and I work in Karamoja. The Karimojong are very poor people and yet I know that they must build Karamoja. In order for the Karimojong to really stand up and play their own role and be counted in this day and age, they must begin to play a role in the national building of this country. 

In order to undertake national building, you cannot only take and take every day. You must know that you have to give something back to your government so that it can do even better. 

In Karamoja, this government is providing what we call community empowerment. Community empowerment enables the Karimojong families to have a starting point to begin to build wealth for the family. If you go to Karamoja, you will see that families have something they can sell and invest in something else. That is what we have to teach our people and that is what I honestly say to the people in Ruhaama. I cannot stand up to the people in Ruhaama and say, you people you are very poor; you need paraffin only, no. 

I feel so ashamed that our people sit on the land in our countryside where every family can honestly get some income and fail to do that and instead look to the world to feed them. So in other words, I am saying that in order to empower our people, this government needs the people themselves to make an input in the revenue that the government needs to lead this country. That input gives them the pride that they have put a brick on the building of this nation. So, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the MP for Ruhaama for giving way. The information I would like to give her and the House is that whereas we are talking about this tax this afternoon, our people are grappling with other taxes. When they buy soap; they pay tax. When they use boda boda; they pay tax. Nearly everything that is being used by the rich and the poor in this country is taxed. And so really, our argument is that why don’t we save our people from this tax? 

The second piece of information I would like to give is that our people are actually utilising the land well. They toil; many of them, eight hours a day in their fields. But the problem is when they attempt to market their produce, it does not go for a good price. So the government needs to come in handy to assist the local folks by putting in place facilities that can help them come out of their poverty so that they are able to pay taxes. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MRS MUSEVENI: Yes, that is how the government will manage to put in place those programmes that will improve on what our farmers need. It is collecting revenue that Government needs so that they can improve on the programmes that will help the communities. There is no other way that the government can improve on the programmes that will help our people and we cannot sit here and mourn about the problems and poverty of our people because we do not want our people to remain poor. To change that, Government needs revenue. 

So we should honestly all agree that this levy is a way of training our people; even those who are very poor, that they have an obligation in the building of their nation. It is an obligation indeed but it is also a pride for each person who is putting a brick towards building Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate seems to be focusing on paraffin but there were some other proposals that came to the House and were not considered. These proposals had come from the committee; the one on sugar, the one on financial transactions and the one on mobile money withdrawal fees. Those ones were with the committee but at the committee stage, they were not brought and we took a decision and passed the Bill without having gone into that. 

So there are still issues that even if we move, we still need to consider. But for us to be able to do that, we need to be able to go to the stage where we can handle these things in a more comprehensive way. So maybe at this time we should take a decision on the motion before we go to the specifics of what needs to be done. So, can I now ask the two leaders – of Opposition and Government Business - to summarise before we see how we move on. 

4.26
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I have been listening and I felt betrayed because when we debated this same subject, both sides carried out some negotiations and trade-offs and we agreed that much as some of us felt very strongly that salt should not have been among those items to be taxed, it was necessary to levy a tax on it.

But before that I was assured by my colleagues on that side – I am saying my colleagues from the Government side - I represent the opposition but if you want I can tell you the name  though I don’t think this is the right moment - that it is okay to levy a tax; looking at the figures involved. So, we agreed to vote for Kerosene. 

But we also looked at Kerosene as having wider uses and particularly we came to agree that Kerosene is not only for lighting Sodoma as is popularly known  -(Interjection)- you can -(Laughter)- call it Sodoma or Tadooba. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has just come from the national prayer breakfast. So she is still reflecting on Biblical words and names.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we came to agree that Kerosene has broader uses. We don’t only use it for lighting; we use it for cooking as well. Some Members of Parliament who visited my farm some time ago confirmed that indeed I am a farmer; a practical farmer. Members like hon. Jalia Bintu who visited my farm can confirm that I have a Kerosene refrigerator which keeps some of the chemicals for agricultural use. She can also confirm that I use a Kerosene stove for cooking on the farm because she even ate some maize cooked by Kerosene stove.

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because it was a painful compromise on my part. I knew that the old woman that I represent in Dokolo definitely would feel betrayed that I had agreed that Shs 10 or Shs 5 be added onto salt. Definitely it was a painful decision for us to make though I thought it was for a wider compromise. We thought that compromising on Kerosene would give us better benefits.

But Mr Speaker, allow me maybe provide some information. Just seven days ago, I buried an old woman in my village who was about 87 years of age. She was not a Musoga; she was a Lango, but suffered from Jiggers.  When I got to learn of that before she passed on, I ask hon. Fred Ebil to visit the home of the deceased. I went there but found that the lady was so poor. She used to sleep on a papyrus mat that was highly infectious.  So, we ensured that some Christians first spray the place with paraffin before washing the blanket with Kerosene and water. Unfortunately the lady was weak and eventually died.

Today there are Ugandans who probably are experiencing similar situations but still saying Kerosene cannot be used for that kind of thing. I am really surprised. 

Anyway, the lady has died but we need to know that this is not the first case; it could be happening even in your back yard. 

Mr Speaker, I got very convincing arguments from the Government side on the issue of Kerosene and that is why I was able to concede. It was because I knew that Kerosene would be saved from taxes because they gave me very convincing arguments and the Hansard is there to confirm this record – (Interjections)- give me a favour to argue my point because you will disorganise me. I will give you time because I value your piece of information. 

Mr Speaker, yes we are concerned about raising revenue. I am also very interested in the exercise of raising revenue. But if as an institution, we are not ashamed of levying a tax on Kerosene yet we can afford, through supplementary requests, to increase funding for State House. Let it also be on record that we are not ashamed of levying taxes on Kerosene and salt but we can increase funding for State House; let that be on record. 

As a farmer and parent, I want to give you a run down by my experience. Most often when it is time for examinations, parents are asked to pay some extra money for buying Kerosene to enable our children read at night. It is happening in Omoro, where the Deputy Speaker comes from; it is happening in Dokolo and it is happening in most rural areas. 

So as a parent, it is very painful for me to get to know that now the people of Dokolo are being told that they will not afford Kerosene -  yes, you might argue that the price will not go up but the business community knows that the moment you levy a tax, the price will go up. It will go up automatically. And I will come back here next week to prove to you that the price of Kerosene has gone up. 

So, my children who are from rural areas who don’t have the solar you are talking about and who don’t have the electricity you are talking about will be forced to perform poorly as they have always done.

I am sure Uganda will celebrate because -(Interjections)- give me the chance to complete my argument because I am talking about something that hurts my heart; you know I have just come from a prayer breakfast. (Laughter) 

My rural schools need my help and Mr Speaker, talk about health. Parliament has a report which was made on Bududa Health Centre. The team was able to prove that Kerosene was a safer fuel or lighting mechanism than biomass or others because it was widely used. But Bududa is just an example and you have the report in Parliament here.

But I also want to inform you that even scientifically, it has been proved that Uganda - I come from Uganda - honourable members, how can I stand in another fora and prove that I come from Uganda when they are saying Ugandans know how to use Kerosene because globally, Uganda is among the 10 countries - get onto Google and check the record. It has also been proved that we know how to use Kerosene safely.; it is a safer lighting mechanism than any other –(Interruption) 

MR SSEGONA: I want to thank the Opposition Chief Whip for giving way. The information I want to give, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, is that I have listened to the government side, and they have got very convincing arguments; that we want to help the rural poor who are disadvantaged, to access light. Isn’t it? They are marginalised, and therefore we are looking at emancipation. At least that is how I understand the argument. 

But this government needs to tax the marginalised to emancipate them. My understanding has always been, and I might be wrong, that the word emancipation would bring into play assisting the disadvantaged. In other words, we should be taxing the advantaged, to give advantage to the disadvantaged. 

The other piece of information I would like to give to my honourable colleague and the House at large, is that we used to spend a lot of money in this country when we were fighting Konyi; we had somebody from the East called Lakwena. Since then, the defence budget, the state house budget, and the budget on donations have kept increasing. Is it not possible –(Interjections)- she can clarify, to deduct money from those budgets, including defence, because we are not at war with Konyi - and emancipate the disadvantaged? 

Finally, we have an agency for rural electrification, and we already have a budget for electrification. Yet we have been increasing the charges on electricity. My understanding has always been that we increase the charges in order to electrify the country. It has never been my understanding of logic and reason that you tax the poorest and leave them without the alternative of using kerosene, and your economic sense is getting money from those people to electrify this country. That is the information. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you very much. I just wanted to conclude by saying, Mr Speaker that it is not Ogwal speaking out of her own thinking, but we also sought for information from other countries, which are experiencing the kind of deep poverty, we are also experiencing. 

I want to draw your attention to the Global National Institute of Health Report of 2013. And this report showed that whereas western countries have reduced on the use of kerosene, it was cautiously done by providing alternatives. These alternatives were provided in a manner that gave the rural poor power to pay less. It was a calculated policy to reduce on the consumption of kerosene, by giving free and cheap electrification. That is what was done in developed countries. Please look for that report; it is by the Global National Institute of Health of 2013; it is one of the latest. You have a look at it and you will testify. 
 
I am willing to sit down with some of you and we go through the papers; there are areas where we can raise money. If we are willing to let a tractor go without taxation, how many people in Dokolo, or Omoro, or Karamoja can afford a tractor? But we are leaving tractors to go free of tax! That is what we are saying. So really we can sit down and see where we can raise taxation without hurting the poor. I think that is what we should do now –(Interruption)

MR EBIL: Thank you Mr Speaker and I thank Hon. Cecilia Ogwal for giving me the opportunity to give you some information. I would like to appreciate your concern and the concerns of other members of Parliament, on both sides of the House. 

The problem we are trying to bring here is that the Bills come late when the collections of these levies and taxes have already continued. At the moment we are discussing the levy of Shs 200 on Kerosene, which has already taken effect. Where is the problem now? The problem is on the question of refund. The companies will begin asking for refund if this Bill does not go through, or if we do not hold on to the Shs 200. That is where the problem will come from.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that the information?

MR EBIL: Yah, that is what I wanted to inform her,

MS OGWAL: You are not helping much. (Laughter) I think he rose to steal a bit of my time, but I just want to plead with my colleagues, I know you are just as rural as myself. I can see Opio, the twin, looking at me; and Kakooza James is very much loved in Dokolo and he knows the poverty of the people there. He knows that if the people of Dokolo see him on that microphone telling the Government to tax them on salt and paraffin, how can you go to Dokolo and ask for your relatives to marry from there? Do you think they will allow you there? 

I have got school children looking at me, and they can confirm that they use Kerosene while doing exams. Why should they go back and say that we saw our grandmother Mrs Ogwal, pleading with government to tax Kerosene so that we do not pass exams? What kind of report can they go back with? 

Mr Speaker, I rest my case, but I want it to go on record that this generation of Parliament is not sensitive to the suffering of the poor. I thank you Mr Speaker.

4.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. This is an important debate, and I would like to take this opportunity to remind my colleagues that of the five East African countries, apart from Kenya, Uganda is the one having the lowest prices for paraffin. Other countries have higher prices. One of my colleagues, Hon. Kakooza has gone through the figures. 

We have been talking of transformation of Uganda. Transformation of Uganda will necessarily mean that we have to change the way we do things. Instead of the majority of our people, the peasants, relying on paraffin for energy and lighting, we will gradually introduce modern ways of lighting: solar energy, bio-gas, and of course power from the many dams that the people of Uganda are now constructing, and gradually reducing the number of peasants because many of them will be going to the factories and industries that are going to be set up especially with more power being available in the country and an excellent environment for investment. 

Mr Speaker, we had some doctors whose credentials need to be questioned prescribing paraffin as the cure for jiggers -(Laughter) - Government is aware of the problem of jiggers in Busoga and a few other areas and Government has already bought appropriate drugs - benzyl benzoate - to treat the jiggers but not paraffin. Of course one should quickly add that jiggers should be prevented by hygiene and clean environment instead of waiting for paraffin or benzyl benzoate. So, let me take this opportunity to request ourselves all as leaders to tell our people to get rid of jiggers by improved hygiene in our homes and as individuals. 

There is also the need for peasants to make a contribution to the economy. We should not be romanticists about peasants. Peasants, like everyone else, need to make a contribution. We have been complaining that the tax base is too small –(Interjection)- why don’t I use these few minutes and conclude so that the debate ends. 

We have been talking of the tax base being too narrow, being too small, taxing a few people too much money. If we broadened it and increased the number of people making some contribution, we may end up paying our taxes with little pain because of a greater tax base of which the peasants will also be contributing. And by the way, Mr Speaker, we must balance our budget and one way of balancing our budget is our people who purchase paraffin being able to make a contribution to this.

The last comment is, we have had repeated evidence that the people who benefit from some of these tax measures are really not the peasants but the middle men and the dealers in the kerosene market. 

So in conclusion, I want to commend the report of the committee and urge all colleagues in this House to endorse the report of the committee so that we can eventually get the necessary resources to support the peasants to change their conditions for the better. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to process this and go to the next level so that we can take the appropriate decision. I need to put the question to this motion which will pave way for us to go to committee stage and deal with those issues. I will put the question to the motion -

MR SSEGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker., This is a very fundamental question that you are putting and this is something that affects the lives of millions of Ugandans. Mr Speaker, is it not appropriate to ascertain the numbers in the House in terms of quorum before we answer that question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have ascertained; I have the record that has been supplied to me by the clerk.

MR SSEGGONA: I am afraid, Mr Speaker that our rules would require us to ascertain by way of a head count. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the way we normally ascertain quorum is I send a note to the Clerk at Table to count for me the members in the House and then I get a chit from her informing me the number and then I know whether I am able to proceed with the vote or not.

MR SSEGGONA: I am afraid, Mr Speaker, our rules require that only when –(Interjections)- I thought the decorum requires that when I am speaking and seeking clarification from the Speaker, members including hon. Musinguzi would have to keep quiet. Mr Speaker, I thought the rules of this House require that when the issue is raised and only when it is raised that the Speaker would ascertain the numbers and not before.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ascertain quorum by asking the Clerk at Table to do the counting and advise the Speaker whether there is quorum or not. That is what we do; but for you to -

MR SSEGGONA: I am obliged and I rest my case.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what we have done and I have been advised that there is quorum. So for the sake of the record again, can we ascertain the actual numbers right now because by the time I did it, some members - I see some members getting out but let us ascertain quorum again. 

Madam Clerk, please ascertain quorum for me. Honourable members, can I ask those members who are in the lobby to come in the House please. I am informed that there are members in the lobbies. Please, can we - Honourable members, I have 103 Members of Parliament. I order that the bell be ring for five minutes to ascertain that there are members who can come in. 

You know that from the position of the Speaker, the Speaker is privy to information that members may not have and sometimes, the Speaker is at pain trying to wish that the members knew what the Speaker knows. But it is difficult to communicate this to the House but some of the decisions that we take or fail to take affect us also directly. So, that is why it is difficult for the Speaker to give you the information that he has from other meetings. 

Did the honourable member for Busiki have something to say? No, it is the honourable member for Mbarara Municipality.

5.02
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much for giving me chance to speak. Mr Speaker, as the bell has gone and as the whips of the Opposition and the Government are doing their job of bringing back the people who are in the lobby, I think we owe this country a duty to ensure that we improve service delivery to the people of Uganda.

Recently, Mbarara Municipality was given three more sub-counties which are a bit rural and they are Nyakaiju, Biharwe and Kakika. Mr Speaker, I want to share with you and honourable colleagues here because I thought that the people who come from the rural area do not want electricity. But I can inform you right now that I am in trouble.  When I am entering Biharwe, the LCI chairperson is almost on my neck because he wants us to give him and his people electricity. 

They told me to inform you to kindly support me in that if we could just get only Shs 200 from every person who uses paraffin and we improve electricity supply to the people in the rural area; they will be happy. This is a message, hon. Amuriat from the people of Mbarara Municipality. I thank you very much.  
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member for West Budama North.

5.03
MR FOX ODOI OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama North, Tororo): I thank you. Mr Speaker, I will take you back to some bit of history just to refresh our memory. A couple of years ago, this Parliament permitted the Government of Uganda to collect a levy on petroleum products and that money was ring fenced into what was then called the energy fund. 

You probably all know that when we started the construction of Bujagali, the very first deposit of the contractual sum came from that money and Bujagali has now been commissioned and it is going to generate electricity that will be supplied to people including the people of West Budama North. I, therefore, support the levy of Shs 200 on fuel. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member for Aruu County. (Applause)

5.04
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, eight months ago I wrote an article in the newspaper that graduated tax should be reintroduced because they think that we come to Kampala to collect money and take it to them.

Mr Speaker, there has to be deliberate attempt by us leaders to change the mind-set of the people. People should know that the money they contribute is the one which is used for repairing roads? 

Members have started avoiding constituencies because they ask them, “Have you brought for us money from Kampala? “ Now what kind of job is this? So graduated tax should even be like Shs 20000 per person. These people we represent have sachets of alcohol littering everywhere in the rural part of country; and some of them drink every day. 

And the number of mobile phones, Mr Speaker, in Uganda is now 15 million and these multinational companies are supplying simple solar panels that these people use to charge their phones; so there are small solar panels in villages they use to charge their phones.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I have here the Uganda banking sector analysis report from African alliance; it was published this evening and the statistics it is quoting, it says mobile money remain prime in the informal banking sector with about Us$600 million transacted throughout 2013.
With the recent statistics reporting 17.6 million subscribers; you can imagine.

Mr ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker the point I am raising is that there are multinational companies that have supplied solar panels and they ask each owner of the phone through SACCOs to contribute Shs 500 a month. They deposit Shs 30000 then they contribute Shs 500 a month. So the number of small solar lanterns that people use for charging the phones could be probably close to Shs 8 million. 

So without compromise if someone like me is talking of even reintroducing graduated tax which is even slightly more than the Shs 200 that is being used for kerosene and the Shs 200 addition on kerosene you use in the house and the graduated tax we bring it back to the centre and plan for it from here.

So given the level of alcohol consumption in the country, I it’s about time that we have to stand firm and say let this tax be reintroduced and the challenge is blackmail, people will call you names; they will say what they want to say but the world will not end. 

Some tax has to be reintroduced and next year please government consider introducing taxes on sports betting; consider introducing more taxes on casinos which pay only US$200 gaming license; and yet the money that changes hands in casinos every night is about Shs 3 billion. 

So we need to, I would urge my members that this same tax the Shs 15 billion is probably the same money that the government will need to do with other things. So if you don’t want to contribute to developing your nation, then who will develop it for you?

And the last information Mr Speaker, in 1964, on taxes, the UPC Government then resolved that certain old people should be relieved of graduated tax. This one my dad told me and he is still alive; so some old and sickly people were relieved of graduated tax but a strange phenomenon happened in lira in Lango area. Those who were relieved from graduated tax were going back to the office of the district commissioner that they be reinstated to pay the tax; Why? Because when they went for the local brew called malwa, they used to say, “this table is only for the tax payers”. That this table is only for men let the women go the other side.

So, these people know what they want. They deliberately walked and paid taxes so as to drink malwa freely with other people. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

5.10
MR FELIX OKOT (NRM DOKOLO COUNTY, DOKOLO): Mr Speaker, the debate that we are having now is very important because when I was studying economics at university I was informed that budgeting directs the direction and acceleration of the nation. It is through budgeting that the acceleration and interests of a nation can be implemented. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Otto, my very good friend talked about reintroducing graduated tax. When they banned graduated tax from Parliament it was for a reason; it was not that these people could not pay but the mode in which the tax collectors were collecting tax. 

They were beating people; they were not remitting money, and that money was going to the waste, and Parliament decided that since the mode of collection was bad the tax should be banned; if they can improve on the mode of collection then we can re-think it.

But as you know the Movement Government is very clear about this policy; we are interested in indirect tax rather than direct tax. Our people are paying tax; when you consume sugar, buy salt, buy paraffin, and buy fuel.

Therefore, Government is urging people that even through paraffin, let’s allow our people to contribute towards the development of this nation. Our people are now demanding that many of them are now dying because of lung cancer which is caused by these lanterns that we have – tadooba - because they are now mixing paraffin with diesel and most of the houses in our area don’t have windows. 

In our area in the 60s, the building plan was very clear; before you entered the house, you were required to have a window. But in Uganda today, people are building houses without windows. Our people are not guided.

You remember in 2003, 50 percent of our budget was being financed by foreign aid. But over the period, we have reduced it to 18 percent. So we are now collecting more than 82 percent from our local collection and we are only depending on donors to contribute the 18 percent. 

This actually creates our independence. You remember that donors are now on us on Homosexual Bill because they know without them we cannot survive. So if you are to survive and to be strong let us finance our budget 100 percent. Let everybody contribute so that we are independent and that will show the independence that we got in 1962.

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank for you for giving way. I want to give him the statistics. To fight neo-colonialism in any country, you have to tax your natives. Your natives have to rise up to fight neo-colonialism, short of that if you want them to go free, then you should accept neo-colonialism.

MR OKOT OGONG: Thank you very much, for that information. Mr Speaker, I remember when growing up, I was told by my father that you must make a contribution to your nation. When we were with you, Mr Speaker at university, we decided to make a contribution to our country and when we went back to our communities, we decided to join politics so that we make a contribution in that line. 

And therefore, I want to appeal to members that as leaders let us guide the people that we lead. This is the time for Uganda to be Uganda; this is the time that we must make a real contribution to our country and I am happy, Mr Speaker that I am - (Interruption) 

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Okot for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give the honourable member and everybody is that we are about 35 million people in this country and only about 1.2 million pay taxes. So, 33 million plus depend on the 1.2 million. So it is right that everybody must try to contribute.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you my brother, hon. Okot Ogong for giving way. The former minister for Youth has passionately appealed to the Ugandan people to make a contribution and in your statement you said that the NRM Government has encouraged indirect taxes so that every commodity the peasants buy, there is a tax molecule attached to it. 

When hon. Odonga-Otto was speaking, everybody cheered especially on that side about the reintroduction of graduated tax. Are you saying that Ugandans should continue to be taxed including graduated tax; including the indirect taxes that you have talked about; including the peasants that you represent who do not have windows on their buildings? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, my point is very clear and maybe I can tell my good doctor that indirect tax means you don’t pay directly, you pay through buying commodities. Direct is that taxation you are talking about - graduated tax and what have you - which in our policy maybe if we change it later, we are not in that line. People were cheering Odonga-Otto because of his method of presentation and not about the point he was raising. (Laughter)
 
Mr Speaker, as I conclude, taxation as I said earlier will liberate our country. If we make everybody contribute like we are doing now it will help. And I want to inform members also that if you look at statistics even from other countries, Uganda actually pays less, only 13.3 percent of our GDP is paid as tax. In Kenya it is 23 percent of their GDP. That is why Kenya is able to finance their budget almost 100 percent not through foreign aid. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to my good sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, we come from the same constituency, we have the same people and they have the same aspirations. We need roads; we need electricity like some of my sub counties - 10 of them. (Laughter)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, is the honourable Member for Dokolo County in order, first of all, to divert this discussion; the debate is focused on paraffin as the subject matter, but talking about economics, which is absolutely out of focus. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I had proposed earlier that it is not the work of the Opposition to lead the government; we have given you our alternative policies on how to raise resources through taxation. We have given you the latest and most modest tax regime – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point of order?

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Alternative policies have been raised on the Floor of Parliament; they have been uploaded on your iPads you can read them on various subjects on how to raise taxation; modern systems of almost all issues. The latest tax regime you could come up with which we thought our government would borrow - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The point of order, Member for Dokolo?

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: So, is the Member for Dokolo County in order to even imagine that I would be party to excessive taxation of his own mother whom I know -(Laughter)- is the honourable member for Dokolo really in order to imagine that I can agree to his own old lady paying tax on salt and paraffin. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Dokolo District, you are the one who is not in order. (Laughter) Honourable members, we need to find a way of resolving these matters. 

5.23
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to support the committee because I have studied history of the Arab countries from North Africa to the Middle East and you find one aspect, the way the white colonised Africa is not the way they colonised the Arabs. How did they colonise the Arabs? They enticed them with loans to the extent that their countries could not pay the loans and they came and occupied them. 

Now when the government comes up with aspects to avoid taking more loans from out and find their own local initiatives and development projects, it would be very bad for some of us to oppose any measure that is geared towards raising revenue of Government. Mr Speaker, this is the reality. Hon. Bitekyerezo is my chairperson on the HIV committee and yesterday, we had a meeting with the Uganda AIDS Commission and they were crying. The donors who have been funding HIV in Uganda are pulling out after next year and as they are pull out, we are going to have a deficit of Shs 200 billion. That is money for people who are on HIV drugs. 

Mr Speaker, the area I come from  is on a highway and this puts the residents on high risk. I have over four landing sites, which are also high risk. I am trying to look at when the donors have gone out, where is Government going to get money to put those people on HIV drugs? The only way is – [Hon. members: “Paraffin”]- not only paraffin. We are dealing with two issues here; money from UCC and even paraffin. One by one makes a bundle; we are not only looking at Shs 15 billion. 

Mr Speaker, apart from that this Parliament passed a law against homosexuality and those “bazungu” cut off aid despite others bringing back the money –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Under Article 79, it is the function of Parliament to make laws. So, is the honourable member in order to castigate this House for having passed a law, which is a function of this Parliament. In fact, it is our obligation. Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable member is saying this House passed the law. It was not true and he has not said so.

MR CADET: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. And, there was some money that was cut.  For our country not to lose our independence and to get financial shock absorbers, we need money at whatever cost. I will support any angle the government wants to tax. I thank the committee for the good work done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Jinja Municipality East.

5.27
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am worried we are about to vote on a wrong thing. The issue before us is not that we do not want Government to raise a tax. That is not the issue. But I see speaker after speaker trying to create an impression that the Opposition, is opposed to that. 

Mr Speaker the issue is that the tax is essential for the running of Government. But we are saying that poor planning in Government has caused them to go for a wrong area to tax. I listened to Members; they talked a lot about electricity.  The statistics is clear. Fifteen per cent on the national grid is the connection so far. Seven per cent, under rural electrification is the connection. But that is as far as the connection is concerned. The tapping of the actual electricity to these houses is not even there. 

So, when you examine the statistics, the facts are that actually it is this kerosene, which is filling the gap. To me, it is just important that we understand that we are not opposed to Government levying tax to raise money to run Government. We are saying, “you are taxing a wrong component.” This is what we are saying. So, the fact that Government did not plan well does not mean that we are going to punish the poor people out there. We need to understand this. 

Mr Speaker, I have looked at the Auditor-General’s report; the Ministry of Finance does not release 100 percent of the budget as per these ministries; they do not.  This is a budget; it is about the revenue estimate of what we intend to spend on. 

Mr Speaker, my proposal is that since we take this area to be very important, that when you talk about kerosene, you are talking about the health centres out there in the villages, which have not been connected to the grid and they are using kerosene to provide lighting. This must be understood. When you talk about kerosene, you are talking about - in fact, I am a product of these lanterns we are talking about.  If we had not studied using those lanterns, may be, I would not even been here; I would not be listened to. I appreciate hon. Mutyabule who talked about the effect.  If it were not for that kerosene she was talking about, she would not be here. May be she would be somewhere else in Namutumba. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, instead of us legislating and imposing a tax just for the fact that it is being used to adulterate petrol and diesel, which has nothing to do with those people out there in the villages, it is important that this Parliament, before we vote on the wrong motion - because I see the motion is different and we are about to vote on another one - may be, Government takes an opportunity to look at how do we curb corruption? (Mr Tim Lwanga rose_) I can take information from honourable member. 

 MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Some of us were privileged to be there when the budget was being formulated and the main reason why the Shs 200 tax was agreed to, to be forwarded for approval as Parliament, was because of exactly what you are saying that there are these health centres where they are using kerosene and Government is trying to find a way of ensuring that a programme for providing solar for places like what you are explaining is done. And that is part of the development. Not only that but when you go to contributions by the poor  of  the poorest in this country; when they showed us the statistics, majority of them use a maximum of two litres of kerosene a month. So, in 12 months it is Shs 4,800. And that is a contribution towards the Treasury. Thank You.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We need to do an analysis. We have been passing loans in this Parliament for rural electrification. I have given you data that on the main grid   we are on 15 per cent. Let anybody challenge me on the front bench. On the rural electrification, we are on seven per cent. So, how much money -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have spent all the time debating kerosene. This motion is not about kerosene only. Can we deal with the motion and then we go to those aspects? If you want to deal with the issue of kerosene separately, then you deal with it? Can I put the question to this motion and then we go and deal with the specifics of the issues and take a decision on that? 

Honourable members I put the question to the motion for reconsideration of the Finance Bill, 2014 and the Excise Bill, 2013, which was returned to Parliament by H. E the President as provided for under Rule 132 of our Rules of Procedure. I now put the question that this motion be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCE BILL, 2014

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there were those clauses that the committee had proposed but had not been considered by the House at that time. Can we start with those ones, which are contained in the President’s letter on page 2; the one on sugar and the 10 per cent on financial transactions and then the one on mobile money transactions? [Honourable Members: “That is Excise.”] That is Excise duty. Oh sorry; so, Finance Bill in relation to section 2. 

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new clause 2 as follows: amendment of section 58 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013. Section 58 of the Uganda Communications Act, 2013 is amended by: a) Inserting in sub-section 3 the following: 3 (a) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Inserting after section-

MR MUSASIZI: Inserting after section the following: “3 (a) The commission shall remit half of the levy charged under this section to the Consolidated Fund.
 
(b) Substituting for sub-section 4 the following: The balance of the levy after the remittance referred to in sub section 3(a) shall be shared between information and communication technology development and rural communication in the ratio of 1:1.

The justification is that Government needs the revenue to finance other sectors, which support effective ICT development in the country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members that is the proposed amendment. 

MRS OGWAL: Rt Hon. Chairman, it is important that the chairman knows that the 2 per cent he is talking about is not a tax. It is a levy and since it is a levy, I do not see any reason why it should go back to the government. It should be retained by the commission for the expansion of services.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Both taxes and levies form revenue for Government and there are many cases where we have levies categorised under non tax revenue. I therefore see no problem with Government asking for one per cent of this levy to be added on the consolidated fund to support general government activities and programmes.

MS RUTH NANKIBIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just wanted to inform hon. Ogwal that not every levy goes to the specific commission or department. For example, the Fish Levy, which was introduced is collected and goes to the consolidated fund. The fisheries department then applies for it. I am sure there are other levies that are also collected and the money is taken to the consolidated fund.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we take a decision on this matter now? I put the question to the proposal by the chairman that clause 2 be in the form that he has proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House to report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2014, and has passed it without any amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.41 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement from the chairperson was restating what is in the Bill. So, that position, which is in the Bill as it is, is what has been adopted by the House. I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2014

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Finance Bill, 2014” be read for the Third Time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled: “The Finance Bill, 2014” be read for the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE FINANCE ACT, 2014”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. Next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY BILL, 2013

5.43
Second Schedule 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, before the Second Schedule, we propose to insert a new clause before the First Schedule as follows:

Commencement 

This Act shall be deemed to have come into force on 1 July 2014. The justification is that the Excise Duty Bill, 2013 and the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014 are already in force as part of the Taxes and Duties Provisional Collection Order, 2014.

 The provisions of the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014 have been incorporated in the amendments of the Excise Duty Bill, 2013.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is the situation. We have an Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill whose provisions we have already incorporated in this particular Bill and if we adopt this Bill in the form it is, it would mean the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill will cease to operate. After all, this entire particular Bill repeals the mother law, the Excise Tariff Act.

 So, it has been brought to this so that when we deal with this and pass it, we will not have to deal with the Excise Tariff Bill because it will just have to be withdrawn; it will now serve no purpose since all the provisions are contained in this. 

Also this particular Bill did not have a commencement clause yet it has tax measures that were proposed to commence in this financial year. So, the commencement proposal would be perfectly in order. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we now go to the schedule?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend the Second Schedule as follows: 

a) By substituting item (e) in paragraph 8 with the words, “illuminating Kerosene, Shs 200 per litre.”
b) By substituting paragraph 9 with the following words: “Cane or dead sugar and chemically pure sucrose in solid form - Shs 50 per kilogram.”

c) By substituting paragraph 11 with the following words: “Sacks and bags of polymers and ethylene and other plastics under its HS Code 2392.21.00 and 3923.29.00, except vacuum packing bags for food, juices, tea and coffee - Shs 120 per cent.”

d) By substituting item (c) in paragraph 13 with the following: “Money transfer and withdrawal services including transfers and withdraw services by the operators licensed or permitted to provide communication or money transfer or withdrawal but not including transfers and withdrawal services provided by banks - 10 per cent of the fees charged.”

e) By inserting immediately after paragraph 13, the following paragraphs: “14, ledger fees, ATM fees, withdrawal fees and periodic charges and other transactions and non-transaction charges, excluding loans, related charges periodically charged by financial institutions, 10 per cent of the fees charged.” 

The justification, Mr Chair is that due regard has been given to the provisions of the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014, which proposes new rates for the financial year and to the committee recommendation that the provision of the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be incorporated in this Excise Duty Bill, 2014 and considered by Parliament as such.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. On the proposal in 11 there was that reference of HS Code 3923.21.00 - was it properly recorded? I didn’t hear it very well.

MR MUSASIZI: May I read the codes again?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. Please.

MR MUSASIZI: It is HS code –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is in 11, not so?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes, Mr Chairman. It is HS Code 3923.21.00 and 3923.29.00.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Honourable members, those are the proposed amendments from the committee to incorporate the provisions that were in the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, to bring them in to this Bill. 

MR ODOI: Thank you, Mr Chair. I actually rise in respect to the same issue – (c) item 11.  I do not seem to understand what the committee chair means by Shs 120 per cent. I think he meant 120 per cent. So, we need to strike out the Uganda shillings and only remain with 120 per cent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Precisely, I heard that also. So it’s a percentage?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Chair that was an oversight. We concede on that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is 120 per cent and has no reference to Uganda shillings. Honourable members, those are the proposed amendments, in the schedule. I put the question to those amendments. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is there any other? 
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL): (Mr Fred Omach):
Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report to thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption to the House to enable the Committee of the Whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL): (Mr Fred Omach):
Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty Bill, 2014” and passed it with some amendments.


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL): (Mr Fred Omach):
Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the Report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE DUTY BILL, 2014

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL): (Mr Fred Omach):
Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Excise Duty Bill, 2014 be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A Bill for an Act entitled: “The Excise Duty Act, 2014”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister and members for making these corrections when the President made this referral back to the House.  Okay, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have residents of Nakibaggo village, Bukabuli Sub County, Mayuge District represented by hon. James Majegere and hon. Rukia Isanga Nakadama, woman MP. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome. 

MR OMACH: Rt Hon Speaker, I would like, through you, to thank the Members, for considering these two Bills. 

DEPUTY SPEAKER: For re-considering - 

MR OMACH: For re-considering the Finance Bill and the Excise Duty Bill. This will go a long way to improve on the revenue collection, and use it well. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, we have two issues that this Parliament will have to really handle expeditiously; one is already at the committee stage that is the Public Finance Bill. That is to ensure that the next budget we intend to have, for the next financial year, would use that Bill. 

DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we just intend to have the next budget?

MR OMACH: We will be having the next Budget when parliament resumes; we pray that this Bill is passed into law, and it will bring a lot of physical discipline in the management of our budget. 

The second one is the Bill on the pension liberalization. Right now, our savings to GDP stands at about 11 percent and this is extremely low, and once we increase it to about 16-18 percent, then we will be having enough raw materials for generating our own resources for borrowing from the domestic markets.  So, we again appeal to members that we look at this law and pass it, so that we are able to increase on our savings to GDP. I thank members very much for passing it to law.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought there was going to be some other communication also to the Members

MR OMACH: The other communication, we have already communicated it during breakfast. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): There is a matter from Kilak that I should have entertained earlier, unless you are still thinking about what the minister has said; I needed the Member for Kilak to raise some issues.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am responding to what the Minister has just said. We were advised by the Speaker that we have 64 Bills to be considered; only one so far has been brought to Parliament and dealt with. I am surprised that the Minister is standing here and pleading with the members to deal with some pending Bills. We are actually demanding that the government comes here with as many Bills as possible, and above all we are pleading for electoral reforms because time is running out yet the Minister and other stakeholders may need to sit down as a team and work out your priorities, so that we can deal with them. We are ready to deal with them, even ready to work as late as you have now seen; some time work up to 8.00 pm. So, we are willing to do that, but what we want you to do is to please bring to us the Bills so that we can work on them.

DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think when Parliament resumes, the Rt Hon Prime Minister should come out with a list of priorities that this House needs to be focused on -(Applause)- so that we can see how to budget our time and move  quickly; so that we are clear on what we are going to do in this period.

5.59
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you Mr Speaker, I rise on the matter of national importance, concerning Uganda National Examination Board, for our senior four candidates. You realise that private schools under USE, up to now have not received the fund; the capitation grants the government promised to pay them. 

On Friday, the senior four candidates are beginning examinations. And as I speak, some schools do not have money for buying chemicals, and UNEB has already released the confidential, and they instructed those schools to buy those chemicals, the apparatus the candidates are supposed to use. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, as I speak, when government has not yet released a fund for this school, these private schools under USE may not conduct senior four examinations properly. I now appeal to government to employ any opportunity that will help private schools under USE. And you know the conditions for private schools; they are not supposed to charge students any money. Schools depend strictly on the capitation grant being given by government. 

And we also realise that it was resolved in this House that the fund for USE should be released on a termly basis, and the President promised that within two weeks from the beginning of the term, the fund should be released for the schools. I do not know why the Ministry of Finance and government is not respecting the directive, from H.E the President. I request the Government to help the private schools under USE, so that our children do their UNEB without any interference, I beg to move.

6.01
MR GUDOI YAHAYA (NRM, Bungokho County, North, Mbale): Before the Minister responds, I would like to -(Interjections)- I was already holding the microphone. I want to add on my friend's submission about private schools. According to what I know, because I have been to the villages, government aided secondary and primary schools, have not got the UPE and USE grants.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, we have received the submission by the Hon. Member from Kilak. I will handle this with the Minister of Education immediately. 

DEPUTY SPEAKER: The exams are on Friday, so it has to be expedient.

6.03
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue needs urgent attention. The confidential forms he has talked about were released two days ago, and indeed it requires a lot of money if those schools are to buy what they are going to use in those practicals. So, if the minister is not even aware that up to now there are many schools that have not been given that capitation grant, we should as Parliament - since we are going on recess, ensure that the minister does so by Friday, because those schools cannot work without the grants. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the point be made this way, those exams have got to go on, and those monies have got to be found before that date. Please let those schools receive those monies so that they can procure these items, which are meant for examinations starting on Friday. 

Hon. Minister, ensure that this happens, otherwise these children will be stranded and they will not be able to do the examination, which is so much emphasised at this time.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, we are so guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, Hon. Members, for sitting this long and conducting all this business and concluding the budget for this financial year. The government is now free to implement programmes that they proposed to this House, and this House has adopted. Honourable members, this is what we should have done last week. I adjourn this House sine die. 

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)

 












