

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 5 October 2021

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s sitting. The Parliament of Uganda is currently preparing for the East African Inter-Parliamentary games in all disciplines of sports. The trainings are on-going and I encourage Members to go for the trainings. We have a competition with the East African parliaments. If you can create some time, it would be good for you to go for the trainings and defend our Parliament and country.

I also would like to take this chance to welcome back our colleagues to the House. While you were away, we missed you –(Laughter)– but we represented the country effectively. However, we are happy to have you back and we will continue working together, as Parliament of Uganda, for the good of our country.

Our communication will be very short because we have a lot of items on the Order Paper. Thank you.

2.09
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, I thank you for welcoming us back. We were not in exile; we only took a well conceited decision to retreat in view of what was obtaining that day. I would like to take the opportunity to thank you for understanding us, as presiding officers, when we took that decision. I also thank the Members because none of them went out of their way to ostracise us for that decision, which speaks to the extent that we go to understand each other when certain things happen.

We are not back because things are okay but because we are the legislators for our people. Madam Speaker, in responding to your well intentioned welcome remarks, I would like to re-state that we want to be well understood as Members of Parliament as well as leaders that for the action we took. It is not that we encourage crime but we also understand that this is our country. When the State is acting to curb crime, it must act within the limits of the law. 

Our friends were produced before court and we still make the same demands; that due procedure is followed and that they exercise a quick, transparent and fair trial so that other citizens and they, can see the beauty of being ruled under the law and not by the law.

Finally, in the same breath, during my response to the State-of –the-Nation-Address, I listed 19 citizens that had been arrested variously by State actors from their work places and homes. If you go to pages eight and nine of my response to the State-of-the-Nation-Address, those citizens are well enumerated. 

Madam Speaker, we never got a response from the Government concerning those citizens. It is business as usual. As I take leave, I would like to know whether it would not be procedurally okay to demand that you instruct Government to respond on the fate of those citizens that disappeared and were taken by State actors. They are not in court and they have not been traced in any prison. Therefore, we do not want to walk out of Parliament next time because of those 19 citizens.

Would it be okay, Madam Speaker, if you ordered the Minister of Security to commit to come to Parliament and explain the whereabouts of those 19 citizens so that their families can settle? Probably, he could even tell us more of those whose names we did not capture. They have never been produced in any court. 

I would like to put the House on notice that we shall present a Motion for Parliament to investigate the human rights violations over the last 24 months, including murders and disappearances. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Government, you have heard the concerns. You will have to come with a written statement on what was raised in response to the State-of-the-Nation-Address and we see how we can have that resolved. 

However, before you come, we could have a meeting on Thursday together with the Leader of the Opposition and forge a way forward.

2.14
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (MAJ. GEN. (RTD) JIM MUHWEZI): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will do that and, of course, we will need more information from the Leader of the Opposition because he is talking about State actors. We do not know whether it is the Army or the Police but we shall interact and get more information. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We shall have a meeting on Thursday in my chambers over that and we see how we can resolve some of these things because we need to have this resolved so that it stops coming on the Floor. Members, I have matters of national importance but I will bring these matters after the Bills have been laid. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a matter that I raised three weeks ago regarding the National Social Security Fund Board that is gender imbalanced; with one woman out of the nine board members. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pledged to come and report to this House after a week. It is now three weeks and the minister is here. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that he gives us a report as to whether that anomaly has been rectified? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were raising a procedural matter on my communication.      

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I cannot raise it, again, as a matter of national importance. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the minister who pledged to come and inform this House as to what Cabinet had – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi has also started smuggling in things. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I am from the border district. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She is from the border. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you were supposed to bring a report on how gender insensitive the NSSF board is. 

2.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true hon. Opendi raised that matter and you directed that we should not come with just a response but to inform Parliament about the correction. 

We wrote to the constituencies – I informed Parliament last time that we are getting members from the institutions. This board is constituency-based. We have written to all of them and, next week, I think they will be able to submit the names and we shall go to Cabinet for approval. 

Madam Speaker, with due respect, I request for three more weeks. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have a copy of what you wrote to the constituencies for me to confirm that you have really done it? (Applause) I should have that letter in my office tomorrow. 

MR KASOLO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for welcoming us back. It was a painful decision that we took. The issue I would like to raise, as a way of procedure, is the extent to which this institution of Parliament can protect and take care of the welfare of Members when they are arrested. 

All of us here are candidates of prison. In 2011, I was in Luzira. I was arrested during “Walk-to-Work”. I was in B2 Murchison Bay, where I learnt that before my arrival, the former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, had been there, the former minister hon. Mike Mukula had been there and the then former minister, hon. Jim Muhwezi Katugugu, had also been there. (Laughter)

I am raising this matter because all of us are potential suspects at one time – you may win your freedom later. So, when a Member of this Parliament is arrested and detained, as it was my case and hon. Muhwezi’s, what protection and help – welfare and otherwise – does the institution of Parliament that employs me offer? That is what I wanted, with humility, to find out from you. 

I went to visit our colleagues in Kigo. They do not see the institution that employs them helping them to cope with what they are going through. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know how much we can be of help, as an institution. I like what the Leader of the Opposition said, that the institution of Parliament has been very cooperative in supporting whatever is happening and helping our Members. 

For you to know that we are still supporting the Members, their salary has not been cut off. They are still getting their full salary because there is a presumption of innocence. (Applause)

As we have pledged, if there is any problem, if they need any medical attention or anything else, our offices are available. We are open to supporting the Members. That is why in my last communication, I encouraged Members to go and see our colleagues. 

If you feel there is anything they need while there, we will provide as long as it is not affecting the investigations. In terms of welfare, we are available to provide, as an institution. Thank you. (Members rose_) Members, I have a very congested Order Paper. 

2.21
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to enjoin on your communication where you thanked our colleagues from the Opposition side for coming back today. 

I would like to add my voice, especially to thank the Leader of Opposition. In the past, whenever we have had disagreements in this House, there have been violence and fights. I would like to thank them for exhibiting civility this time round. They walked out in a civil manner. There was no fight. They made their statement very loud and clear. I beg to submit. (Applause) 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, order on who? (Laughter) Members, may be it is just that you have not understood hon. Silwany. He is appreciating the team. He is appreciating the Leader of the Opposition for being a very good leader. Thank you for being a very good leader (Applause)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. For the last three days, the media has been awash with the Dubai Expo. As a country, we are feeling quite embarrassed about what is going on. 

If it is procedurally right, could you allow the honourable minister to make a statement on the Floor of Parliament because the country – Uganda has always been respected in the whole continent. It is not right that some simple things in Dubai should tarnish our name. 

I request, Madam Speaker, that you allow the honourable minister to come and inform Parliament and the entire country about what is going on in Dubai and why those things are happening. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you want the honourable minister to make a report? The minister is in the House. The team in Dubai is in Dubai; they will come and make a report. How do you make a report on where you are not? (Applause) They will make a report at the right time. That would be speculation. 

For me, I have not seen anything on social media because WhatsApp has been off. (Laughter)

2.24
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you may recall, over a month ago, I raised an issue on this Floor of Parliament concerning the people of Tororo County, specifically Malaba where the border gate – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it on the communication? 

MR ANGURA: Yes, it is on the communication, concerning the closure of the border gate. Last week, hon. Opendi raised a similar issue, which is related, among others, to security. 

The closure of the small community gate in Malaba has left the whole central business district of Malaba isolated and completely deserted. It is becoming a security issue. 

The last time I raised it here, the Prime Minister confirmed to us that in one week or so, the gate would be opened. We have moved to all offices that we thought were responsible for the closure of this gate. Security is saying Health, Health is saying Internal Affairs, Internal Affairs is saying it is the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives.

Madam Speaker, we need to know when this gate will be open. Where necessary, allow us to go and cut this padlock that is denying our people services in terms of cross border movement since the borders were opened. Since the minister responsible for security, whose office has been jumping up and down, and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives are here – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not true. They were not jumping up and down.

MR ANGURA: The procedural matter I am raising –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First withdraw your words that “they were jumping up and down”. 

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, it has taken long. It is really a big problem to the people. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am saying you withdraw the phrase “jumping up and down”. 

MR ANGURA: I withdraw the phrase “jumping up and down”. (Laughter) 

We have been made to move from one office to another seeking for an opportunity that will create a lasting solution for this community gate to be opened so that people enjoy services. We have even requested that if the human resource is lacking to handle the gates, it should be known to us. We are now –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, in the last sitting, the Rt Hon. Speaker asked for an inter-ministerial meeting with all the respective ministers in regard to that issue. So, what we are going to do is to wait for a report. Honourable minister, do you want to give a report?

2.27
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to inform the Member of Parliament, hon. Angura, that the gate is not under the Ministry of Security; it is under immigration, which is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Secondly, I have already interacted with hon. Sarah Opendi who raised the matter here and we have agreed on the way forward to resolve the matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an order but the minister has already finished. 

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: Much as he has finished, I am rising under rule 224 of our Rules of Procedure. 

On the 7th of last month, you ordered the Minister of Security and the Minister of Internal Affairs to immediately go and act on the issues involving the 50 children who were abducted. Up to now, those children are still in detention surrounded by the army and police. Is the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka, was that the issue being discussed? 

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: I am on point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are discussing the issue of Malaba. Bring that as a fresh issue. That is a very serious issue. Bring it as a matter on its own. 

MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA: The point of order I am raising is whether it is contempt – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bring it as a new issue.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising originates from your speech, where you alluded to how tight the Order Paper is. 

I remember at the beginning of August, you dispatched the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to the greater Masaka Subregion to do some investigation and pick issues that are leading to the murders by the panga wielding goons who are killing our people.

It has now been two months yet you instructed us to report within two weeks. My point of procedure is: when shall our report access the Order Paper? We are being asked why the report has not come and we are being suspected –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you raising information on procedure?

MR MUWUMA: That is the issue, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwuma, we shall have your issue on the next Order Paper. (Applause) I am aware that the report is ready and you will have it on the next Order Paper. Next item.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EAST AFRICAN CRUDE OIL PIPELINE (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2021

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY)) (Mr Sidronius Okasai): Madam Speaker, the First Parliamentary Counsel in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs prepared the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (Special Provisions) Bill, 2021 following a request from my ministry. 

The overall goal of the Bill is to enable some provisions – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay the Bill. Give us the name of – 

MR OKASAI: This is my maiden speech on this matter. (Laughter) This is the first time I am laying Bills. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, for someone to be appointed a minister, he or she must have taken time off and learned the basic things. For a minister to appear in Parliament and not even know the basic procedure of laying a Bill -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, it is the first –
 
MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you can see that the training that should have happened elsewhere is happening here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, we all learn. (Applause) It is not a crime to be appointed a minister even when you do not know - Please hon. Okasai, can you lay the Bill? 

MR OKASAI: Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the Bill entitled, “The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (Special Provisions) Bill, 2021” for the First Reading. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Lay the Certificate of Financial Implications.

MR OKASAI: Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications to the Bill. I beg to lay. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important Bill. However, I want to bring to the attention of the minister that although this august House passed two important Bills into law, the upstream and midstream Acts, in respect of the oil industry, there has been a pending downstream Bill. 

This particular Bill you have brought has an interlinkage between the downstream Bill and the midstream Bill. I hope that you will talk to your senior minister to see when you can bring the downstream Bill to enable us deal with it together with this very Bill because they will be closely interlinked for information purposes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Niwagaba. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources for perusal and report back in 45 days, in accordance with Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

2.36
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021,” be read for the first time, in accordance with Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure. I accordingly lay the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Bill entitled, “The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021,” and for Bill No. 24 of 2021. I beg to lay both.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny and report back within 45 days as per Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure 
 
BILLS
FIRST READING
THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2021,” be read for the first time.

In accordance with Rule 118, I beg to lay the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2021, Bill No. 27 of 2021.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny and report back within 45 days as per Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure.

2.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have received the Bills.  Some of them are fresh and others are returning following the ruling of the Speaker. Given the volume of work, wouldn’t it be proper, if for example, some of the returned Bills are given a shorter span for processing to allow space for other fresher Bills that we can - because there was consensus on most of these Bills and there were no contentious issues.

For example, the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021 seemed to generate consensus then and now. wouldn’t it be proper if the time span is limited to give way for fresh business from the House that we can do as much as feasible?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is really okay and as you may be aware, the Rt hon. Speaker ruled the other time that old Bills are given 10 days while the fresh ones, 45 days. However, you can report in one day; it is within the rules.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

2.40
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2021,” be read for the first time. I beg to lay both the Bill and the Certificate of Financial Implications in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is the Bill seconded? It is seconded by hon. Aber, hon. Opolot, hon. Apolot, hon. Opendi, hon. Dan Kimosho, hon. Grania, hon. Muwuma, hon. Ssemujju and hon. Akello. Thank you.

2.42
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 59 of the Rules of Procedure, which permits a Member to move a Motion without notice. I would like to move a motion to suspend Rule 129 because I have looked at this Bill. This Bill is straightforward because the Deputy Speaker has been sitting as a member of the Parliamentary Commission although for emphasis it was not clear.

Therefore, this Bill intends to make it clear and give the Deputy Speaker powers, in the absence of the Speaker to chair the Commission. Secondly, it is trying to amend the Rebecca Kadaga Institute of Parliamentary studies.

This is an obvious Bill and if Members agree, I would like to move the motion that we proceed to the second reading of this Bill so that we dispose of it. There is no need for this Bill, which is straightforward to go to the committee. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, is the motion for the suspension of Rule 129 seconded? The motion is seconded by the whole House. (Laughter) Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, when you look at the object of this Bill, you realise it is to amend the Administration of Parliament Act but also to provide for the defects with the current legislation where Section 2 of the Administration of Parliament Act excluded the Deputy Speaker of Parliament from being a Member of the Parliamentary Commission.

This, to me, is a straightforward matter whose amendment Members should support. In the event that the Speaker is indisposed, the Deputy Speaker may have challenges, even legal challenges, if certain decisions are made by the Commission and yet, the Act does not recognise the Deputy Speaker as a member of the Commission; yet, that is one office. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker should be explicit and should be members of the Commission.

The Institute of Parliamentary Studies is also provided for in the Administration of Parliament Act. However, in order for us to streamline the operations of the Parliamentary Commission and training of Members, I would see no harm in having the Institute of Parliamentary Studies handled under the current system and also that the Parliamentary Commission takes over this role.

The other issue is about the tender board. We all know that tender boards were long abolished but it still exists in our law, yet we currently have the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act (PPDA) that guides all procurements of all Government entities in the country. Therefore, this motion that I moved was for us to move to second reading of the Bill so that we can then proceed and dispose of it. Thank you.   
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Opendi. Honourable members, I put a question to the motion that we suspend Rule 129 raised by hon. Sarah Opendi as far as it applies to the Bill that has been read. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 129, suspended.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

2.47
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, let me first thank hon. Opendi. I move the motion that “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Yes, it is seconded by the whole House. Can you speak to your motion, hon. Akol?

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, hon. Opendi did very good work for me and almost finished the difficult work that I should have done to convince the Members.

First, it is very clear that for this time – good enough one of the Commissioners helped me when I was raising a motion seeking leave that even when we just started Parliament, the Commission had problems regarding how to move because the Deputy Speaker was sitting there without the authority from the Speaker. I think it is on record that it was put on the Floor of Parliament here. That is one of the reasons I felt that it is important that we amend the rules so that that position of the Deputy Speaker – not exactly you sitting there now – but it can be hon. Niwagaba, hon. Bahati or myself next time – should be sitting legally in the Commission. 

The other day, I also made it very clear that I thanked Government. I am not there but when I was a Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I talked about the overload – the expenditures that the Government is incurring with too many Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) created by the Act of Parliament. Therefore, I thought it important that as the institute is also part of Parliament of Uganda, it would be good for us to have it under the Commission. That is one of the reasons this Bill is seeking for it to be under the Commission of Parliament.

Thirdly, it is a very simple thing known that we have the arm of Government, which is in charge of procurement but still, in the Administration of Parliament, we have the illegal part of it that we need to create a Board that can work on its procurements. 

Therefore, we would like to put things right in the Administration of Parliament Act. That is why I thank hon. Opendi for thinking that we should not wait for long to handle this. It is a very simple thing that Parliament can handle. 

Madam Speaker, I do not have much to say. This is a straightforward amendment. Thank you.

2.51
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion under Rules 16 and 59(1)(j) that Rule 130(2) and 130(5) be suspended. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion on suspension of Rule 130(2) and 130(5) seconded? It is seconded. I can see hon. Aber, hon. Okwalinga and other honourable members. 

Honourable members, Rule 16 on Suspension of Rules does not apply in respect to Rule 5, 6, 11, 12, 13(1), 16 and 98. 

Rule 129 and 130(2) and 130(5) are not part of the rules that cannot be suspended. I, therefore, put the question that rule 130(2) and 130(5) be suspended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rules 130(2) and 130(5), suspended. 

2.53
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, in that respect, I move a motion under Rule 71 that debate be closed and the question be put as to the Second Reading of this particular Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I put the question that the Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.
Clause 2

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just wanted confirmation. Last time, when the honourable member was moving, he assured the House that the staff of the institute we are amending were not going to be affected. 

Now that we have moved, because of the urgency of this Bill, we would want assurance because we have not read through to see how the clause is written; can we be assured that what the Member told Parliament is actually, what is in the Bill? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, when you look at clause 5, it has a transitional provision; that does not affect any member to be sacked. We are not working like other mergers; they will be part of the Parliamentary Service - a Directorate of IPS.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, that is what we want because we do not have the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is catered for.

MR BAHATI: Thank you

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is catered for. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME 

2.58
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, and the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.59
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2021” and passed it without amendment.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.00
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

3.01
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2021,” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2021,” be read the third time and do pass.
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ADMINISTRATION OF PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2021”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) Thank you very much honourable members. This is the first Bill I have passed in the Eleventh Parliament (Laughter). This is my maiden Bill.

3.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the House and the presiding officer for the Bill so fast passed. For the new Members, it looks like a baptism of fire and probably, it is not the best way to learn how Bills are processed.

I would like to invite Members to probably get an extract of the processes. We are going to be handling more challenging matters in this House. The invitation to amend rules should be declined. This was more less an in-House management rule and, therefore, we were willing to have it moved. However, if there is an appetite across the right side of the Speaker to suspend rules, I want to warn in earnest that we shall reject it. You should come prepared and justify –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, I do not have appetite to suspend-

MR MPUUGA: No, Madam Speaker, I am not referring to the Speaker because I said there was consensus that the Bill before the House, which we have just processed, was about Parliament and how Parliament runs and we were in consent with it; it did not violate any –(Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for coming up to appreciate. However, in the process he said the Speaker will not have appetite to amend rules. It is something simple, which I think he should withdrawal and be expunged from the Hansard. 

The Speaker has not amended any rule here; it is backbench Members of Parliament who moved for the suspension of rules. Is he in order to insinuate that the Speaker has appetite to amend rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, did you say I have appetite? (Laughter)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, you know I had taken long without seeing my dear sister across and the first time she has the occasion to settle in the House, the debates are flying so fast and I can understand why she heard me in her-


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the issue is, did you say I have appetite?

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, you have been around long enough to know how I present my issues. At no time would I find the Speaker –(Applause)– I said on the right hand side of the Speaker. That was my statement. However, I welcome her back to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what we want is to get this out of the Hansard; that “the Speaker has appetite”. I have appetite for other things but not for the rules. (Laughter) 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, let the records capture the Leader of the Opposition very clearly; that the reference was made on people seated on the right hand side of the Speaker. That was the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.06
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for getting me by surprise. I was preparing for a long discussion and I thought today, I am handing over and then wait for another day. 

I would like to thank hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and hon. Opendi for making it a short one. Much as it was a maiden one for you, for me it was also the first in this 11th Parliament. Thank you very much, honourable members, for making it happen. I pledge to work together with you. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Members. I said this is our maiden Bill as the 11th Parliament. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF PAYMENT OF TOBACCO FARMERS IN BUNYORO SUBREGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives -

MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In your remarks, you said that we would look at matters of national importance immediately after the Bills have been laid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we are going to look at them. They are only laying papers.

MS CHRISTINE APOLOT: Okay, thank you.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, this is the issue to do with the payment of tobacco farmers in Bunyoro region and other parts of the country. 

Since last time when I made a statement here, we have drafted a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), which we are yet to sign. It will be signed in the course of this week or next week because one company, as I said, is willing to start the payments while we are still negotiating and talking to the other company. 

As soon as the MOU is signed, I will be able to bring it to this House as you requested, in the course of next week. That is the brief I have for Parliament, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. When do you expect the MoU to be ready?

MR BAHATI: The MoU for the first company, which is willing to start the payments, will be ready at the end of this week. Therefore, I will be able to deposit it with the Clerk to Parliament in the course of next week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Remember the order of this House is that you should not pay even a coin before an MoU is signed between the company and the Government because we are not lenders.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are following that order and that is what we shall do. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.09
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is telling us that one company is willing to pay and they are still negotiating with the other company. 

This is Government and Government has all the powers and apparatus to ensure that a company is made to pay Ugandans because these tobacco farmers have been suffering for a very long time.

That company that the minister is talking about that they are not yet willing - The minister is not clear. The clarification I would like to get from him is, can he tell us why the company is not willing to pay and why other companies are willing to pay so that we know? If he needs any support from this Parliament, then, we provide the support so that all the companies agree that they are going to pay the tobacco farmers. That is the clarification I would like to get from hon. Bahati.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, this issue of tobacco farmers has been on the Floor of this House several times. If I can remember very well, last week, the Prime Minister promised here that they are going to lay the MoU on the Floor of Parliament that they already worked on and signed.

Today, the minister is telling us stories after stories. Therefore, are we really proceeding well on this tobacco issue? Why all these?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the House needs clarification. Last week, we were told that you are going to bring a signed MoU to that effect. Therefore, we need a signed MoU.

Secondly, as you make clarification, you also need to make clarification on what plans you have for West Nile because it has been an issue.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I have a duty to tell the truth to the House. Therefore, if the MoU is not ready, I cannot come to the House and say it is ready. The MoU is not ready and we are working on it.

As you recall, Madam Speaker, we passed Shs 11 billion and –(Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The same minister was before us and he said the MoU was ready. He is now saying it is not ready and he cannot present it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not the same minister.

MR MWIJUKYE: The Government told us that they were ready. The point of procedure I am raising is, isn’t the ministry contradicting itself by saying they were ready then and now, they are not ready?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is important for us to focus on is to have the payment done and have the MoU. Actually, we do not want the payment before the MoU. Let us have a signed MoU tabled in this House before you pay the money. That is what we want.

MR BAHATI: The first company is willing to sign. I just want to remind the Members of this House that the origin of this started from the farmers of Bunyoro and that is the reason we had passed the Shs 11 billion. 

However, demands from West Nile have also come. One company is actually saying, unless we include the farmers from West Nile, they are not willing to sign an MoU. Those are the issues that we are working on.

Hon. Mwijukye, Government has procedures they follow. I wish one time you would be on this side. You would learn how the Government works; it does not work that way. 

As soon as I am ready, Madam Speaker, next week, I will bring the MoU. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can we have a meeting together with the Attorney-General’s Chambers, your office, Speaker’s Office plus the owners of the companies you are talking about on that matter so that we get a feel of what they are saying?

MR BAHATI: After the House, I will follow up to get the appointment. 

THE 59TH INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATIONS

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by congratulating you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this your maiden speech? 

MR OGWANG: It is my maiden speech in this term of office. I would like to begin by congratulating you and honourable members of this august House for assuming that office as the Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. I would also like to congratulate my good friend, the Leader of the Opposition, for being elevated to the office of Leader of the Opposition of the 11th Parliament. I am here to present a statement on behalf of my senior minister, hon. Milly Babalanda, who is unable to be with us here. 

Madam Speaker, on 30 September 2021, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business presented to Parliament a statement on business for the succeeding week, which included a Statement on the 59th Independence Day celebrations. I wish to submit as follow:

Uganda is scheduled to celebrate her 59th Independence Day anniversary on Saturday, 9 October 2021, at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. 

The theme for this year’s cerebrations will be: “Celebrating our 59th Independence Day as we secure our future through National Mind-set Change”. I hope this statement has been uploaded on our iPads because I, earlier on, submitted it to the office of the Clerk.

Madam Speaker, aware that the COVID-I9 pandemic is still roaming large, this year’s celebrations will be scientific. In other words, not more than 570 guests have been invited to physically be in Kololo. The categorisation of the invited guests is attached herewith as Annex l.

For the record, allow me lay on Table a list of all the invited guests to prove the 570 guests who will attend the function. I beg to lay.

The rest of Ugandans will quietly celebrate from their homes. The activities in Kololo will be relayed live on all major televisions and radios and, therefore, people are advised to watch the proceedings from the comfort of their homes.

The chief guest will be His Excellency, the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the function will begin at ll.00 a.m.

Madam Speaker, Cabinet, under Min. Extract 342 (CT 2018) of 24 September 2018, directed the Office of the President to prepare and circulate guidelines for planning and organising national functions.

Specifically, section 3 of the aforesaid guidelines provides that there shall be a National Organising Committee (NOC) for each national function chaired by the Permanent Secretary under whose docket a given national function falls.

The National Organising Committee reports to the responsible minister, who shall, in turn, brief the President on the preparations as and when the need arises. Since the NOC for the 59th Independence Day falls under the Presidency, it, therefore, follows that the Secretary, Office of the President has been chairing the technical-level preparatory meetings.

So far, the NOC has held five technical-level meetings in preparations for the forthcoming 59th Independence Day celebrations scheduled for Saturday, 9 October 2021. As per the available reports from the subcommittees, we are set to host this day.

The overall readiness of the key subcommittees of the NOC stands as follows – please, allow me give a brief summary on the specific committees other than reading what each committee is doing since you already have the statement. 

Decoration Subcommittee 
Construction Subcommittee 
Invitation Subcommittee
Ceremonies Subcommittee
Entertainment Subcommittee

A snapshot of the actors who contributed to the attainment of our independence

Madam Speaker, while the struggle for Uganda’s Independence was long and probably cannot fully be captured in these few words, it is important to highlight a few individuals that began the struggle for our independence. 

The origin of the struggle for Uganda’s Independence was the founding of Uganda’s first political party, which was Uganda People’s Congress. The party was founded by Ignatius Musaazi, Abubakar Mayanja, Stefano Abwangoto, Ben Okwerede, Yekosofati Engur from Lango and Katembo from Tooro.

Musaazi was the founding President General and Mayanja was the founding Secretary-General. The others were chairpersons in their respective regions. A host of other parties were later to be formed and were all pushing to one direction, which was self-determination. 

Indeed, in 1962 when Uganda was granted independence, Dr Milton Obote became the Executive Prime Minister and Sir Edward Mutesa II became the President.

The period that followed Uganda’s Independence in 1962 was marked by tribal and religious sectarianism, bigotry, chauvinism, state abuse of power and human rights, state and economic collapse and intermittent conflicts, including civil wars. 

A combination of measures was taken to engender national security, peace and stability, democracy as well as socio-economic transformation and, no doubt, Uganda is now on the right track.

Madam Speaker, I have to highlight some of the strides made in a few selected sectors, as a nation, over the last 59 years -

Education sector. In these 59 years of independence, we have done a lot to build the economic and administrative capacity to implement the development decisions we rightly make as a free nation and as a free people. 

We have addressed the intellectual capacity of our people in terms of building a knowledge and skill base through education.

We have invested a lot in educating our people, using new and refocused curricula. It is true we still have problems in this area but we have also made impressive gains and we shall continue to do so. For example, we have increased the number of primary school-goers to over l0 million pupils, compared to about 2.5 million in 1989.

We have increased the number of secondary school-going children to over two million students now. There are 53 universities: nine of them are public and 44 are private and constituent colleges thereof and more are in the pipeline.

Agriculture sector

Agriculture remains the main thrust of Uganda’s economic growth. It employs about 64 per cent of Ugandans and about 72 per cent of all youth, highlighting its importance to household income growth. 

The value of agriculture exports has increased over time to $l.5 billion, representing unprecedented growth over the last four financial years.

We are now exporting 8.5 million bags of coffee, a figure that is still growing with more investment and better regulation in the sector. Fortunately, the global demand is able to take all the coffee and still demand more. 

The global demand for milk products is 906 billion litres, valued at $458.l billion. Therefore, our present production of 2.6 billion litres of milk can enter the global market provided we solve the problem of cattle diseases, that is to say, foot and mouth, anthrax, etcetera. and, of course, also offer competitive prices.

Information Communication Technology (ICT)

This is one of the four core sectors promoted by President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni as guarantors of jobs and growth opportunities and the route for most Ugandans to enter the money economy – others being agriculture, industry and the service sector, for example, tourism and hospitality. 

ICT has created 500,000 direct and indirect jobs with a lot of space for further growth. The Government is promoting ICT innovations to create jobs for import substitutions to avoid overdependence on foreign ICT products.

The figures of telephone and internet subscription currently stands as follows, as of December 2020:

27.78 mobile phone subscribers from 22.37 million in 2016.
21.4 million Internet users from 0.4 million users in 2016.
26.4 mobile money subscribers with an active user base of 15.6 million.
Mobile transactions have reached a high of Shs 93.7 trillion.

The Government is promoting ICT innovations to create jobs for import substitution and to avoid overdependence on foreign ICT products. 

A national ICT innovation hub for 500 innovators has been constructed in Nakawa. Innovation grants have been given to ll2 innovators and six private sector innovation hubs under the National ICT Initiatives Support Programme. 

In November 2019, mobile phones and computer manufacturing by SIMI Mobile was launched in Namanve by His Excellency, the President, and the company has just shipped the first consignment of 18,000 mobile phones assembled in Uganda and Morocco –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, rule 52 of our Rules of Procedure allows a minister to make a statement either to explain a policy or any matter. This particular minister stood to speak about the Independence Day Celebrations. He is now – I do not know whether he is running away. 

He is now reading the Budget Framework Paper, which usually, under the Public Finance Management Act is presented in December. It has all the figures of how many bags of coffee we are exporting, the litres of milk that we are producing and exporting, the number of tourists that come to Uganda, the number of jobs created by the ICT and how ICT is a core sector that the Government is promoting. The statement has everything.

Last year, we received – The figures may have changed but they will be updated in December, at least according to the Public Order Management Act. Is the minister, therefore, in order to request your office to present a statement on the 59TH Independence Day Celebrations but then end up presenting the Budget Framework Paper for the next financial year? (Laughter) Doesn’t that offend our rules? 

The point of procedure I am raising is whether the minister in blatant violation of our Rules of Procedure should read next financial year’s Budget Framework Paper instead of talking about the Independence Day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, the minister asked for permission to tell the House about the 59th Independence Day Celebrations and the achievements they have registered. What he is reading is the achievements they have registered as a party. (Applause) Honourable minister, can you summarise your achievements? (Laughter)

MR OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you look at rule 52(2), it says “A statement made by the minister may be debated provided that such debate shall not exceed one hour.” I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise guidance you have given. 

As you have correctly guided, I am unable to dwell into the details of the achievements we have made as far as economic infrastructure and the energy sector are concerned. Let me just make a summary since my brother, hon. Ssemujju, says that I am making a state-of-the nation address.

Hon. Ssemujju, we must acknowledge that all these achievements have been made – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are addressing the House, not hon. Ssemujju.

MR OGWANG: All these achievements have been made during these 35 years of the NRM rule. I ask my colleagues here to allow us to talk about them because I am in the right forum where appropriation of money to the Government is done. So, it is important that, once in a while, we account to the people of Uganda. 

In conclusion, therefore, we wish to borrow from the wise words of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, when he was receiving the instruments of power as the Prime Minister of Tanganyika on 1 May 1961. He said:

“I have talked to you before about poverty, ignorance, and disease. But in fact, if we defeat poverty, we shall have achieved the means by which we can defeat ignorance and disease. Yet poverty is something that really only you can fight. If you have cotton unpicked on your shamba, if you have cultivated half an acre less than you could cultivate, if you are letting the soil run needlessly off your land, or if your shamba is full of weeds, if you deliberately ignore the advice given to you by the agricultural experts, then you are a traitor in the war. You are failing all of us Tanganyikans because you are not fighting to the limit against the common enemy of poverty.”

The quotation from the founding Father of the United Republic of Tanzania summarises it all for Ugandans as we celebrate our Independence Day under the appropriate theme “Celebrating our 59th Independence Day as we secure our future through national mind-set change“. There can never be true independence if we are starving or if we produce for consumption. We must produce enough for export as well as continue with innovations to fully industrialise our economy.
 
Uganda is progressing steadily and currently ranked as one of the most entrepreneurial countries in the world. When it comes to natural beauty, Uganda is no match for most countries. We are certainly on the right path and with determination, initiative and cooperation, we shall surely succeed.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. I thank you for giving me this opportunity to make this statement on the 59th Independence Day Celebration on behalf of the Minister for Presidency. Thank you, honourable members for giving me the time and listening to me. I say all these For God and My Country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister for the statement. The last function we had in Kololo was a disaster. Honourable members will bear with me. 

We were made to sit in mud. The function was not well organised. Our visitors went back ashamed. We hope, this time round, you will have a well-organised function. 

3.33
MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement on the Independence Day of Uganda. As Uganda celebrates her 59th Independence Day, I must commend the Government for the key milestones it has achieved. For example, the minister told us that the enrolment in UPE has increased to at least 10.7 million as of 2019. 

However, due to the lockdown and the effects of COVID-19, many school-going children got pregnant; teenage pregnancies are on the rise in many districts in the country. My district has not been left out. In the last seven months, 1,300 girls have got pregnant during this lockdown. If we are talking about the enrolment, how will the enrolment be after the lockdown? This means that these school-going girls are not going back to school and that will have a negative impact on the country and the communities we live in.

The theme being “Securing the future through national mind-set change” how can we change the mind-set of the people in our communities? These girls are going to be looked at as outcasts and children who cannot go back to school. How can we change their mind-set so that even after they get pregnant, they can go back to school?

It is our role, as legislatures and leaders to make sure we provide a safe environment for these girls to go back to school after conception.  The Government should come up with a system to protect the girl-child and women during this lockdown. We are talking about increased numbers of teenage pregnancies. However, how can we solve this? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement presented. This year’s independence celebration is very crucial to Uganda.

Madam Speaker, when you look at it critically, you realise that a child who was born in 1986 has, this year, made 35 years. It is the period in which a child was born, attained the youthful stage and became an adult.

This is the lesson that we should learn, now that the NRM Government, headed by His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda - and I am happy that he is going to be the chief guest on this day. We request the President to tell the child who was born in 1986 and he is no longer a youth from next year - he should tell his plan for retirement so that this child compares him with other presidents of the Republic of Uganda.

That child born in 1986 - as I summarise, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

3.38
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The time is very scary yet this matter is very important. I hope the frame in which my brother hon. Ogwang presents this statement is not the same frame under which the function is going to be organised; to make it look like it is a partisan function like it has been before where they are going to announce the protocol of arrival of one party as if they are going to Kyankwanzi for training.

Madam Speaker, the theme “securing Uganda’s future” - I was helping the late Abu Mayanja to do his biography before he died. From his biography, the late Mayanja became the Secretary General of the first political party in Uganda when he was still a student at Makerere University.

Today, we have a leader who said that at 75 years, one will have lost energy - and he said it many times. The young people who were not born before he came here, like hon. Ogwang, think that the future is going to be secured that way.

This independence had nothing to do with schools. In fact, when you look at the schools established here by the colonialist - Buddo, Namagunga, Namugongo, Gayaza and so on, they are still the best schools in Uganda. That shows that the people who fought for independence never fought for schools. They were fighting for self-determination where they would be respected as human beings.

If you are still rolling Members of Parliament in the mud; if you read the book, “Uganda’s Revolution” by the Late Gen. Pecos Kutesa, a former Member of Parliament, you will notice that he said that the reason he went to Luweero to fight was because President Museveni who was a minister was stopped at a roadblock in Kireka and he was not respected and for that, Gen. Pecos Kutesa and others went to fight in Luweero.

Today, Members of Parliament are being arrested like chicken thieves. Court orders are being overturned by someone who thinks Uganda is his personal estate, inherited from his parents. This attitude needs to change. Those of you who think that Uganda now is under your feet and that you are helping others to live in this country, until we have created a country where all of us feel respected and that this is our country, you can have as many functions at Kololo to remember the occasion, maybe to commemorate the 59 years.

I am only inviting you, finally, to make this independence meaningful by going back to the ideals that drove the Abu Mayanja and Muzaazis who were not fighting for establishment of schools; the schools were there. However, today - Abu Mayanja was expelled from Makerere University and he went to the Governor in Entebbe who was operating a scholarship - people are still going to Entebbe, even you Members of Parliament, as if the –(Member timed out.)

3.41
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for presenting the statement. Indeed 59 years ago, Uganda was able to attain independence and it is commendable that today, we have a sovereign state.

However, the statement from the minister focuses on narrow areas. When you look at education, for example, I would think that we should be moving ahead rather than focusing narrowly on the aspect of access to education. When the minister focuses on saying that we have increased the number of school-going children, but we know that as a country, we are challenged with so many other aspects, I would implore the minister to look at those other parameters.

While we look at the numbers of children going to school being increased, we should think about the retention for both boys and girls in schools. My honourable colleague has already talked about the dropout rates due to pregnancies. However, we know that there are high dropout rates, which affect mostly girls and some boys for various reasons.

There are issues to do with completion rates. Therefore, while we focus on access, what about the completion rate? Therefore, there are pertinent issues the country has to deal with. I would like to request the minister that in the subsequent statements, he should be alive to the reality by looking at the issues affecting our country. I thank you.

3.42
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement. Indeed, 59 years ago, as a country, we obtained our independence. I would like to thank God thus far He has brought Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the Government for choosing the theme for us all to change our mind-set. This is indeed a fundamental theme that this country needed yesterday.

Allow me to talk about the education sector. We have done well, as a country, in terms of formal education. However, a lot is still going wrong. We are forgetting other institutions like the cultural institutions that should be guiding our children. 

I would like to call upon the education sector to review the curriculum for this country, particularly, with a view of bringing in parenting. A lot is going wrong with our children and if we are to secure our future; the future not for individual plans in this country, not for mountains but for our children; the young population of this country - we need a proper curriculum to guide our children. 

Still concerning education, it is now time for the country to focus on skills development. I get perturbed - year in year out, we are coming up with programmes, dishing out money with very little impact. I come from a fishing community. In Pakwach, we believe that, “Give me a fishnet or a boat rather than fish.” 

When we design programmes, we should not focus on the financial aspect alone but tangible equipment that can equip our people to remain with the skills for a lifespan. That is why I am calling upon Government that as we celebrate the Independence Day this week, we can try to review the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) Fund, if possible, so that we do not only give women money. We should equip them with tailoring and design, bakery, weaving and many other skills so that they stay with these skills so that –(Member timed out.)

3.45
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the minister. I have clearly heard that the guests will be around 500. I grew up in the village and this is a day when we listen to all the authorities like the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) and the rest. This is a time when the rest of the population in the village is counseled but this is no more.

I would like to know from the minister if our villages are allowed at least to assemble 200 or 100 people so that they are able to get the information for the change of mind-set. We cannot change our mind-set when people are here doing everything virtually and yet, we do not have these gadgets in Terego.

I will be grateful to hear that in Terego, we are allowed to be part of this country. Thank you.

3.46
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. In particular, I would like to look at the theme of the year; “Securing the future through mind-set change.” 

For the last 59 years, Uganda has gone through a number of changes politically, socially and economically but our political history has not been very good. That has created a lot of divisions because of the fights, coups and has pitted tribes against each other in different regions.

This has affected the way we think and look at ourselves to the extent that it has created a lot of hatred among the people of this country and we cannot hide it. The best way to deal with this is to change the mind-set of people; the way we think and how we can make our lives better.

I would like to ask the honourable minister; what do we have in place that we have put in and is going to help us in achieving our interest of causing a positive mind-set change in the country? Have we put in place institutions or strategies through which we are going to handle the young people, old and politicians whereby we meet and agree on how we should think and look at how we should develop our country? Without that, you will find people running to sell land to buy a boda boda instead of engaging into very serious economic production.

Today, parents have absconded from their responsibility of parenting. The only parent we have now is the school. The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed us and we need to change the mind-set of parents in this country so that we look at our responsibility over the children. (Applause)

The rate of teenage pregnancy in my district is high; 2,300 young girls below the age of 19 have got pregnant. The children go to evening clubs, centres and discos and the parents are watching. Sometimes, they are also on the one side of the road while children are dancing on the other. What kind of mind-set have we built?

I think the honourable minister should put this in black and white and present it to Parliament on the approach that we are going to use in ensuring that we cause a mind-set change as we get into the 59th Independence Day celebrations. Thank you.

3.50
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the other Members in thanking the honourable minister for presenting such an elaborate statement on the Independence Day celebrations. This is going to be the 59th Independence that the country is celebrating. When you look far back in 1962, Uganda was not as good as it is today. We would like to thank Government for bringing us this far.

What I would like to ask from the minister is as follows: 

First, what can we do differently whenever we are making such important celebrations? The Independence Day comes once in a year. If we are to do something unique so we know this year we have done this and the next independence we shall do this, I think we shall be moving very far. 

As Parliament, we should know that we are going to do this during these Independence Day celebrations and that the next Independence so that we move as a country ahead. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at infrastructure, everything has moved well. However, our cornerstone has been security. This year, we have had challenges. I thought that the minister was also going to talk about that. We need to secure the future of Ugandans. Your future cannot be secured when you do not have security. 

Honourable minister, you should clarify that because we need a big statement on issues of security in this country so that Ugandans are secure and everybody knows that the country is secure to live in. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have many statements from different ministers. This was a statement on Independence. If it is a statement on security, hon. Jim Muhwezi is here and he has a paper to present. If it is a statement on works, we shall have a Minister of Works and Transport. (Members rose_) Who are you putting under a point of Order? (Laughter) People who are standing are ordered to sit down. That is why we want to go for recess and have orientation so that people know that when the Speaker is speaking, you keep quiet and sit down. For now, let us have a response from the minister.

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking you and honourable colleagues who have raised those pertinent questions.

The first one is from my good friend, hon. Ssemujju Nganda. Will this function be the same as the others? No. We take note of the challenges, which we all saw in the previous functions. The purpose of those committees is entirely to help us address those inadequacies, which were there. I would like to pledge on behalf of the Presidency that this will be a very well organised function and all invited guests will be taken care of.

The second question is that all colleagues have made a mention of “mind-set.” It is true that if you look at the National Development Plan III, one of the 18 programme areas is on mind-set change. I implore all of us that can we and the ministry leading this - the Ministry of Gender, Labour and social Development, followed by the Ministry of Information Communication and Technology – so it is important that as leaders, we join Government in trying to help us address, disseminate, talk to our people on issues of the mind-set. We all have cultural institutions, religious leaders, it is our call as Government, and it is the main reasons why we thought it wise that we should call upon the population to look at what we are doing well and where the question of the mind-set is leading our country.

Hon. Gilbert Olanya raised the question of when should H.E the President retire. We are in a multiparty dispensation and I want to speak for my political party; the NRM will determine when H.E the President will retire. 

However far as I am concerned, each party presents its best candidate. If NRM has been presenting Yoweri Kaguta as the best candidate and he has been wining, why would you a Member of the Opposition tell me that he should retire? Therefore, hon. Olanya, please, note that our party will determine when H.E the President should retire. Thank you.

Furthermore, Madam Speaker, other questions, which have come here, are on the education sector, particularly on the curriculum. I would like to state that the Minister of Education, who is also the First Lady, appointed hon. Amanya Mushega to chair the committee to review our education curriculum. Therefore, for that matter, work is in progress. 

I acknowledge the comments and concerns, which all of us have and I think that was the reason why the First Lady, who is also the Minister invited hon. Amanya Mushega to chair that committee. I would like to ask all of us to support the initiative, because it is going to help us move our country forward.

Colleagues also asked about the challenges the pandemic is causing. It is true; I would like to first thank hon. Tonny Ayoo, for the concerns he raised. It is true, as parents, we all have responsibility to take care of our children. We must accept that most times, some of us have neglected our roles as parents. As Government, we shall continue to work with you in trying to ensure that all infrastructure are there for the purpose of our children to be at school and to facilitate them to stay at school.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity and I want to take this opportunity to again remind us that the Members have been invited and the list is before you; maybe for the record, you will be able to give a formal communication to Members of the House in that regard. But, our number is 570. Thank you so much, I say all this for God and My Country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you honourable minister for your statement. Members, allow me vary the Order Paper. We asked for a feasibility report from the Minister of Sports and I am told he has another engagement? Can he lay the report on Table?

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, last week on Thursday, this Parliament directed the Ministry of Education and Sports to lay on Table, the report of the detailed feasibility studies, environmental and social impact assessment for two stadia: Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium in Lira and Buhinga Stadium in Kabarole, all earmarked in 2018 to be constructed with a grant from China under the Forum on China-African Cooperation.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports conducted that study and the report is here available. We equally submitted as a condition precedent under this grant this report to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and copied it to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for purposes of further management in terms of securing the grant to enable the Republic of Uganda construct the two stadia.

Madam Speaker, under rule 31 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on Table volume 01 for Buhinga Stadium in Kabarole. Volume 01 is the final feasibility study and concept design report comprising of the final feasibility study report, the concept design report, the geo-technical soil investigation report, the final environmental and social impact assessment report, the economic feasibility study report, topographical and cadastral survey report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table stadium volume 02 for Buhinga Stadium in Kabarole. Volume 2 is the architectural concept design report. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, for Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium proposed to be constructed in Lira City, I beg to lay volume 01. It is the final detailed feasibility and concept design report conducted by the Ministry of Education and Sports and already submitted to the Ministry of Finance. 

Herein, there is the final feasibility study report, the concept design report, the geo-technical soil investigation report, the final environmental and social impact statement, topographical/cadastral survey report and the economic viability and feasibility study report. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, still on Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium, I beg to lay volume 02. It is the architectural concept design report already submitted to the Ministry of Finance for purposes of securing the grant. I beg to lay.

Finally, I beg to lay a copy of the letter addressed to your office, for purposes of submitting the final feasibility study and detailed proposals for Akii-Bua and Buhinga stadia in Lira and Kabarole districts respectively. I beg to lay. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Before you take a seat, can we find out if that grant has expiry date? Is it in perpetuity or it has expiry date?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the period of this grant was meant to run from 2018 to 2021 because the period 2021, another meeting with Forum on China-Africa Cooperation will be held in Dakar, Senegal. However, for purposes of this, I strongly believe we are still within 2021 and all should be done to ensure that we secure this grant to construct the proposed two stadia.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, you are supposed to bring a report on that.

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICROFINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Madam Speaker, on today’s Order Paper, there is a provision-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a provision but we want to know; do you have a report? What is the way forward?

MR KASOLO: We have the report, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So present it. Members, I am referring these reports to the Committee on Education to verify and fast-track on how that grant can be got. I am giving you 10 days to report back to the House.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is, the last time we were in this Parliament with hon. Charles Bakkabulindi before hon. Obua became a minister, we presented a proposal and I even followed hon. Bakkabulindi up to his office. They promised that when they are getting the grant, they would give Busoga region in Jinja City a stadium. There is a very big stadium; Bugembe Stadium. This promise was made in this Parliament, much as it was not made in the 11th Parliament.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that when we are asking for this grant, we include our region so that Jinja, one of the biggest cities with serious sports, gets a stadium so that we get the talent that we have in the region to be felt at the national level? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need all the stadia to be worked on. However, what we are looking at now is fast-tracking the grant for what was promised. Can we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Mr Haruna Kasolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You may recall that in June 2019, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda led the Ugandan delegation to the People’s Republic of China to, among other issues, present and discuss with his Chinese counterparts the project for financing by the Chinese authorities under the eight major initiatives of Forum for China-Africa Cooperation for the period 2019-2021.

The project for construction of Akii-Bua and Buhinga stadia in Lira and Kabarole districts respectively was among the priority projects presented to the Chinese authorities by His Excellency the President.

Further consultations were held on projects to be financed by the Chinese authorities under FOCAC and on 21 January 2021, the Government of Uganda officially submitted its prioritised projects for inclusion into the Uganda-China pool of projects and consideration for financing under the FOCAC cycle of 2019/2021.

After submission of the approved projects, MDAs whose projects had been prioritised commenced preparations of the detailed project proposals and feasibility studies. However, in a letter dated 21 August 2021, the Chinese authorities informed us that the Ugandan pool of projects had been revised and some projects had been dropped.

Following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of China committed to support African countries to address the COVID-19 outbreak through donation of equipment and medicine. This affected financing of most of the projects in the project pool thus leading to the dropping of many projects from the pool of projects, the above project inclusive.

Finally, all the projects that were dropped will be prioritised in the next FOCAC cycle programming for the period 2021/2023. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, do we still have hope of getting that grant? Do not come and read for us papers here. What we want to know is, is the money still there? What have you done, as a ministry, to have the money?

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, as we have indicated in our submission, because of COVID-19, our priorities changed. Therefore, China zeroed in on supporting our priorities as opposed - 
      
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you mean sports is not a priority?

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, as for COVID-19 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that money meant for other priorities other than sports?

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, it was not for that. However, as I have indicated, the donor chose to support Uganda in other activities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did they communicate that they were switching the grant from sports to another activity?

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, we are committing that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am saying, did the donor communicate that there was a switch from sports to other priorities?

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, I need to crosscheck whether that written communication - (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, I would like to advise you that if you are not ready to give a statement that is helpful to the House, then do not come and give it because this is something that has been outstanding. Please, Committee on Education and Sports, we need that report.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I was very excited to hear from the minister that he has a report that is going to help us understand why this construction has taken long. I believe that when a minister is coming to present a report, you have a document where you pick the information from. Surprisingly, the minister is telling us that he needs to crosscheck whether there is a written document from the Chinese Government to that effect. Are we really proceeding well?

We should direct the minister to go back and crosscheck the relevant documents, work on a proper report and then come on the Floor of Parliament other than receiving a document he is not sure about. Are we proceeding well, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it was a point of procedure. Can I rule? Honourable ministers, help us to help you. Come when you are ready to give information to this House. This House is a representative of all the people outside there. These are the voice of the voiceless.

Now, if you cannot give us information that we shall take out there, what will people in Kabarole say? What will people in Lira say? That we were given money and it was diverted? Take your seat.

I am referring this matter to the Committee on Education and Sports. You will need to give them all the relevant information as to why you are not getting that grant. You must know that this was something that was given to Ugandans before COVID-19.

Why don’t we have this grant given and these stadia built? Do not come and give us haphazard information. Committee on Education and Sports, report back on this matter in 10 days and summon the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give you all the information. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION ON THE RENAMING OF WAMPEWO AVENUE AS BMK AVENUE

MS AISHA KABANDA: Madam Speaker, you moved only one item because the minister was going somewhere. According to the Order Paper, it – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kabanda, I would like to accommodate matters of national importance. That is why they are called “matters of national importance”. We will handle. The Order Paper is for the Speaker to manage. It can be varied. Kampala?

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AND METROPOLITAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kyofatogabye Kabuye): Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the implementation of the Parliamentary resolution on the renaming of Wampewo Avenue as BMK Avenue –(Interjections)– Hon. Muhwezi, you may not be hearing me. Could be you have an impairment? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, the honourable minister is giving a maiden speech. Honourable minister, please, use the microphone and introduce yourself. (Applause) You are protected. 

MR KYOFATOGABYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am Kyofa Kabuye, the Minister of State for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs. Members are asking for my constituency. I represent one constituency, which is Tibuhaburwa. 

Madam Speaker, Parliament earlier on resolved that Wampewo Avenue be renamed BMK Avenue, in commemoration of the tremendous developments and services rendered by the late Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige. I need to let Parliament know that this was a full resolution of Parliament. 

I wish to submit as follows:

Her Worship the Deputy Lord Mayor communicated to Kampala Capital City Authority Council, in its sitting of 15 September 2021, on renaming of Wampewo Avenue as BMK Avenue after the great man, Alhajji Bulaimu Muwanga Kibirige, who is now deceased. This was in commemoration of the deceased for his contribution towards nation building. 

The above proposal was adopted under Minute KCCA/04/25 of 2021 and referred to the Standing Committee on Physical Planning for further scrutiny and later, approved by Council on the 28th day of September 2021. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION IN THE MATTER OF KASOLI TENANTS SACCO LTD/KASOLI HOUSING PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, please, lay the petition on the Table.

4.19
MR SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a petition by the Kasoli Tenants SACCO Limited. This is a housing project where there was a partnership between the Government and the slum dwellers. 

In 1988, they conceived a vision to transform the pathetic housing conditions that were dirty, densely populated and unplanned into a conducive and healthy environment estate of low-income grade houses. 

In 2003, the community members organised themselves and formed the Kasoli Tenants SACCO Limited. In 2010, they entered into a memorandum with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the UN Habitat, dfcu Bank and Tororo Municipal Council to transform this slum into a low-cost housing scheme. 

This project was undertaken and construction done. In 2012, the implementation started by identifying and the signing of a contract between the Kasoli Tenants and the Empire Contractors. 
In 2016, the first phase of the project was – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you lay the document? That will be handled at committee level. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May be just to mention – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MS OPENDI: One concern is that last month, dfcu Bank decided to put up an auction of this property in the newspapers. Arising out of that, they gave them just about one month within which to pay up or they sell off the property, yet, the people could not continue paying dfcu Bank when the Government came up with the Standard Gauge Railway and asked the people to prepare to vacate. 

Therefore, the prayers are that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, working with the Ministry of Works and Transport and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development prevail on dfcu to halt the plans to sell this property. 

Also, the Government should expedite or come out clearly regarding the standard gauge railway and compensate the people because it is the one that stopped them from further developing the place and discouraged them from paying their part of the mortgage. 
I beg to submit this petition. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am referring the petition on the matter of Kasoli Tenants SACCO and Housing Project to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Please, report back in 10 days. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE LAW REVISION (FINES AND OTHER FINANCIAL AMOUNTS IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) (MODIFICATION OF WRITTEN LAWS) INSTRUMENT, 2021

4.23
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (MR Jackson Kafuuzi): Presentation of the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of Written Laws) Instrument, 2021 to the Parliament for approval. 

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to present to Parliament the proposed Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters)(Modification of Written Laws) Instrument, 2021, for your approval as required by Section 7 of the Law Reform (Fines and Other Financial Matters in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008. Section 7 of the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008 requires the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, with the approval of Parliament, by Statutory Instrument, to modify the fines and other financial amounts relating to matters in affected laws of Uganda.

The modification of the fines and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, you are laying the document which will be referred to a committee. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, is it your guidance that I lay this document without explanation to the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will go and explain to the committee. 

MR KAFUUZI: I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You repeat the title of the document. 

MR KAFUUZI: With the guidance of the Speaker, I hereby beg to lay on the Table the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) (Modification of Written Laws) Instrument, 2021 to Parliament for approval. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the action of the Attorney-General is in compliance with section 7 of the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, 2008. I thank you, Attorney-General. I am referring this matter to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back in ten days.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I rise not with a purpose of adjusting your guidance on the particular document laid by the learned Attorney-General. I am only concerned about the timeframe of ten days because the document has the effect of amending over 68 legislations by necessary implication. 

My sense is that the time frame is too small. I seek your indulgence to give more time to the committee to scrutinise this document. I am very sure the framers had time to look at each of the legislation and made impact of adjusting this to inflation and other tendencies in the economy, and of course, on the people that will be eventually affected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition. If the ten days will not be enough, they can still come and seek an extension in this House. 

II) REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER, 2020 FOR THE FOLLOWING:

A) UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND (UNFPA)–DATA AND POPULATION DYNAMICS COMPONENT IMPLEMENTED BY NATIONAL PLANNING Authority (NPA)

4.27
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (NUP, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)-Data and Population Dynamics Component implemented by National Planning Authority (NPA) for the year ended 31 December 2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government).

UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND (UNFPA) - DATA AND POPULATION DYNAMICS COMPONENT IMPLEMENTED BY THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STATISTICS 
4.28
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (NUP, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)-Data and Population Dynamics Component implemented by the Uganda National Bureau of Statistics for the year ended 31 December 2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner. The report is sent to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

C)  UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND (UNFPA) - DATA AND POPULATION DYNAMICS COMPONENT IMPLEMENTED BY THE MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (MGLSD) 

4.29
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (NUP, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)-Data and Population Dynamics Component implemented by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the year ended 31 December 2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Commissioner. The report is sent to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal.

D) UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND (UNFPA) - DATA AND POPULATION DYNAMICS COMPONENT IMPLEMENTED BY THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL (NPC) 

4.30
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (NUP, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Auditor- General on the financial statements of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) - Data and Population Dynamics Component implemented by the National Population Council (NPC) for the year ended 31 December 2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is referred to the relevant committee.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING THE GOVERNMENT TO ESTABLISH A BLOOD BANK IN BUNYORO REGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, we said we would have matters of national importance first. Hon. Ruyonga, you will present the motion later. 

4.31
MR GODFREY WERE (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance concerning Majanji Landing Site.

Majanji Landing Site is one of the historical landing sites in Uganda, which had a harbour for ships to dock. The Government of Uganda, in 1995, tried to construct the harbour through the African Development Bank but up to now, work which had started was left on the way. As a result, it has caused up to 11 deaths to our local people. Last month, I buried two people in my area due to this landing site. 

My prayers are:

The Government should provide updates on this project which has stalled for more than 10 years. 

The minister concerned should pay a visit to this landing site to assess further the actual situation on the ground. I beg to submit.

4.33
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Madam Speaker, I undertake to inform the relevant minister to look into this matter and come back to explain to Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How long should we expect your response?

4.33
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): I think it is a very important matter. I will respond within two weeks. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We expect to get your feedback in two weeks’ time.

4.34
MR LUTTAMAGUZI SEMAKULA (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance regarding the sorry state of Wobulenzi- Nakaseke-Kapeeka Road. This is a very important road because it connects mainly the districts of Luweero, Nakaseke, Mityana and Mpigi. Actually it is the main link to Kapeeka Industrial Park.

Madam Speaker, it has been highly affected - I am very happy that even the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority comes from that area, yet, he cannot support me to remind the Government to rehabilitate or reconstruct that road. It has hampered trade in that area.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Government, through UNRA, tries to help our people who use  Wobulezi-Nakaseke- Kapeeka Road. I beg to submit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, we have a comprehensive statement on the status of roads in the country ready for presentation and that road is one of those included. We shall give a comprehensive response once we are given time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Semakula, we will have your report included in the main report. The statement is there but the minister asked to present the statement in the next session. I can see the Minister for Kampala is dying to give a statement but we want to have a meeting with the ministers and Members of Parliament from Kampala. That meeting should be tomorrow at midday in the Speaker’s Chambers regarding the papers that you are supposed to present.

4.36
MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding schools. As Government plans to reopen schools, we have realised that a communication came from the Ministry of Education and Sports to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development ordering them not to release the grant that is meant to cater for quarter one of the 2021/2022 financial year. 

As of now, we have entered into the second quarter but we do not know whether the first communication still applies to the second quarter, yet, schools are planning to reopen early next year. These schools need to prepare to receive pupils and students. This mainly applies to our universal secondary education and UPE schools. These schools are currently in a very bad state. 

Therefore, my prayer is to request the Ministry of Education and Sports to give an updated communication to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on whether they should still hold the money or release it to these public schools for them to prepare for the reopening of schools early next year.

Many of these schools have staff and teachers who are not on payrolls and they need to be facilitated and maintained at this time. It will come to a time when we open up schools but without teachers and support staff. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Education and Sports will be coming to update the country on the reopening of schools. However, the Government is working with honourable members; we work as team and anytime - because it is in our own interest, as Government, to ensure there is smooth reopening of schools.

Therefore, the various agencies like the Ministry of Health, Finance and Education are in talks together and we are going to come here to update Parliament and the country on the issue. Thank you.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I listened very carefully to the Member and specifically, while he talked about financial issues and transfer of finances. Good enough, we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the House. I wonder why the Government Chief Whip wants to answer everything when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. Why don’t we give time to Finance to explain the transfer of money rather than hearing from him? Thank you.

4.40
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (MS Justine Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, the issue of schools - she was specific about funds, yes but it is a multi-sectoral issue. We cannot come here to talk about only funds because funds have to do with capitation yet there is also the component of health.

There are many issues that must be considered. Therefore, it is better for Government to present a comprehensive multi-sectoral approach to the issue because it involves more than the Ministry of Education and Sports. I beg to request that you accord us the time because it is the concern of everybody. 

The beauty of it is that most of the Members here have children that fall in that category and so, they are not only concerned on behalf of others but also as leaders and individuals. I beg that we be accorded that time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Minister for General Duties. As she has stated, it needs a multi-ministerial approach and you need to report back to this House because it is affecting all the constituencies, districts, schools and sectors. You may find hon. Nakazibwe just being an eye opener. Therefore, we need a report to that effect before the schools reopen. We need to be prepared before schools reopen.

4.41
MS JULIET BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance about the hailstorm that hit Mitooma District. The subcounties of Kigyenda and Kanyabwanga in Ruhinda North and Mitooma Subcounty especially the parishes of Nkinga, Katunda and Mushunga were badly hit. Many schools and churches especially Nkinga Catholic Church were totally destroyed and Kyakunkwe Primary School.

As I speak, the people who were affected have no meals. They do not even expect to find what to eat as time goes on. I request the Government to come to the aid of the people in the affected parishes and churches and provide construction materials especially for the churches now that they are open. As much as schools are still closed, they need to be refurbished. I beg to submit. Thank you.

MS AKAMPURIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. The issue of disaster is everywhere in the country. It is very sad now that when you go to the Prime Minister’s office, they will tell you there is no money. 

I have three roads in Rubanda District, which have been totally cut off. It is only in the Prime Minister’s office that all Members have to run for roads, education, hospitals and everything else including food, blankets, salt and oil. (Laughter)

My prayer is that these other ministries be given an opportunity so that I can move to the Ministry of Works and Transport today and request them to come and help us on our roads. However, right now, when you go there, they tell you, “There’s no money. Go to the Prime Minister’s office.” Is that how we are going to continue moving? 

I pray that all ministries be given funds for disasters so that our people are helped. Thank you.

4.45
MR DICKSON KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is over three weeks since we started bringing matters of national importance related to these disasters. I think I was among the first but three weeks down the line, nothing has happened. 

This country has got a Meteorological Authority. We do weather forecasts but it is as if every other year, we are caught by a surprise. What is the long-term strategy for planning for these disasters?

Secondly, some time back we passed a motion here urging the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to revert the issue of money that goes back to the local Governments. Some of these emergencies can be handled by local Governments, for example, roads if they have the money. Why do we want to centralise everything here?

I was in Sheema with my colleague, the Woman Member of Parliament. We reached areas where we could not cross. We are coming here presenting matters of national importance but there is no response. There is no action week after week. 

Madam Speaker, if we believe in decentralisation, let us empower the local Governments to deal with these disasters in a timely manner so that our people can get the service. I submit.

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When such things happen, society gets to Members of Parliament and think we must come up with solutions. They want food from us, money and roofs of schools because we have now become Government of sorts. In Buhweju County, three subcounties are cut off; Buhunga, Nsiika Town Council and Kyahenda. 

The procedural matter I am raising is; can the Prime Minister sit down with the various ministers and look at these emerging issues and allocate them according to the relevant ministries and come to us to deal with them once and for all?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to have a multi-sectoral approach on disaster. 

MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. Last week, I followed Parliament, I think it was on Thursday, when the Prime Minister was presenting on the Shs 5 billion shillings. In my hand, is the Public Finance Management Act. I would like to draw the attention of the Members to section 27(3) and I read it verbatim:

“In this part, ‘natural disaster’ means an event that causes severe human suffering or material, economic or environmental damage and which results or is likely to result in the loss of essential services required to meet basic human needs and which, (a) cannot be responded to with resources available from the annual budget or other sources of funds; (b) creates a compelling need for funding that is in the public interest.”

Madam Speaker, some of the disasters we are talking about are not recent happenings. It is close to two years. A big part of Uganda has been flooded. I do not know how many times I have risen on this Floor of Parliament to report about the floods that affect the people of Pakwach. We have roads and health centres washed away and communities that have nowhere to live. 

Last week, I was called by a senior religious leader from the district. He asked if Government could buy land for some of the affected people of Pakwach. I listened with a lot of dismay and pain when I saw how the Prime Minister was busy allotting funds to selected areas that she had visited. Why don’t we do a holistic visit to all the areas affected and we sit down as Government and properly give the people what they need?

I remember I met the former Prime Minister together with the Woman Member of Parliament for Buliisa but now I see Pakwach nowhere. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the people of Pakwach and Uganda whose areas are flooded no longer need posho, jerrycans or tarpaulins; they need land where they can be relocated. Churches, schools and markets are flooded. People in Pakwach have to move and pay close to Shs 5,000 every day to and fro wherever they have to go. 

It is painful to see that some Ugandans are treated very well and others not. Even what I saw in Ntoroko is a time bomb. Why would we leave young Ugandans floating on water? In fact, the Prime Minister should have directed immediate evacuation of those people. 
Madam Speaker, this matter needs to be addressed with the urgency it deserves and it should not be done on a selective basis because we are equal Ugandans. Thank you.

4.52
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For a year now, I have been closely following the discussions and what is taking place even before I became a Member of Parliament. It is not that Members of Parliament enjoy raising matters of national importance. Members out there will begin to think that the best thing we do is that, yet in the actual sense, we should address these issues. 

There is what is called reduction risk management and disaster risk preparedness. It is something that we need to look at and expect the Office of the Prime Minister to present to us a clear plan on what is on table as disaster risk preparedness for further management.

Last time, we raised a matter of national importance concerning the issue of elephants and other animals in Kitgum District. 

Madam Speaker, the Office of the Prime Minister gave us posho, beans, cooking oil and the rest. Two weeks later, the elephants came and destroyed thousands of gardens and we could not go back because the list was long. They would say, “Submit a request and wait for the next lot”. We need to have a clear way forward on how to map out this. Yes, disasters are there, but some have repeatedly happened in these places. 

We need the Office of the Prime Minister to avail this House with a clear plan for future disasters that will take place in this country, so that we do not keep on raising these issues repeatedly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, that issue has been raised on a daily basis. It is not because we love appearing on the cameras, but our people down there are suffering. People do not have food; rains have washed away people’s houses. 

Now, for us as Government, we decided to just run; if there is a disaster today in Bukedea, you run there and leave Shs 5 million. Let us have a disaster preparedness plan; let us have a disaster preparedness management commission in place. It is a constitutional matter. When you look at Article 249, the country is supposed to have a disaster preparedness and management commission. Do we have that commission in place or are we going to have that commission in place to help us plan? We need a multi-sectoral approach to these issues of disaster.

I can bet, Prime Minister that 98 per cent of these Members of Parliament have disasters in their constituencies; including hon. Jim Muhwezi over there, he has a problem; even the Chief Whip. How are we going to explain to our people tomorrow that we do not have money, when people are dying because of hunger? What plan do you have as Government? That is one of the reasons Members of Parliament do not come back to the House, because people think their role is to buy food, tarpaulins and all kinds of things for voters; we need to help our people and our Members of Parliament.

4.56
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by thanking Members who raised issues in relation to disasters on the Floor and those who have written as individuals or through the chief administrative officers and through other stakeholders. What is important in this case is passing over information to the institution, which has the mandate to respond immediately.

What I want to share with you Members is that we have been having these discussions and you have even given guidance to the Executive and as we talk today, supply of food to the affected districts has started. We started with Karamoja Subregion and it is ongoing.

I think where we missed the point is that in the meeting we held this morning, we realised some Members of Parliament had not been informed by the Office of the Prime Minister. We are going to work on it because we were able to identify it in the meeting this morning.

The issue of disasters - that is why they are called “disasters” they are emergencies. However, you went ahead as Parliament and secured it under the Public Finance Management Act, where the Ministry of Finance was given the leeway to come in and handle emergencies.

However, as you are aware, there are issues everywhere and resources are not enough that is why we have started with Karamoja. However, that does not exempt Government from handling the other areas.

I would like to say that we may have to discussion and see how to manage this because what is happening, floods happen somewhere, we supply food but then we have to handle issues to do with - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MR KIMOSHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, in this Parliament, we were discussing the same topic and there was an issue of diversion of money meant for disasters that came up. The Prime Minister promised that she would give a comprehensive report on it today. 

As we continue to lament, Madam Speaker, are we proceeding right before we receive this comprehensive report to start hearing issues regarding insufficient resources, yet on the other side, we are hearing issue of diversion? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, as we wait for the Prime Minister’s report, people do not stop dying and we must raise these issues and we need them resolved. The other question somebody would ask is the criteria of giving out food? If you are saying you have started with Karamoja, why didn’t you start with Bukedea? (Applause)

Why didn’t you go to Omoro, or Masaka? That is why I am saying honourable minister, we need - I am giving Government two months to set up a disaster preparedness and management commission; it is a constitutional requirement; it is not my own requirement. 

If you had a commission in place, it would be doing strategic preparations for all disasters; we would be having a schedule which would determine that “today we are going to start with Karamoja, next is Nakaseke, another day Apaa” and all those districts. Therefore, we need a commission in place.

MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA: Further procedure, Madam Speaker. Would it not be procedurally right, from your guidance, for us to take a position as Parliament of allocating each ministry funds to help our people? If Members told you what it takes for them to go to the Prime Minister’s Office and report about roads, landslides, houses and everything like I said -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prossy, why would you go to Prime Minister if it is on the issue of works or electricity?

MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA: Madam Speaker, when you go to other ministries, they tell you that they do not have money for disasters and I have received that answer about three times. I went to the Ministry of Education they said they had no money for disaster. I went to the Ministry of Transport, they said there was no money for disasters-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, which is under the Prime Minister’s Office. What we need to do is to empower the ministries so that the Prime Minister’s Office does not take all the responsibilities. If the issue relates to the Ministry of Works, let that ministry do its work, if it is to do with water, let Ministry of Water do it work, let the Disaster Ministry do its work also. Let us not take the responsibility of other ministries, you will breakdown. Leader of the Opposition, can your Member first submit and then you come in? 

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister about Disaster Management Committees at district level. Do they exist? If they exist, are they functional? Do they also have some ways of mitigating disasters because disasters occur every time? If we focus at national level only, are we going to help our people better? 

Why do we even talk about District Disaster Management Committees and Subcounty Disaster Management Committees? Some of us who come from war-torn areas used to have those committees very functional in those days. Now, you cannot even hear of them. Are they there or have you killed all of them? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, you cannot kill a committee.

5.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I observed the demeanor of my sister, the Minister, Office of the Prime Minister (General Duties) and I could see she was really labouring with a huge challenge. 

Honourable minister, I would like to assure you that you are not dealing with a personal problem. Please, share with Parliament the width of the problem. How much resources are at your disposal, for example, to handle the requirement for food? You began from Karamoja and this is very wonderful. How many districts are you going to cover and in what period of time? If the need is food, can the need for food wait for generations of time? How much time is at your disposal to solve the emergency of food requirements? Can we talk money?

Madam Speaker, would the minister advise this Parliament – because then we can decipher whether actually, she can handle the food needs. How much money is at your disposal to make provision for food?

Secondly, we should not run away from the urgency to account. If Shs 5 billion was diverted, whoever took it should immediately return it so that it is available for disasters. That should not even wait for a day. Otherwise, if you are going to beg people to account, then we are here as bridesmaids and not as leaders of our people. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore the minister to be of service to this House and inform the House of the resource envelope at her disposal to deal with the problem so that we can get out of the semantics about “when are you coming to Masaka? When are you going to Karamoja? When are you going to Teso?” Do you have money? Will people wait for so many months to get food? If you do not have money, raise the red flag and this House will deal with the problem once and for all. Otherwise, we are into semantics when the urgency is definite and clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, whoever says anything does so in good faith for the good of this country. Therefore, what you need is to inform this House in terms of every ministry because the disaster affects roads, schools and all those kinds of things. How much can this House appropriate in terms of supplementary to help? If they have the money, then it should be used. Prime Minister -

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker who has reminded us to set up the Disaster Commission. We will work on that but we are also developing the standard operating procedures for disasters. When they happen, what should we begin with? You always just send reports and yet, we should also be guided on how to begin to handle as the Central Government is coming in to join the efforts of local governments. 

Regarding the question to do with the size of the resources that we have to handle the problem at hand and what is going to happen in the next minute or hour, which we may not predict, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come – According to the resources that are available, how much do we have that can be put to disasters?

5.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As this Parliament, we agreed to make a provision for disasters within the Public Finance Management Act. We agreed that – I think 0.5 per cent of the budget of the preceding year be appropriated in the budget for disasters. For instance, we have a budget of Shs 44 trillion and 0.5 per cent of that would be about Shs 2.2 trillion.

The challenge has been the availability of funds. In this financial year, we made a provision of only Shs 62 billion as opposed to Shs 2.2 trillion. Therefore, there is a huge deficit. 

As fate may have it, this year, we have had a very huge problem in terms of disasters. The disasters we have had this year have been very unprecedented. For example, when you take Kayunga where I come from, very many villages were cut off. There is a village that remained within Lake Kyoga where the population is highly vulnerable; any time they could be swept by the floods. 

However, to move all these people requires a lot of money, which we did not provide for in the budget. We only provided for Shs 62 billion. It is a challenge for all of us to ensure that we put aside many of our priorities and commit this money towards solving disasters because the experience I think that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister had asked you how much money is available for disasters.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I think I had answered the question; we provided Shs 62 billion in the budget as opposed to Shs 2.2 trillion. 

Allow me to say this as well. This money is not appropriated to the Office of the Prime Minister. It is actually under a vote known as Vote 130 - Treasury Operations. It is in kind of a pool within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. If a disaster relates to a bridge, the Ministry of Works and Transport should apply for that money. If a disaster relates to provision of posho, the Ministry in charge of Disasters could ask for that money. However, we also make some small provisions within – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us clarification? If the disaster relates to a bridge, which ministry gets the money?

MR LUGOLOOBI: The Ministry of Works and Transport would apply for that money from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And if it is a school?

MR LUGOLOOBI: If it is a school, the Ministry of Education and Sports would ask for that money because that money is in a pool. You cannot tell where the disaster will strike. You cannot know but you are just preparing yourself to be ready for any type of disaster. That is why this money is in that pool. I hope – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have understood you very well. Basing on your communication – now that you have clarified to this House very well – I want you to bring a report on how you could remove Shs 5 billion from disaster funds to be taken to another office. Was there an authorisation?

You have just said that if it is a disaster concerning schools, the money must come through education and if it is for roads, it must come from works. We need an authorisation that you gave for that Shs 5 billion to be removed. 

Members, the Prime Minister has committed that they are going to work on whatever is happening. It is really a disaster to the whole country. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate what is happening. All of us are affected. However, much as we are looking for money to give relief food, I think we need to go back to the drawing board and look at mitigating the climate change effects and environmental degradation. 

Much as you are going to give this money, even next year, when it rains, it will be the same. I have never seen or felt what we are experiencing. In Rushenyi, roads are cut off. Some of us do not talk. We have never had floods in our place but now, we have floods. People’s houses have been swept away. 

When you look at that – it is happening in Amolatar and many other places – how long are we going to be like this? We better think of how to mitigate. What is the cause of these kinds of disasters, which are increasing every year? Are we going to get money to give food every time, everywhere? How are you going to manage, with our economy? We better think of how to mitigate the cause of the problem. Thank you. 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we wait to hear from the ministry, let the Committee on Presidential Affairs help us to visit the disaster areas and get specific strategies. Work together with the Office of the Prime Minister and see what we can do for a lasting solution. 

Let us get a lasting solution, just like hon. Kabasharira has proposed. If it is the issue of the water, we should be thinking about how to dig dams. So, Presidential Affairs, work together with the Office of the Prime Minister and assess what can be done. 

5.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have already dispatched letters to the relevant stakeholders to handle two issues. One is on disaster preparedness and the second is on the management aspect. We have taken it in good faith. We shall report back. Thank you. 

5.17
MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

In 2018, the Bukumi Gravity Flow Scheme in Bubyangu Subcounty in Mbale District, supplying over 10,000 families, broke down. 

Shortly after the breakdown, the Eastern Umbrella came on the ground as they had been contracted by the Ministry of Water and Environment to renovate the water source. In the process of renovation, they removed all the underlying pipes. Since then, the contractors have never been seen on the ground. 

In its current state, the glorious water source that served over 10,000 families has become a shadow of its former glory. 

The water collection boxes at various points and the reservoir tank, which was under construction using the taxpayers’ money, has since been left to rot. 

Other gravity flows under similar circumstances are Namili Flow Scheme and Namukuyu Gravity Flow Scheme. 

The people in Bungokho North in Mbale District feel neglected by the Government as a result of this water situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your prayer? 

MR MAGOLO: My prayer is that the Minister of Water and Environment takes up this matter and ensures that the Bukumi Gravity Flow Scheme and others are restored as a matter of urgency. I beg to submit. 

5.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important prayer he has made. I am going to ensure that, indeed, it is implemented right away. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Government Chief Whip, you need to follow up on the issue of the water reservoir and give a feedback to the Member of Parliament. 

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the project he is talking about is being worked on using the Force Account, by Umbrella Schemes in the Ministry of Water and Environment. I am going to ensure that indeed, today, I link up with the minister and the Commissioner in charge of Umbrella Schemes to ensure that they work on it expeditiously. 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am rising on is about the wise ruling you have made on committees going to do their mandate. 

Most committees do not have funds to enable them do their work in the field. Therefore, is it procedurally right to send these committees to the field when they do not have even fuel funds? I submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How can you say we do not have money? The whole of Parliament? We have the money. We have asked Finance not to cut the 40 per cent from any committee activity. We are going to have committee work. (Applause)

5.22
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): First of all, let me thank you, Madam Speaker, for that last statement you have made that Parliament cannot fail to have money to do its work. I hope they have heard.

On the issue of water – similar to what my colleague from Mbale has raised – I do not know what has happened to the Ministry of Water and Environment. I have a similar project in Kasilo. They came and dug – it was water for production. They drilled the well in 2017. However, year in, year out, they say “No, we are operating on a force account”. It has been four years now. That is the level where it has stopped. 

Madam Speaker, this project needs to be completed. This was water for production and I remember very well we passed a loan for wells to be completed. So, it defeats one’s understanding why a water source can be drilled and then disappear. 

The Government Chief Whip should take it up. It may not only be limited to Mbale and Kasilo; it may also be happening in other places. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Government Chief Whip, take it up for all the areas that have the same kind of water connection. Do you have any clarification?
 
MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to clarify on the issue of the constant floods –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have moved away from the floods. Hon. Tebandeke, haven’t we left you behind? (Laughter) We have left you behind. Hon. Masaba, first sit down and allow hon. Nsegumire to finish. 

5.24
MR MUHAMMAD NSEGUMIRE (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance in my constituency.

The recent rains and strong winds in Kikandwa and Kalangalo   subcounties have destroyed a number of property, which included houses, banana and coffee plantations as well as other crops. As a result of this catastrophe, a number of people have been left homeless after their houses went down. Famine and starvation is likely to face them culminating from the destruction of their food crops by the heavy rains and winds.

The road from   Kiryokya in Kalangalo Subcounty to Matte in Kikandwa Subcounty is totally destroyed. My people have nowhere to pass. Even the road from Kyamusisi to Mukonga is also cut off. The road from Kalangalo, which I have already mentioned, that connects Mityana District to Kiboga District is also cut off.

My humble prayer is that the Government intervenes in this matter by providing some assistance in the form of shelter, food items and seeds that can be distributed to the affected persons in the area. I also pray that the two roads I mentioned be repaired. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is still a disaster. Government Chief Whip –(Hon. Akampurira rose_) - I know you are raising procedure because you want to talk. 

MS AKAMPURIRA: Madam Speaker, it is something small. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MS AKAMPURIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister said food is being distributed in Karamoja. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the tractors to come to Rubanda and the Ministry of Education and Sports to go to your constituency and others because not all people want food? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why we want to know the strategies; we want a commission in place. We want to know their work plan on how they are distributing –

MS PROSSY AKAMPURIRA: Madam Speaker, roads in Rubanda are closed. (Laughter)

5.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you. Madam Speaker, indeed, we are going to take this up with other matters of disaster. However, I just want Members to agree with me that one of the reasons the Government gave districts road units was to open up most of these emergency roads during disaster.

Members, I am your colleague and I also face the same – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the Government Chief Whip. I also want you to interest yourselves in the road fund, which goes to your districts. Otherwise, that road fund has become a bonanza for engineers and local government people. Your districts have the road equipment. Monitor that fund and see how it is working; whether it is there and how much is there. 

Honourable members, I am the chairperson of the road fund in my district. I will go and see what is happening and how they are using the fund. So, you need to do the same. 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not even unique to your area alone. You will find most of the road units for which the Government got loans and spent on are being used for private works in our areas. I request you, in good faith, to go to your districts and look at what the road units are being used for. Where you can provide fuel, you are told you cannot have the road units.

Colleagues, I urge you to go and investigate your districts. You will find you can sort out some of the roads, which you are bringing here every day at the district level. That, however, does not take away our obligation as the Government to ensure that roads under the central Government are worked on and opened up in cases of emergencies. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I saw somebody was arrested in Hoima over those kinds of units.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, in Mitooma District, we also arrested them because they were using the road units for private work. When roads are –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want you to pick keen interest in those road units. Go and audit how much money has been sent for the road fund. My sister, the honourable member, has been an LCIV and she knows what happens. Look at how much money is in the road fund and how it is being used. Is it doing anything in the district or is it a cash bonanza for some people?

Once you do that, you will be doing your oversight role. Where the equipment cannot work, that is when we come back and say, “Look, we cannot do a, b, c and d.” The districts that have not got the equipment should be able to get them from the neighbouring districts. 

5.30
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While districts were given this equipment, in some of the districts, the equipment broke down a long time ago. The repair has been a challenge. 

The point I want to raise is:  when we created the National Road Fund, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was supposed to remit all these monies collected to the National Road Fund. However, what is sent to the National Road Fund is only about 30 per cent of the collection yet that money is supposed to be ring-fenced. 

I request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring to us a report of how much has been collected, for instance, in the last financial year and the last quarter of this financial year and how much was remitted to the National Road Fund. 

The reason we are struggling with all these roads and bridges we are talking about is because UNRA is not able to work on our roads. This is because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has become the boss and yet the law is very clear, that they must remit 100 per cent of all the collections to the Uganda Road Fund. How much do they remit to the National Road Fund? Can we get that report? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I want you to give us a report of how much money you remit to every district in terms of road fund. Everybody should get in their pigeonholes the status report.

Secondly, Members, I also want you to get the status of how much money has been used in your respective districts from the road fund. Give that report to my office. I want to know how much money has been used or utilised. Check value for money because that is one of your oversight roles.

Honourable members, let us not lament in the House. Let us be action-oriented and go on the ground. Now that we have reports in the committee, we have everything. We are going to give you time for you to look at what is happening in your constituencies.

Hon. Okupa, I have already ruled. Let him first lay the papers.

5.33
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the reports for the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2021. I beg to lay the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For which institution?

MR SILWANY: That is where I am coming to. Madam Speaker, I beg to the reports for the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the National Social Security Fund for the year ended on 30 June 2021. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is that for NSSF? 

MR SILWANY: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  For NSSF, the report is referred to the Committee of Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises.
MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay a special audit report on the technical, legal and financial evaluation of the Namanve Thermal Power Plant. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The report is referred to the Committee on PAC, Central Government. Honourable members, we have had a long session. I am adjourning the plenary sitting of the House to 19 October 2021.

In the meantime, committees should process the reports that have been given to them and report to the House. You now have work. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 October 2021 at 2 p.m.) 
