Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 30 October 2019

Parliament met at 3.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Welcome back from the recess. I hope you were able to talk to the real people during that time and things are okay.

Secondly, I would like to amend the Order Paper, taking into account recent events. I will allow the Minister of Education and Sports to present a statement on the student unrest at Makerere University. I will also allow hon. Paul Mwiru, Member of Parliament for Jinja Municipality East, to present a petition on the implementation of the recently approved tuition policy by the Makerere University Council, and hon. Nambeshe, MP Manjiya County, to present a petition on the issues at Makerere University. 

Yesterday, we celebrated the 134th anniversary of the martyrdom of Bishop Hannington. We were shocked to find out that it was not a public holiday and yet one year ago, the President had declared 29th October a public holiday in honour of the late Bishop Hannington. I also came to the House and reported this, then followed it up with a letter to the Ministry of Public Service. We would like to hear an explanation from the Minister of Public Service what happened to the President’s directive and why yesterday remained a working day. The Archbishop of the Church of Uganda wants an answer from the honourable Minister of Public Service.

Honourable members, I went to Serbia for the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) meeting. After the meeting, we had an official visit with my counterpart, the Speaker, who came here in February. There are very good prospects for collaboration. Now that I went there and she has been here, they would like the President of Uganda and that of Serbia to exchange visits. I hope the Government can encourage the President to do so. Serbia is a successor state of Yugoslavia which was the home of the non-aligned movement; so it is a very important country and there are many things we can do together.

The immediate concern, however, is that we were informed that they have been giving scholarships to Uganda through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but because they were not taken up, they have brought them down from 10 per year to two per year. They said that if we do not take up these two, they are going to give up on us. There are so many young people in this country who need scholarships. We were told that other than buying a ticket, everything else is free - accommodation, per diem, tuition - and it is for any course at the University of Belgrade. 

We would like answers from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Education and Sports because this matter was between the two ministries. We were also informed that India has also been giving us scholarships which we do not take up; I do not know why. We need an explanation. What is the composition of the central scholarships board? Does it work and when does it work? Why don’t we see what they do? 

I also want to talk about the impunity and grabbing of Government facilities in this country. During the recess, we read about the grabbing of Njeru Stock Farm. Honourable members, anyone who has used that road over many years knows that is a Government farm. However, it has been broken down and taken. How did a Government stock farm become private property?

I have received a complaint from the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre (NAGRC) on that issue and they said that there is a man called Muhangi. I do not know whether that was the Muhangi who went and broke down a Government building in Jinja on Alidina Visram Street. Unfortunately, each time those things happen, the name of hon. Otafiire is mentioned. So, we shall want to know the relationship between Muhangi and hon. Otafiire and who this Muhangi is who cannot be touched. He broke down a building and evicted 40 families in Jinja. Now he has taken over a Government stock farm and everybody is quiet. 

This is a serious issue. I direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to examine the issue and update us next week - Who is Muhangi? How did he get Government land? How could he destroy Government property and life goes on?

Honourable members, there is an ongoing strike by students at Makerere University, which has paralysed classes for over a week. Unfortunately, there have also been indiscriminate and uncalled-for attacks on students at night in their halls of residence. The last time soldiers entered Makerere University was in 1977. We were students then and we were beaten up, and that was Amin’s time. Now they have occupied Makerere University for one week, beating up students; I understand some girls may have also been raped and some students are still in hospital. It is a serious issue.

I hope that when the minister comes to speak, he will explain to us what has been happening to these young people and why the army is in Makerere University.

Finally, on behalf of the residents of Luuka, Buyende and Kamuli, especially those who use the Mbulamuti ferry to reach their destinations, I would like to say that the bridge collapsed and the road is not passable. We cannot use that road anymore. I would like the Ministry of Works and Transport to help us and quickly address the issue of the bridges at Kiko and Kituba; they have claimed so many lives. Passengers on buses, lorries and cars cannot use that road. Those who are walking are falling into the water. It is a very serious issue.

The Minister of Works and Transport should assist us to first deal with the urgent matters and also tell us her plans for the old Jinja-Kamuli Road.

Honourable members, in the public gallery we have a number of children; it is a good day for them. We have Entebbe Parents Secondary School. I am sure they look very smart. Welcome to Parliament. Their MPs are hon. Tumusiime and hon. Sseninde. Another set of students is from Victory Junior Primary School. They look very smart in their sweaters. They are represented by hon. Apollo Ofwono and hon. Sarah Opendi. 

We have another group but I do not have their details yet. We have a delegation of students from Makerere University. They are represented by hon. Muhammad Nsereko and hon. Naggayi. There are also pupils from Promise Christian Junior School. They are looking very smart. They are represented by hon. Peter Ssematimba and hon. Rosemary Sseninde. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, we also have some difficult situations. Hon. Bildad Adome lost his wife. We would like to send him our condolences. Hon. Annet Nyakecho also lost her brother on Sunday. I would like us to stand up for a minute of silence in their honour.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were a number of matters of national concern. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. This is a reaction to your communication from the Chair. You mentioned the Njeru Stock Farm and the involvement of either the person or name of Maj. Gen. Otafiire. Maj Gen. Otafiire is a member of this House. Instead of leaving us in suspense, you could allow him to tell us why either he or his name is involved in grabbing public land.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Otafiire. 

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we speak now, I have instructed my lawyers to take Government and the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank (NAGRC&DB) to court to throw them off my land. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very sure that hon. Kahinda Otafiire is not from Buganda; he was born from somewhere else – (Interjections)– I do not know very well. Njeru Stock Farm has been around; it was around even before he became a minister in Uganda. There is a reason as to why Government put up Njeru Stock Farm. Now, hon. Otafiire, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, goes to court saying that he should be given permission to throw people off his land –(Interjections)– He went to court to throw Government off his land yet he is a minister in the Government he is throwing off his land. 

Madam Speaker, isn’t this impunity of the highest order, with arrogance, for a whole minister who is supposed to protect Government property to go to court, come and grab public land using his office? First of all, that is abuse of office and this is quite dangerous. Therefore, Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that quickly –(Interruption) 

MS ADONG: Thank you, colleague, for allowing me to give you information. The information I would like to give you is that the minister is the minister in charge of courts; so he is instructing court to give him land. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see. He is the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; he controls the justice ministry. He is the minister in charge of courts; so he goes to the courts which he controls and asks for authority to go and throw Government off, which he serves – (Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the same minister used the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, where he was a minister then, to get this very land. Whichever ministry he has, he uses it. Now, he wants to use this one to formalise the one he got when he was the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I would like the hon. Mwijukye to repeat this outside this House –(Interjections)– Yes! Repeat what you said outside this House. Madam Speaker, I do not envy hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concern as regards public property. However, I have told you I am in court; the matter is sub judice.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as far as we know - those who come from the east - this is a Government farm and it has been that all along. So, come and tell us how you acquired Government land and lay the papers here. That is what we want.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I would like to refer you to the report of the Inspector General of Government (IGG) and the report of Lady Justice Bamugemereire, who investigated that matter. Since the matter is before court, I am not at liberty to discuss it. Let us get –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we do not want to discuss it; we want you to lay the papers here. That is what we want you to do.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: I will do that, Madam Speaker. I was caught off-guard.

THE SPEAKER: Bring the papers tomorrow. We are not discussing it; we want you lay them on the Table and tell us how you acquired a stock farm. (Applause)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Much obliged.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. To conclude –

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know hon. Otafiire very well; we are good friends but he is a very wrong friend when it comes to public property. When he was in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, he went to Kyambogo. There was land for African businessmen there which was under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. He went and used a certain name - Sam Kikonyogo is the name I know – and got that land. As you are going to Kyambogo University, the land is on the lower side. He used his office very well and got that public land.

Therefore, the statement that hon. Otafiire uses his offices very well is a true story. I will also repeat it and see what you will do to me. You have used these offices to grab public property. I am going to repeat it outside there and I will see what you will do. Even if you want us to trade blows, hon. Otafiire we can get out and we try it now. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I fight legitimate wars and I fight for just causes. I have no urge to beat hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, tomorrow we expect you to bring and lay before this House the papers showing the process through which you acquired the Government stock farm at Njeru, which is in Busoga.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter before this House is very vital as far as Government farm land is concerned. Though we are discussing the person of the minister – hon. Otafiire – I would like to know whether it wouldn’t be prudent if this House looked into other Government stock farms, like Nshaara, that have been taken over by other people. Can’t we do this other than concentrating on one farm when there are other farms that other “big” people have taken over and grabbed? If we can, let us lay all the information here and it is investigated.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I brought this up because I received two petitions about the Njeru Stock Farm. However, if you have any other information, bring a motion and we debate it and deal with the thieves.

3.35
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent Bukooli Islands. One of the issues that have been disturbing us is the need for the Government to give us a ferry. I recall that one time, we wrote to His Excellency the President asking him to fulfil that pledge. 

I thank the Government of Uganda for constructing a ferry three months ago at Masese in Jinja; it is the most beautiful. However, since then, the ferry is still at Masese, Jinja. The people of Bukooli Islands still die in the water. It is my plea that the Minister of Works and Transport addresses this House as to why the ferry that was constructed and completed is still lying at Masese instead of it being used by the people of Bukooli Islands.  Thank you.
 
The Speaker: Honourable members, the issue of access and transport on the islands is very dire. We were excited when we heard that Government was providing a ferry for Sigulu. However, if it is just docked at Masese, it is not serving the purpose. Can we ask the Minister of Works and Transport to come next Tuesday and give us an update so that we know why the islanders do not have their ferry.

3.37
Ms esther anyakun (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have an issue of national importance from Nakapiripirit District. 

The road from Muyembe to Nakapiripirit District is totally cut off. Business is no longer working out as business people have been stuck there for the last two days. Their merchandise that was supposed to be transported to Karamoja region is totally spoilt and rotten. Personally, I have a consignment that I was sending to my district for the primary 7 pupils. Unfortunately, it has not reached Nakapiripirit because the road is inaccessible.

A month ago, I went with the Chairperson of Karamoja Parliamentary Group (KPG) to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We also talked to the Minister of Works and Transport. They both promised that the ground-breaking for Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road would take place on Independence Day. Unfortunately, on that day I got to know that the ground-breaking would not be done. The Minister of State for the Presidency told me that the President does not carry out parallel activities on the same day when there is a national function. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Works and Transport give this House a report as to why this road has not taken off. We need urgent attention to enable the people of Nakapiripirit and Karamoja region to access their area via the Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road.

I also pray that a response be given to the House as to why the ground-breaking did not take place on the anticipated date. If it is because the President is not supposed to have parallel events on Independence Day –(Member timed out)

The Speaker: The Minister of Works and Transport should come next Tuesday and update this House on the issue of Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. She should tell us the plan she has for salvaging the situation, which is dire at the moment.

3.39
The MinisTEr Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, we have just concluded a meeting in which we have tasked Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to give a comprehensive report on the status of roads as a result of the heavy rains that we are experiencing –(Interjections)– we shall talk about the Jinja Express Highway when the right time comes – so that we can begin to plan on how to raise funds.

The situation is very dire. If you go to some parts of Teso, Bunyoro and Masaka, we are reaching a point where communities are almost being cut off, and those are just examples. Anyhow, I would like to inform the House that we are addressing the matter seriously. We had a meeting with the Minister of Works and Transport. We shall come next week and tell you where exactly the problem is and how we plan to sort it out.  Thank you.

The Speaker: Are you coming up with an update from the Government on the roads nationally on Tuesday or Wednesday?

Mr kasaija: Uganda National Roads Authority has got some of the data already through their regional offices. We will come next week with the Minister of Works and Transport to update Parliament on what is happening where and the steps that Government is going to take.

The Speaker: We expect a report from the Government on the roads in Uganda next Wednesday.

3.41
Mr waira kyewalabye majegere (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the night of Independence Day, I was ambushed by armed men who were in army uniform. I had just passed by the area but when I came back after 15 minutes, I met people who raised a torch towards me and I stopped. One of them immediately came in front pointing a gun at me. Luckily, I had an armed security person with me. I told him to come out and shoot. When he came out and cocked his gun, the armed men ran away, including the one who had pointed a gun at me. 

I went to the nearest police station and called the District Police Commander (DPC) who sent a police patrol vehicle. We went back to the scene and since it had rained, the policemen managed to trace the armed men and they arrested one of them. When we got information that the armed man had been seen with another person that evening, we went for that other person and arrested him too. The following day, we gathered with the local people and the police and we managed to trace their footprints – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: What are your prayers?

Mr Waira: My first prayer is that the Ministry of Security should take over this case because the police are kind of handicapped. They have just sentenced the person I saw with the gun to a year in prison because we failed to trace the gun. The second has been handed over to Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). The third has been released on bond. These are the people I saw! It means that police has not managed to corroborate and analyse intelligence information very well. That is why I request the Ministry of Security to take over.
 
Secondly –

The Speaker: Would you like the Ministry of Security to take over the investigations and the trial? I am a bit lost. Hon. Waira, what would you like the Minister of Security to do?

Mr waira: To investigate further so that they can corroborate call log data to show how the three were communicating. I saw them but police has failed to gather all that intelligence information. I therefore, request that the Ministry for Security or the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) takes over this matter so that they can internalise all intelligence information gathered by the police to help us get to know whether it was a general robbery or something political.

Secondly, I request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to tell us when they giving Mayuge District sniffer dogs because if we had them, we would have recovered even the gun. We managed to recover a few items because – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Security is required to examine the events surrounding hon. Majegere on Independence Day and come and advise us on the way forward. 

Secondly, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come to this House and inform us on when he is going to acquire sniffer dogs for Mayuge District. The answers should come next week on Thursday. 

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, my last prayer is that the Minister of Internal Affairs tells us the plans he has to ensure that operations patrol vehicles do not run out of fuel. 

Madam Speaker, the Police wanted to leave the patrol car and use my car as we were chasing the murderers. (Laughter) It is a shame that during that crisis, the police patrol driver said that he did not have fuel, moreover at night. In certain instances, we had to walk to look for these criminals. Therefore, the Minister of Internal Affairs should tell us the plans he has to ensure that this lack of fuel in operations patrol vehicles is no more. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the minister comes to inform us about the sniffer dogs, he should also update us on his arrangements to support the police in the region with fuel to carry out their activities. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to my good friend, hon. Majegere, I heard him say that he ordered a security personnel to shoot. I see many of our colleagues moving around with security personnel. I am wondering whether it is not procedurally right that the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Minister of Security make a statement as to who should give instructions to these officers who escort MPs. This is because if an MP can say, “Shoot” and they shoot – (Laughter) – I am afraid that they will shoot innocent civilians out there yet we have been cautioned on the presumption of innocence. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs should also come and address us on the issue of who commands the shooting. (Laughter)

3.48
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. 

Three weeks ago, some people ferried really sick cattle at night and dumped them at a place called Got Apwoyo in Got Apwoyo Subcounty, near the national park. I am not a cattle keeper so I do not know what disease they were suffering from. Due to pressure put on them by the district, they took some away but they brought them back. Nwoya District is not in the animal corridor and these cows are being brought at night without the notice of any district official, not even the Resident District Commissioner (RDC). 

My fear is that the animals in the national park will contract diseases from these cows. Secondly, the district does not have the capacity to handle this matter. The news that we are getting is that these cows are being brought by big people in Government from Tanzania. They bring them at night and the police cannot stop them. 

I wonder whether we have a functional Government anymore because anybody can cross from anywhere with animals. We have animal movement control in place but it is not being enforced. Nwoya District is not within the animal corridor and we do not have a budget to handle such eventualities – (Interruption) 

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Speaker, I raised an issue here on Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) about three months ago and the question was answered unsatisfactorily in my absence by hon. Kabatsi. I raised the fact that she answered it badly and, Madam Speaker, you ordered that it was supposed to be reinstated on the Order Paper, but this was not done. 

These are issues that would have been handled because regardless of whether you are in the cattle corridor or not, no one is supposed to spread any animal disease. When I made noise about foot and mouth disease, they closed the markets in Ssembabule but it then spread to Gomba. Now we cannot sell our cattle and yet we rely on them. Moreover, milk is being sold at Shs 300 a litre. This is terrible. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Adong, I have not understood something; do they bring the cattle there to die or to spread disease? Why do they bring them there? 

MS ADONG: The cattle are taken there to graze and fatten or maybe the owners could be hiding them. I really do not know because this is done without notice to the district leadership – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a pending issue on the Order Paper along the same lines. It is about disease-stricken heads of cattle from Tanzania, raised by hon. Rwakoojo. I hope that we shall bring it forward tomorrow so that the honourable minister can respond to your concerns. 

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, my prayer was that they should equip our veterinary departments to examine cattle. We do not stop people from bringing their cows to graze in our area because the grass is good but the right procedures must be followed. When we see Government officials who are supposed to implement policies breaking them, it breaks my heart. 

My second issue is about food security. We are rejoicing that we are receiving a lot of rain but this rain is going to bring hunger. In my district, which usually produces a lot of food, farmers are failing to plant because the rain is too much. They cannot plough, plant or weed. 

I request the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to do a food security assessment. We are celebrating but next year, we are going to have famine because people are not planting. We have commercial farmers who used to grow a lot of maize but they have failed to plant in this second season because of the rains. As such, I would like to alert Government to do a food security assessment and stock food accordingly. This is not good rain. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should come and update the House on what plans he has to ensure food security, taking into account what has happened during the heavy rains. Report to us next week on Wednesday. 

3.54
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning persistent road carnage in Omoro District. This is not the first time that I am raising this issue. On 24 January 2019, I rose on a matter of persistent road carnage in Omoro District that within a period of six months had claimed the lives of 26 people. This happened after an accident that 42 people got involved in. Just last week, we had another bad accident where we lost two people within one week. 

When I raised this matter on 24 January, a response was given by the Minister of Works and Transport on 26 March 2019 in your presence in this House. From the minister’s response, he pledged and committed to four different action points. One of them was to go to the district and construct traffic calming features on the roads such as humps and rumble strips at a number of hotspots within a radius of 25 kilometres.

Madam Speaker, the minister also made a commitment to have all the zebra crossings along that highway painted so that they are visible. He also promised to put in place a number of road signs. However, up to date, nothing has been done in relation to that and we have continued to register a number of cases of road accidents. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Quickly mention the prayers.

MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA: My first prayer is that the minister should not come to the Floor and give responses just for the sake of it. Secondly, the Minister of Works and Transport should go to the ground and make sure that something is done this time on those roads. Otherwise, it is becoming too much. Losing two people because of a road accident every week is terrible. Within one year, how many people shall we have lost? I pray that the minister this time takes action immediately. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport should urgently address the issue of road accidents on the Kampala-Gulu Road and give an update to this House next week. 

3.54
MS ANNITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on issues concerning Bukedea.

Madam Speaker, the floods in Bukedea have displaced about 14,000 people. Houses have been watered down and roads blocked. Actually, no vehicle can pass on the roads that are in Bukedea. People do not have food since they are staying in schools like Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). There is a big problem in Bukedea. In fact, there is cholera outbreak in the areas where people are staying. 

My prayer is that the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should provide food and non-food items to those people. The Ministry of Works and Transport should work on the roads since the roads are completely impassable. Also, the Ministry of Health should provide drugs for the people in those areas –(Interruption)

MR IKOJO: Thank you very much, my sister, hon. Annita Among, for giving way. 

Madam Speaker, the situation in Bukedea is devastating. In my constituency, out of the 11 subcounties, about five subcounties are heavily affected. My sister has talked about the roads. We have a road that connects Kolir to Kamutur but that road is in a very devastating state. Actually, the floods have washed away that road. We have tried to request the Ministry of Works and Transport many times to work on that road since the budgetary allocation from the ministry cannot enable the local government work on that road. 

I would like, therefore, to request that the ministry works hand in hand with the District Disaster Committee to assess the impact of these floods and comes up with modalities on how to help our communities. Thank you.

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, as I finish, I would like to say that we need to get a permanent solution for Bukedea since it is a low lying area. All the water from Nakapiripirit and Bulambuli comes to Bukedea. I think the best would be to dig dams in those areas.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is required to go and address the situation in Bukedea concerning the 14,000 people who have been affected.

The Ministry of Health should address the health concerns. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said they are addressing the issue of the roads generally; I hope he will take into account Bukedea. When you report, you should tell us what you are going to do.

4.00
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development talked about the affected roads for the whole country. I would like to inform him that the floods are affecting the entire country. In Adjumani District, a whole parish is now settling in a primary school because the whole place is flooded. 

I would like to, therefore, propose that Government should bring a comprehensive report about other effects of the floods. They are not only affecting the roads. People are staying in schools. In fact, children are now sitting for exams and there might be an outbreak of cholera. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I think you have heard. It is not just the roads but productivity, food and agriculture has been affected. I do not see the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here. I do not know who is going to give us an update on floods and agriculture productivity.

Honourable members, I am trying to find out which minister can address the issue of the impact of the floods. Is it the Minister for Water and Environment?

4.02
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, we should agree that this is a serious problem. It touches on people’s lives and the economy. I am going to take it up and advise the Prime Minister that we should look at the problem of roads, schools, health and education holistically, so that we can brief the nation through Parliament on the steps Government has taken in order to reverse the condition that the rains have inflicted on the population. I have undertaken to inform the Prime Minister so that we come with a holistic picture of the matter.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is important. 

4.03
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Despite the general statement that has been made by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development regarding the roads, I cannot be sure that the bridge in Kaliro will be reflected. I think it is appropriate that I submit this as a matter of urgent concern.

Madam Speaker, the bridge that links Kaliro and Pallisa District at Saaka has been washed away because of the pressure of the waters that flow across. In fact, two days ago, two children, Kange Robert and Nakyesa Sarah, nearly drowned at that bridge. Fortunately, they were rescued before they lost their lives although they are still in a very difficult situation.

Madam Speaker, this road does not only serve for business purposes but also children cross using that road to go and study. This being an examination time, we are worried that some of our children might miss their exams if there is no urgent attention given to this.

Madam Speaker, while there is a promise that next week on Tuesday Government will come and make a statement on this, I think there are some spots, which need to be urgently fixed so that we do not hinder the school going children. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in view of the forthcoming examinations for the children, I would like to urge the Ministry of Works and Transport to take some emergency measures to ensure that the movement between Saaka and Pallisa is motorable. The minister should update us on Tuesday because the children will be doing exams next week.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, they are starting on Monday.

THE SPEAKER: Today is Wednesday, so the minister should work between now and next week.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, as I speak now, people cannot cross Ssezibwa because the whole bridge has been washed away and over 10 schools on the other side have delayed the start of their school day today. We have been hiring a canoe so that the young ones can cross because the exams are on Monday. 

The residents are not bothered. They do not know the minister; their cries go to Members of Parliament. Our humble request is that the ministry does something immediately. Maybe they can change the examinations centres so that these children use another school and sit from there. How can they cross using a canoe?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, this is a serious issue about children not being able to cross to school and some of them are candidates. Can you organise for them to sit on one side of the district?

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have received that information and our team is studying the situation. If they require some special assistance, we shall provide it and make sure that all our candidates sit their final exams without any disruption.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ongom, you are on fire.

4.07
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Just on the same note, districts have got equipment and UNRA stations are in some regions but they are lazy to work. Some of the bridges just need de-silting so that the water does not flood, but they sit and watch water taking the roads.

As the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is speaking about that, let them order - If it is a matter of fuel, can they give fuel to the districts and regions so that the roads are worked on because the machines are there? Thank you.

4.07
MR NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I come from Kisoro District, which is one of the three districts in the country that has two international borders. That brings its own uniqueness that has implications on the security of our people. 

As I speak now, the district has been lacking power for the last one or two months; in other words, the economic activity has completely changed. There is disarray; there are no social services and the social lives of our people are affected. Also, the fact that it is largely an insecure district resulting from that location vis-à-vis the Democratic Republic of Congo, there are issues that we are concerned about.

My prayer is that the minister responsible or Government tells us what measures it intends to take to ensure that the supply is not intermittent but steady, to allow our people to be secure and allow the social activities of our people to continue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is required to come next Wednesday and update the House on the plans to ensure stable power supply in Kisoro District.

4.09
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come here with a matter of national concern. 

I was in my constituency and then I happened to go to the constituency of hon. Oboth Oboth, where my mother comes from. They have the same problem of vandalism of transformers and electrical installations. In my constituency, in Busolwe Town Council and Busaba Subcounty, unknown people came and removed transformer oil and right now the whole constituency is in darkness. Whenever such happens, Umeme is adamant; they take months to respond. Even in Nagongera - our regional office is in Tororo - it is the same issue. 

My prayer is that the people of Butaleja also get a sniffer dog because some of these people may be walking on foot and the dog can come and get them. 

Secondly, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development should instruct Umeme that whenever such things happen - if they have just removed maybe one litre of oil -  the oil should be replaced immediately, because we are badly off.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is requested to go and-

MR WALUSWAKA: There is an additional prayer from my uncle, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the relevant minister should come up with legislation to address vandalism of these public utilities like electricity. We gave a recommendation that was adopted in this Parliament, that the punishment for people who steal cables and poles should be a bit prohibitive. 

I think there is time to amend the Electricity Act. Umeme and the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited (UEDCL) have called for this Parliament to make those laws. However, we are waiting for the minister to bring the amendment so that we make it not a very attractive business for our people who are tempted to look for mercury. Some are even dying; so, there is need for amendment. Those who are arrested are taken to police but are out in a few days, yet Government and the wananchi are losing a lot from these other services. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of vandalism of transformers is quite rampant. There was a time Mbale had the highest rates of vandalism in the country. They were known for vandalising transformers and installations.

I would like the minister responsible for energy to explain to this House what plans she has to protect these facilities. Also, she should tell us whether she has intentions of enhancing the sentences for vandalism. Is it under the Penal Code or Electricity Act? The minister should come and report to us next Thursday.

4.13
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance as the Shadow Minister for Sports. 

Madam Speaker, I have my ears on the ground. On 10 October 2019, the Federation Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) implicated the President of the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA) in a matter concerning the World Cup ticket slots which were sent to Ugandans.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, has that matter ended or is it still ongoing?

MR SSEWANYANA: It has ended.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the report?

MR SSEWANYANA: I have the ruling and the verdict and it is all over the media.

THE SPEAKER: Can it be presented here first?

MR SSEWANYANA: I have it.

THE SPEAKER: You will have to present it because I did not read it.

MR SSEWANYANA: Maybe you can first listen to me because I have an issue. As a Member of Parliament, I also have -(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the Shadow Minister of Sports, the ruling the honourable member is talking about is not on the record of Parliament. When the honourable member went to watch the Africa Cup of Nations in Egypt, he was almost culpable; we brought the issue here and we shielded him. He brought fire to the stadium.

Therefore, is it in order for a Member who broke the rules in a foreign country to come here and bring funny allegations against our FUFA President, yet we have not seen the report here? Is he in order, when he is also a lawbreaker? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether this FUFA is really a Government body. However, I would like you to first bring me the ruling, we read it and then you can move the issue. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, it is not related to that. I have not raised the issue but now you are ruling and people are calling me to order. 

My issue is that on the matter where FIFA ruled in favour of my petition on the tickets, I petitioned Government over the same. Up to now, Government has not given me any response, not even a statement, even after hearing what happened in FIFA.

The man is serving a two-month ban, which started on the 10th of October, for fraud and theft of World Cup tickets. It is national information and the man is serving the ban. It is even international information. So, Madam Speaker, my concern is –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not try to use this House to bring battles here. 

MR SSEWANYANA: No, it is not a personal issue; it is a national issue.

THE SPEAKER: Please, bring the ruling, we shall study it and then we see how to move on. I have not read it. I do not know what they said or what the verdict is. Bring the ruling, I will go through it and then we see how to move.

4.17
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Nakapiripirit and Bukedea districts are neighbours to Bulambuli District. As I speak now, the source of the floods in those districts is from Bulambuli. Bulambuli is the source of the floods happening in Bukedea and Nakapiripirit.

This has been worsened by two problems: There are two factories which are mining marble in Bulambuli, specifically in Nabongo Subcounty. As these two factories mine, the area where they are mining is now a source of water. Seven parishes have been badly affected.

My prayers are:

1. 	I request that the Committee on Natural Resources goes to Bulambuli to assess the extent of the damage caused by these two factories, specifically Kampala Cement and Hima Cement factories. 

2. 	For people who are affected, I am requesting for relief items, specifically blankets, tarpaulins and then what honourable members have mentioned, to help our people. They are in dire need.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is required to go and assist the people of Bulambuli who have been affected by the flooding.

Secondly, and more seriously, the Committee on Natural Resources should proceed urgently to Bulambuli and establish the relationship between the mining of marble and the flooding which is affecting many districts. It is urgent; please report in a fortnight. Thank you.

Honourable members, we are about to go back to the Order Paper but I would like to invite hon. Businge to make her maiden speech. Do not disturb her; no points of order or clarification.

4.19
MS HARRIET BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and the honourable members of this august House for the warm and cordial welcome accorded to me. (Applause) I wish to also thank President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the entire National Resistance Movement (NRM) party for the support they accorded me in the just concluded Hoima Woman MP by-elections.

I wish to extend my special appreciation to the office of the National Chairman of the NRM, ministers, honourable Members of Parliament, the NRM Secretariat, all the regional and national leaders who collectively campaigned for my candidature until we attained clear success. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, allow the Member to make her maiden speech.

MS BUSINGE: In a special way, I would like to thank the people of Hoima who positively exercised their constitutional right of voting, being guided by the true values and virtues of the development ushered in by the NRM Government. The gallant men, women, youth and the elderly all decided to vote for me as their Woman Member of Parliament. (Applause) This heroic act indeed confirms that the NRM has delivered to the people’s expectations and still has the trust and mandate of the people of Hoima. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to commend you for the able leadership you have exhibited so far in the august House. You are my role model and you are one of the great personalities in this country – (Applause) – who has inspired my political ambitions. I must say that women and girls in this country have been inspired to get into leadership positions because of your personality, positive zeal and determination in line with national duty. May the Lord God Almighty give you long life and good health.

As I joined Parliament, I pledged total allegiance to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Parliament of Uganda, the National Resistance Movement party, the interests of the NRM Government and the people of Hoima District. I recognise and commend the NRM Government for the peace, stability, democracy –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a maiden speech. You are disrupting hon. Businge. (Laughter)

MS BUSINGE: Madam Speaker, I recognise and commend the NRM Government for the peace, stability, democracy and national development so far attained. It is because of the sacrifice made by President Museveni and the other gallant Ugandans that we are here today debating in a free and democratic environment.

On behalf of the people of Hoima District and Bunyoro region at large, I wish to commend the Government for the improved road network and infrastructure. I believe in a few years to come, Bunyoro will be declared the Netherlands of Uganda.

Further, I commend the Government of Uganda for the international airport under construction in Hoima. As you can see, the work is progressing well. We know this will help boost the regional and national economy in terms of trade. However, many voices would wish the airport to be named Hoima International Airport, as opposed to Kabaale International Airport - (Interjections) - I beg for your protection, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a maiden speech. Please, allow the Member to speak.

Ms businge: Madam Speaker, allow me to bring to your attention the voices I have carried along with me from the people of Hoima. 

The first issue is about Bunyoro University. From time immemorial, Bunyoro region has not had a university. Many attempts to initiate one by the various stakeholders in the region have not resulted into any positive results, yet a substantial number of people in the region cannot afford to send their children to universities outside the region. This has largely left most of the people in the region with minimal technical and professional skills and because of this, the people of Bunyoro have been disadvantaged. This remains dangerous and disastrous not only to the people of Hoima but also the entire region.

There is an urgent need for an Act of Parliament to create a Government university in Bunyoro. Hoima District remains centrally placed to host the main campus at Bulindi Agricultural Research Centre. Its campuses can be stretched to other districts like Kigumba that houses the Kigumba Petroleum Institute, Nyabyeya Forestry College, among others. 

I request the Ministry of Education and Sports to welcome me when I go to their office to discuss this important issue that is pressing my people. 

About Hoima Regional Referral Hospital, I commend the Government and other regional development partners for the new infrastructural development at the hospital. However, it is currently overcrowded. At times, the medical personnel get overwhelmed during service delivery to the regional citizenry. Our mothers perish daily during delivery, a situation which has continuously brought tears to my people.

Madam Speaker, there is urgent need for the creation of the district hospital in Hoima and the improvement of the lower health centres like Kigorobya Health Centre IV. This will help decongest the referral hospital in Hoima. I request the Minister of Health to welcome me, with open hands, when I go to them to seek assistance for this noble cause.

On the local content issue in the oil and gas industry, many local companies have been registered on the national supplier database, but it beats my understanding to see companies ferried from Kampala to offer supplies to the industry. This also extends to the jobs. Bunyoro now has qualified professionals in the oil and gas sector but many of them have been employed as blue-collar employees. Oil companies and Government should urgently address the component of local content, which is a requirement – 

The Speaker: Honourable members, be courteous to your colleague. Honourable member, please take your seat.

Dr Nsaba buturo: Madam Speaker, the integrity of this House is under threat, more so when we have visitors in the gallery observing the proceedings of Parliament, with people who carry the title of “honourable”. There are basics regarding conduct when one is a Member of Parliament - (Interjections) - This is an example of what I am saying; this is not a market – 

The Speaker: Honourable members, please take your seats. 

Dr Nsaba buturo: Madam Speaker, is it therefore in order for the custodians of integrity and moral values in the nation to continue behaving in a way that brings disrepute to this House?

Finally, is it not in order that there should be a moment when this House sits down and deliberates on the way we should be conducting ourselves in the House? Is it in order to have what Members are doing, disrupting debate? Hon. Ssemujju is not the best person to talk about matters of integrity in this nation. Is it in order for us to have this disruption going on?

The Speaker: Honourable members, I am surprised at the way you are treating our new Member. I informed you that this is her maiden speech. You know that in the traditions of this House, you do not interrupt, whether she has made a mistake or not. You allow her to speak until she finishes. 

Honourable members, if you are worried about – You go to court if you do not believe in her victory. Please proceed, honourable member.

Ms businge: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, there is a wide and total outcry among the people of Hoima – the Tobacco farmers and the issue of land grabbing. 

I would like to also bring to your attention the fact that Hoima and Bunyoro at large are excelling in the political field. We would love to have a regional sports stadium with the emergence of important clubs like Kitara Football Club, the Lady Doves and the like.  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and the House at large.

The Speaker:  Thank you, honourable member. You are very welcome and we shall move along together as time goes. (Applause)

4.32
The leader of the opposition (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to welcome the new Member but also say that there is need for people to guide you. If all of us read our maiden speeches the way you read yours, you would find us still reading – (Interjections). So, you needed –

The Speaker: Honourable members, if I was to tell people how Members struggle on this Floor – (Laughter) – You are welcome, honourable member. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON TAX EXPENDITURE FOR THE PERIOD JULY TO SEPTEMBER 2019, FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

4.33
The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, before I lay the report on the Table, I would like to inform this House that there is no report. I just want to confirm to this House that I have not exercised the powers granted to me to waive or vary any tax during the period under reporting. I wish to lay this information in the form of a letter. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE AVAILABILITY OF LAND IN JINJA DISTRICT WHERE THE MAHATMA GANDHI CONFERENCE CENTRE WILL BE SITUATED, AND IN ENTEBBE

4.35
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the Jinja site, a survey carried out on the land indicates that approximately 13 acres of land is situated within the vicinity of the proposed Mahatma Gandhi Conference Centre. However, some of this land is in the buffer zone of River Nile. Our technical team is working on determining the size of land that can be developed within the existing legal framework, by delineating the buffer zone to remain with that which will be utilised. 

Currently, the land has occupants whose interests are unregistered, apart from one individual who has registered interests in form of titled land. 

The technical team is also working on ascertaining the controlling authority of the land because that portion that is gazetted under the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), which should have been either under the Ministry of Gender or Ministry of Tourism, does not have a title. Therefore, we have to ascertain the controlling authority. 

In relation to the proposed site in Entebbe, allocation has already been made. Last time, I laid on the Table the allocation by the Uganda Land Commission. I have already communicated to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to submit papers for titling. 

My ministry has received confirmation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that both sites should be developed. This means that both Entebbe and Jinja sites are to be developed. One will be a convention centre and the other a cultural heritage site. The Jinja site is the cultural heritage site. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have any timeframe? 

4.38
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We needed an answer on the issues raised in this House. 

There was a question of ownership of land. You talked about the land under the UNESCO heritage site where an individual has obtained a certificate of title. Earlier, we raised an issue on the feasibility of that title; we said that it cannot stand. We expected you to respond to that matter. What happened, because it seems to be an encumbrance? 

The other encumbrances that you are talking about are the licensees, and they pay tax to the council. This means that actually, they can easily be removed. However, you have not attached a timeframe within which to deal with those issues. You are just telling us that your technical team is dealing with the matter.

I would like to seek clarification from the minister on what has really happened in respect of a title, which was erroneously issued for that place? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, our instructions to you were that if you found titles irregularly obtained, you were to cancel them. That is what we agreed upon when we left here. 

4.39
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is not being clear. She is talking of the convention centre and the cultural centre but she is not telling us who is actually going to finance the convention centre. The one in Jinja is going to be financed by the Indian Government. Who is going to finance the one in Entebbe? I thought that the minister should be clear so that we know who is responsible for which site.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think our main concern was the one of Jinja. The one of Entebbe is not our business. During the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC), the Speaker from India went to Jinja and saw no sign of us doing anything. He said, “What are you doing? It has been one year?” That is our issue. 

4.41
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report, although it is not clear. 

We are asking: is there land? Who are the people there? The minister is saying that there are two categories of people there; one category is those with unregistered interests. However, you are not telling us who these people are. The other category is one person with a registered interest. Who is this person? What are these interests that you are talking about? Time is running out, based on what was discussed here, and the Indian Government is waiting for feedback.

Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to be specific. She is the custodian of all land titles but she is shocking me by saying that there is land that is not registered and not owned by anybody. According to her statement, she is not sure whether it is the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities or another ministry that owns the land. 

I would like to be helped to understand those dynamics. Otherwise, the minister seems to be dragging us to a corner, which might make this project fail. That is my worry. I would like the minister to clarify to all Ugandans whether what you are talking about is for the common good of Ugandans or for those unregistered interests. Thank you very much.

4.42
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The offer was for the benefit of the people of Jinja and Busoga. Now to come and say that part of that offer will go to Entebbe and another part to Jinja - that is the heritage centre and convention centre - 

Madam Speaker, we are talking of decongesting Kampala but also sharing resources. I think there is a lot that needs to be assessed, understood and evaluated concerning this project. Like hon. Abala has stated, we need to know all these things surrounding the piece of land in Jinja. It could be similar to the earlier one we talked about - the stock farm.

My proposal is that if the people of Jinja and Busoga are to benefit, let both centres be in Jinja. If the land is not enough for both the heritage and convention centres, the people of Busoga can find a place within that vicinity to have the convention centre in Jinja as well.

I would like to propose that this House institutes a select committee or an ad hoc committee to look into this matter in detail and establish what is surrounding all issues regarding this project. I beg to submit.

4.44
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My specific concern is about the land in Entebbe. We all know that Entebbe is a prime area in terms of cost of land and Project I should not be a problem to Project II. What I mean is that we need both the projects that are being planned and the projects that are already there.

One of the pieces of land that is under threat in Entebbe is that which houses the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre. I went there and found that the land is being given to individuals. The suspicion is that there is a project that is going to take place there. These individuals will become the people with registered interests and they will be paid money when that project takes off.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the minister to tell us the specific land she is talking about in Entebbe so that we can understand whether it is not part of the project. Otherwise there are people grabbing this land in anticipation of a very big project and they will become the beneficiaries when the project kicks off.

4.46
MS ANNITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If I recall, in the meeting that you had with the Speaker of India, he said the money had been approved by their Parliament. You even sent me to take the Speaker of India to Jinja.

Madam Speaker, time is of essence and we need to finalise this. Actually, money is available and the development they want to do in Uganda is in Jinja. I do not know how Entebbe comes in. The Speaker talked about the Source of the Nile, which is in Jinja and that is where they poured the ash. Unless some ash was poured in Entebbe, then the project can be taken there.

4.47
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Certain things leave us speechless, especially when you listen to how issues are handled in this country. 

This was a deliberate project offered by the Indian Government in a specific place for reasons known to all of us. It is not rocket science. The project is needed in Jinja because the ashes were poured in Jinja. Madam Speaker, I have never heard of any Source of the Nile in Entebbe. Whoever is cooking this idea of trying to shift the project from where it is best suited to where - people are just thinking whether they should put it or whether it is appropriate. You are scratching your heads but it is not a good idea and I do not support it. 

I would like to, therefore, inform the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that there is land in Jinja. Unless you are telling us that that land no longer exists. Otherwise, you need to declare to this House certain issues.

Madam Speaker, we sit here, debate and pass resolutions but these resolutions are pushed under the table because there are people who are interested somewhere. I would like to request the minister to respect the request by the Indians; otherwise, it is an offer given to this country. After all, we did not have the money to put up such a conference facility. It is not a loan.

If you take this project to Entebbe, you might have to buy land. Madam Speaker, my only concern is that there is no Source of the Nile in Entebbe. I stand with those who support that this project remains in Jinja. We do not want to hear that the project has been taken to Entebbe. Otherwise, Government should get other projects for Entebbe. Thank you.

4.49
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I am at pain and in shock to listen to a senior minister, whom we thought is our sister and our own. If she can sign a document for something meant for the people from the East to cross the Nile - I really am shocked.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is a deliberate effort by Government or the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not to sign anything that crosses the Nile. We talked about the Entebbe Express Highway and they were dilly-dallying yet for the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway, they have said nothing. Now we have a grant, which was specifically allocated to Jinja. 

Honourable minister, if you claim that there is no land in Jinja, why didn’t you take the project to Mayuge, Bugiri or Kamuli? Why did you, of all places, take it to Entebbe? The reason you are talking it to Entebbe is very simple; the foreigners will come and sell the land or the project without Parliament’s knowledge. I think that is it. 

Madam Speaker, I do not think we need another inquiry or select committee because the matter is very clear. If Government does not want to construct this for the people of Jinja or the East in general, let it come clearly so that we can tell the people of India to take back their project.
	
I cannot support something that is going to Entebbe. Everything is always for Entebbe. I am not happy and as a representative of the NRM, I will tell the chairman of the party that some of his ministers or technical people are making him to be hated. In fact, elections have started; do you want the President to be chased from the East? No, it will not happen. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.51
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember when the Prime Minister of India was here, all of us were also here. He was very clear; he said that he was offering this to Jinja District.

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time the Government has diverted things offered to Jinja to other areas. I remember in 2013, the Chinese Government gave us an opportunity or a donation to build a hospital in Jinja but this donation was diverted to Naguru. They promised that they would construct another hospital in Jinja but up to now, there is nothing. 

They did construct a hospital but it is incomplete. Now, with this offer from the Government of India, again they are bringing in Entebbe. Jinja is also part of Uganda and whatever is being done in Jinja is being done for Uganda. Therefore, why is it that the minister is coming now - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Walyomu. Madam Speaker, when I heard the minister mention Entebbe, I knew that there was something fishy going on. In fact, that minister is very intelligent.

Madam Speaker, Jinja has an opportunity to have something and we want Jinja to develop; why should you bring in Entebbe, which was not there? Please give Jinja its opportunity. Go and look for something else for Entebbe if you want but leave this for Jinja.

MR WALYOMU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we have land in Jinja and the minister also talked of the buffer zone of the river Nile but that can also be used for eco-tourism. I do not see any problem. Since the land is there then we should not have that –(Interruption)

MS AMONG: The information I would like to give to the honourable member is that Entebbe is too congested; it has everything that you would wish to see. Why don’t we take the project to Jinja?

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, for that information. Not only is it congested but I don’t think Entebbe has more land than Jinja. The constituency that I represent has land. If the issue is land then Jinja has land. We can bring that project to my constituency -(Member timed out.)

4.55
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Three good things have happened in the minister’s presentation;

    i) There are 13 acres of land are available in Jinja. 
    ii) She has put technical people to address the encumbrance on the river bank.
    iii) We heard here that the Indian Government has already allocated money for this facility.

However, what is not clear from the minister is that there are two interested parties on that land and one of them has a land title. Can the minister tell us, using her powers, what can be done to those encumbrances so that this project can go ahead?

There is compulsory acquisition and so forth; why isn’t she saying this in her statement? What is the concrete action she is going to take to address these two specific issues? Otherwise I don’t see any more problems. The Jinja project should go on. I thank you.

4.57
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Womam Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I am a bit disturbed. This is a grant for a specific purpose conditioned by the giver and it is going to benefit not only Jinja but the whole country. Why should we delay?

We needed to identify the bottlenecks and come with a comprehensive solution. As a country, we are choked by loans; the loans are good but we are over borrowing. Now that we have a grant, how shall we present ourselves to the giver that we are delaying because of a, b, c, d?

As Government, we need to take action. The minister should come with a specific way forward. I expected the minister to tell us the encumbrances on this land because the question was, do we have land?

If the answer is yes and the willingness of Jinja District is not disputable- you even met the Speaker and also visited Jinja District and I thought at this point the government, through the relevant ministries, should have harmonised any encumbrances on this land before coming to present.

Therefore, the minister should tell us the way forward because it is still with the Government. The focus was on Jinja and diverting us to split resources to Entebbe cannot suffice. It will be a breach of contract between us and the giver of the fund. 

I support that we stick to the conditions given to this grant and as Government, we should show that we have the capacity to absorb by not delaying sources which are available to this country. Thank you, so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is clear that it is not the absence of resources but the lack of will. They are not interested. If it was somewhere else you would have seen the speed.

4.59
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I have been telling a colleague here that if it were a private investor looking for even 30 acres of land in Jinja, it would have been got overnight because that private investor would in one way or the other have a kickback.

In Entebbe, part of the land that they are talking about was got from NAGRIC to the Civil Aviation Authority. We visited that area unless it is somewhere else. To date, the Civil Aviation Authority says they cannot process a land title because Uganda Land Commission asked for a kickback from them. Those are two Government entities.

The honourable minister talked about the buffer zone but what are the technical officers doing because we know that it is 200 metres from the lake; and it is not that you cannot use it, you can use it sustainably.

Madam Speaker, if this is happening in Jinja – an area within your jurisdiction - but the honourable minister is presenting that one leg has to go to Entebbe and another in Jinja, what will happen to projects under the control of mere members of Parliament?

It is not an issue of lack of will; they want to use this project to get land in Entebbe but they will maybe implement the same project in Jinja and the land acquired in Entebbe will go to some other individual activity. Thank you.

5.02
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When this grant was given, we, the members of Parliament from Busoga, had an interaction. The excitement with which we received this grant at the time when they promised us that they were going to construct the centre in Jinja was too much.

I get so disappointed today to hear of Entebbe and of something new. We have new cities like Jinja, Mbarara, and Arua to redistribute development and move away from the city of Kampala and Buganda, which is already overcrowded.

There is no way you can stand and convince this House that the value of land in Jinja is higher that the value of land in Entebbe; that you can face difficulty getting land in Jinja than Entebbe, I think this comes to will. We should take a decision as Parliament and say that this project must be done in Jinja as earlier planned.

I support all Members who are talking about the project being done in Jinja. The people of Jinja are waiting and are excited. The NRM is going for elections and this can make us lose elections in Busoga. They are waiting for such projects so that they know that we are standing with them. 

Madam Speaker, this is our area and on this one, we are going to close our eyes and die for Jinja to ensure that the project goes to eastern Uganda –(Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that I think there is a deliberate effort – there could be mafias somewhere – to sabotage Jinja. The people of Jinja may decide to riot around the bridge and no vehicle will cross from anywhere - either to go to Butaleja or from Kenya to come here. 

I think there are people who want to fight the President by bringing some headache such that we face it rough in the next elections. That is the information I would like to give you. It is not only for Jinja.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude. We need to move to another subject.

MR SILWANY: I would like to receive more information from hon. Nzoghu before I conclude. He has very important information.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Silwany. The information I would like to give is that of course the honourable member was talking about redistribution of – actually, what it takes in terms of the economy. I would also like to state, in the aspect of politics, that we know that the eastern region has been delineated for long, politically. This would be the time for it to also benefit from this small thing.

Surely, I also wish to ask this Parliament that when 2021 comes, let us also ensure that we redistribute the political power in this country and it should not be concentrated in one district. I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to know who the lead minister is on this issue. Please conclude.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, allow me to conclude. On this one, honourable members, we request for support from all of you to stand with us so that we work and take this centre to Jinja, in order for the district to achieve development so that the people and members of the public from Busoga can all benefit.
I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We need to finish.

5.06
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, when I was growing up, one of the districts that was well known in Uganda was Jinja. However, as we speak– 

THE SPEAKER: Order! What happened during the recess, honourable members? (Laughter)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, when you go to Jinja and compare how the district was popular and known in the country back then and now, there is a lot of destruction. I think there is lack of political will to develop the place. 

I worked in the NGO sector for about 15 years before I joined Parliament and I know that a grant comes with conditions. In this case, the condition is simple; the Indians have a very important person in their history and the ashes were scattered in the Source of the Nile, which is in Jinja; it is not in Entebbe. If anything, the River Nile does not even flow to Entebbe – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR AKOL: If one was to trace for the ashes, they would not even reach Entebbe. The problem is very simple - I visited Buliisa and Hoima where the oil roads are being constructed. What always happens in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is that they know where the projects are going. They hurriedly buy land in the area where the projects are going to established.

Do not even be surprised that when they talk about Entebbe, it is going to be acquiring land. You find that the people in the ministry go ahead and buy the land and when it comes to compensation, they are the ones who are compensated. I think it is important that Parliament opens its eyes now and we deal with them accordingly. This project must not leave Jinja; it is for a purpose and history, which should never be distorted.

5.08
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the law, whenever we need land for public interest, it takes precedence over individual interest. It seems there are some individuals who are interested in that portion of the land in Jinja.

I think that the honourable minister should inform that person; we have heard that it was the former Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Why is it that ministers of lands have a lot of interest in land? There is a tendency to grab land – which they should not. Please, the people of Jinja are interested that that facility promised by the Prime Minister of India should be in Jinja. 

Actually, the two sites are the same and there is no argument; if the land there is small, expand it and let the interests of the Prime Minister of India be implemented with that grant. What is decided here should take precedence over you, individual thinkers and land grabbers. Can I say this? Those greedy people should let public interest take precedence. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Lands, when you left here last time, I was very hopeful. You left with a lot of energy to solve the issue. However, today, you are non-committal and cold on this issue. You are not giving us hope. Actually, I am deflated.

5.11
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, the lead ministry in this matter is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I received a presidential directive to allocate land for the Mahatma Gandhi Convention Centre in Entebbe and the heritage centre in Jinja. I have been working with the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, who has more information on the two different projects. I would like him to first clarify on the two different projects and then I will answer the land-related issue.

5.12
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, you would like to confirm because the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has an inherent interest in developing Jinja as a source of the Nile, as well as the heritage centre. Mahatma Gandhi’s ashes were immersed in the waters of the Nile as a symbol of shared vision and civilisation. 

Consequently, I would like to confirm that as far as the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is concerned, the heritage centre, in memory of Mahatma Gandhi, will be built in Jinja at the Source of the Nile. That is where Mahatma Gandhi’s ashes were immersed and there is no change about this.

THE SPEAKER: However, you do not see any urgency to build this; there is no urgency from anyone.

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, let me give you information. When the Prime Minister of India was standing just behind where the Speaker is, he said that they were going to build a convention centre in Jinja. We can retrieve the Hansard and read what is there - 

The Speaker: Read the Hansard of 25 July 2018.

Mr akol: It reads: “In opening the State House to celebration of Deepavali, you have lit up the many strands of ties that connect India and Uganda. Among these, the most sacred is the site of Jinja…”

Mr okupa: I think he has problems retrieving it. Anyhow, Madam Speaker, I do not want us to lose this opportunity the way we lost the land in New Delhi. You know well that the Government of India had offered a very strategic piece of land in a prime area, to the Government of Uganda between the British and the American Embassy. However, the Government of Uganda dillydallied and we lost it.

Therefore, I hope that they are not the same characters doing the same thing for the source of the Nile. The place for the construction of the convention centre is in the words that were used by His Excellency, the Prime Minister of India. We cannot start coiling and bringing in some other words - this was all supposed to have been embedded in the hearing of the “convention centre” and not the “heritage centre.”

Now Prof. Kamuntu and others, for reasons best known to them, want to split it yet there is a difference between the two. I do not want us to lose this opportunity the way we did in New Delhi. My colleague, hon. Anthony Akol can retrieve the Hansard.

Mr baryayanga: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification; we all know that when the Prime Minister of India came, the centre was to be built in Jinja. 

I would like to know the source of funding for the project that is to be built in Entebbe. How is it related to the one in Jinja? Are you diverting the funds for Jinja to Entebbe? How do you relate the two projects? If you could clarify to us how the two projects are interlinked, then we will be happy to know where we are moving.

The Speaker: Honourable members, there is a plan to kill Jinja. We have been asking Government to repair the port at Jinja but they instead went to Bukasa. There are facilities at Jinja but they are not interested.

Mr Olanya: Madam Speaker, let me seek clarification. I would like to find out from the honourable minister how many hectares of land those two projects require? 

You also have to tell us clearly the reasons you had to divide the project; one in Jinja and the other at Entebbe. To be clear, did you fail to acquire that land in Jinja? Please clarify on those two so we get to know.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think the question of where the funding for the convention centre at Entebbe is coming from is very important. Otherwise, this is what the Prime Minister said, “In opening the State House to celebration of Deepavali, you have lit up the many strands of ties that connect India and Uganda. Among these, the most sacred is a site at Jinja, at the source of the River Nile, where a portion of the ashes of Mahatma Gandhi were immersed. 

In his life and beyond, he is one with Africa and Africans. At the sacred site in Jinja where a statue of Gandhi now stands, we will build a Gandhi Heritage Centre. As we approach the 150th birthday of Mahatma Gandhi, there can be no better homage than a centre to remind us of Africa’s role in shaping his mission that even inspired Africa to freedom and justice; the universal and timeless values of his life and mission.”

Therefore, why are you conditioning us to a convention centre at Entebbe? No, no, no! Honourable minister, you are the one talking about those things. Tell us where the money for Entebbe is coming from. Is it part of this because he was clear? He was talking about Jinja and nothing else. 

Mr waluswaka: Madam Speaker, as the minister comes, I am also interested - we had the Secretary General for the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) supporting it and the National Resistance Movement (NRM) as well as the Democratic Party. Can we hear a word about this Jinja matter, from the party President of Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) since he is here? (Laughter)

Can we hear a word or two if it is possible? Maybe he can guide us. UPC is the oldest party; the father of this nation.

The Speaker: We are not talking about parties but what the Indian Government wants to do here. 

5.20
Mr jack Wamanga-wamai (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The source of the Nile is a very important place in this country. It is known all over the world. I have taken delegations to Jinja at the source of the Nile and the problem is that when they get there, there is nothing.

Therefore, the donation from the Prime Minister of India, which was later on echoed by the Speaker of Parliament - the convention centre - must be built in Jinja. Indians were very clear that it must be done there and so, you cannot transfer the donation from Jinja to Entebbe.

I would like to ask the minister or Cabinet to advise the President that when the Prime Minister was here, he specifically talked about Jinja. We are adding beauty to this country because there is nothing at the source of the Nile. The donation cannot be diverted from Jinja to another place.

I would like to sympathise with the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development because she said that she got a directive. However, she should have told the President and all the Cabinet ministers that this was specifically meant for Jinja and according to all submissions on this Floor today, it is very clear that it is Jinja. 

As members of Parliament, let us take a decision and tell the President that his views are misplaced; this project must be in Jinja. 

The Speaker: Honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, where are you going to get money for the Entebbe Convention Centre? Are you touching the grant?

5.22
The minister of lands, housing and urban development (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, like I stated before, as the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, I only wait for ministries that require land for their projects and I process them.

In the circumstances, the Ministry of foreign Affairs gave me guidance and the President directed me that they wanted land for the Convention Centre in Entebbe.

Secondly, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities said they wanted land in Jinja for the Mahatma Gandhi Heritage Centre. I have looked for the two pieces of land; the one for Entebbe was land for NAGRIC and we have already approved it under the Uganda Land Commission.

We have communicated to the line ministry that asked for land for the Mahatma Gandhi Convention Centre and that is the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. The one for the heritage centre is the 13 acres that I have indicated. 

Madam Speaker, if this House feels that those were misguided directives, this House can call the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come on this Floor and withdraw their directive to me and tell me that they want land only in Jinja. It is not my function; I am not the person responsible for determining where the project is. If there is a matter that this House would like to make a decision on, the decision should be directed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

Before I answer a land related issue, I request that you allow the minister responsible for the centres; both the heritage centre and the convention centre – I have been directed to put the title in the names of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Let the minister first tell us about the two projects because - (Interjection) - he will talk about the money equally. I will then talk about the encumbrances, acquisition and related land issues.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu –(Interjection)– No, let him come and tell us. Let us hear what he says.

5.25
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, with all humility, Jinja is an integral part of this country. If we are developing this country as one, every part of this country – it is in the Constitution and there must be equitable development of the country –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the Constitution is very clear; it talks about equitable development. I would like to ask something before I go to the point of order. In eastern Uganda, the only tarmac road is the Jinja-Tororo-Soroti Road, which is an old tarmac road constructed by UPC. 
 
In western Uganda, the old tarmac road is from Masaka up to Kabale but we have Ibanda, Isingiro, Rukungiri and Kiruhura. Why? Is that equitable development? Therefore, is the minister, who has seen something coming to eastern Uganda so that it gets near to equitable development, in order to come here and start applying equitable development on something coming to eastern Uganda as opposed to what was there earlier? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think you should go easy on issues of equity because we are aware that there is no equity in this country. The only new road we have is the road to Musiita. That is the only new road on that side. Please, do not talk about equity unless you are sure. What are your plans for the heritage site in Jinja?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, sometimes I am surprised by –Let me state it without stammering. Entebbe and Jinja are two different places. The source of the Nile as well as the event of Mahatma Gandhi’s ashes being immersed in the waters of the Nile is a tremendous tourism potential for this country.

Consequently, Mahatma Gandhi’s Heritage Centre –(Interjections)– I am using my words carefully and I have used the words, ‘heritage centre’ - will be at the source of the Nile and you all know where it is. That is the instruction that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has; to demarcate that land and remove all encumbrances so that construction of that heritage centre can start. 

The reasoning, the history and the linkage are all very clear. A convention centre can be anywhere but the Mahatma Gandhi Heritage Centre must be at the source of the Nile where the ashes of Mahatma Gandhi were immersed. That is very clear. 

Madam Speaker, I think our sense of patriotism makes some of us feel repugnant when sectarianism is brought into the equation. If there are some inequalities in development, they must be corrected but it cannot be used as a justification –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, for the record, the World Bank put Jinja Port and Old Port Bell on the World Bank radar for development. However, the mafias in Government, because they had bought land in Bukasa, insisted that they wanted the port built in Bukasa instead of rehabilitation of Old Port Bell or Jinja. As a result, the Jinja project failed at a higher cost.

I have a report to that effect and I undertake to lay copies of the World Bank report, which I have seen. I also had interactions with the minister and Chairman of Uganda Railways. 

Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to say that there is equity and that those of us who agitate for equity are not patriotic but are sectarian yet they practice sectarianism in the way they do their things? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is wrong to label people unpatriotic when they are agitating for their rights. That is what the Members are saying. Minister, when shall we get that land? When will we start building? That is what we want to hear. We would like to hear about Jinja and not the other site.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, let me state that the whole purpose of instructing the Minister of Lands to demarcate the land to determine the land available without encumbrances was to speed up the start of construction of that heritage centre. I would like Members to believe me that we are so keen to have that heritage centre constructed because for all this time, including today with the Budget Committee – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to speak, please.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, nobody should doubt our commitment to have the heritage centre constructed. After all, if you are a minister in charge of tourism, a transformative force in curing the development of this country - that source of the Nile is the source of civilisation, which led to the discovery of this country. It must, therefore, be developed and no one should go against it.

MR SEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is not in order to say that - I might have said it wrongly but let me say what I wanted to say.

Madam Speaker, when you say that the facility that you want to build in Entebbe can be built anywhere else in Uganda, then why do you insist that it must be put in Entebbe, when it has a relationship with the one in Jinja? In fact, there is still land in Jinja?

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that I suspecting that where they want to put that facility in Entebbe is a cultural site for Entebbe Zamugula in Buganda. It looks like they want to destroy that cultural site in Entebbe as they advance their other. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to close this matter. Are you proposing a solution, honourable member? 

5.38
MR RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Yes. Madam Speaker, it is good we are discussing this in the presence of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

This Parliament sits and scratches its head looking for money for development projects for our country. I am sure if this was a loan, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would have been up and down for about 10 times. Now he is very quietly seated as if this is not interesting in terms of financing projects in this country. 

We are privileged to have a grant. I have been listening to the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – if the convention centre goes to Entebbe - this is why I am coming up with a point of procedure. Colleagues, kindly wait a little so that I can develop my point of procedure.

Madam Speaker, this is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. We have a responsibility to our people to take certain decisions and at a certain time, we may not have to go with what the Executive brings on table. Clearly, there is a point of inequity in terms of resource allocation and delay to procure a grant to the people of Uganda. In fact, there is insensitivity in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in terms of inability to procure public land for a public good. I do not understand that. 

Imagine someone is giving you a grant but within one month or three months, nothing is done. Do you want Parliament to throw it back to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs? I would like to move that we take a decision as a Parliament.

As representatives of the people, we should resolve that the project in its entirety, comprehensive as it is, and bearing the two aspects of a convention centre and the cultural centre should be located in Jinja. (Applause)  

The second proposal is that this Parliament should resolve that Government procures and avails land for the said project within a period not more than one month. (Applause) I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, prof. Kamuntu talked about the issue of equity. However, if you put up a convention centre in Entebbe, you will bring more money for Entebbe and Kampala only. No other part of the country will have that - I think this is not fair. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I would like to enrich the motion presented by hon. Magyezi. When the Prime Minister of India talked about a conventional centre, the idea they have in their region is that when commemorating their leaders, they establish a convention centre. The best example I can give to this House is Ho Chi Minh Convention Centre in Hanoi.

A convention centre is a bigger thing and in it, you find heritage a centre. Therefore, what the Prime Minister had in mind was to have a convention centre, which will contain the heritage centre. That is the practice in that region. I therefore, do not know why the minister, in his wisdom, decided to take the convention centre to Entebbe and have the heritage centre in Jinja. Otherwise, the practice in that region is to have one convention centre, which has got a heritage centre, like the Ho Chi Minh Convention Centre in Hanoi. 

Madam Speaker, that is the practice in that area and I think that is what the Prime Minister had in mind, when he proposed that we should have a heritage centre for Mahatma Gandhi in Jinja. Why does the minister want to change the practice, which is in India, by saying that the convention centre should go to Entebbe? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it means that the meat will go to Entebbe and the bones will remain in Jinja. That is what it means. 

MS AMONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to amend the motion moved by hon. Magyezi. I would like to add that the money that is meant for that project should be requisitioned by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development since it was already appropriated in India. In fact, the Speaker of India asked our Speaker why we are not asking for our money. Can that money be requisitioned as we acquire the land in Jinja, where the conventional and recreational centre will be?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us deal with the motion.

MR KASIBANTE: I would like to give more information with regards to the motion.  Madam Speaker, there are two issues in Entebbe. There is Entebbe as a place for the project and there is that land within Entebbe.

Madam Speaker, that land does not only belong to agriculture but it houses the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Base. I think we should know the importance of this Government agency. They do research and come up with new breeds of animals from time to time. 

It is a very sensitive agency and that land is very important. Our economy is based on agriculture by over 80 per cent and so, we cannot say that because we have this, we should do away with the other. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you support the motion?

5.43
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion of having the heritage centre promised by the Prime Minister of India in Jinja, as his request was. 

I would like to also inform Members that we have delayed too much. When the Prime Minister was here, he told us that as they were approaching the 150th birthday of Mahatma Gandhi to celebrate his birthday anniversary which was on 2nd October. 

As hon. Magyezi suggested, let the land be acquired and the process be started within one month. I fully support him and let it be in Jinja with no excuse. I thank you very much.

5.45
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to support and second the motion moved by hon. Magyezi with amendments. 

First of all, because the minister has failed to explain to us and give a concrete reason as to why he intends to shift the convention centre to Entebbe from Jinja as earlier requested for by the Prime Minister of India, I find the minster’s request ridiculous and should be thrown out of this House and rather, the original reason for having the convention centre in Jinja upheld.

You cannot just have a heritage site without a convention centre; the two go hand in hand. One is a money maker and the other will pull tourists. Tourists cannot go to Jinja to see the site and then travel to Entebbe to sleep.

5.46
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion for the reason that the honourable minister has terribly failed to justify his proposal for severing the convention centre from the heritage site.

The minister alluded to the fact the he received a directive from the President, which I highly doubt, because His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda was in this House and was very attentive. 

The issue then was the convention centre and the cultural site in Jinja. This august House siting here to decide otherwise will be putting the nation in disrepute because the Prime Minister of India is much aware and the entire Indian Government is aware that the convention centre is to be built in Jinja.

When that news was received, the people of Busoga and the entire nation were happy that for once there is going to be equity in this country. Why is it that the honourable minister is dying for this convention to be built in Entebbe? If it was for equity, he would be suggesting for it to be built in northern, West Nile or Karamoja. I support that the convention centre be developed in Jinja. Thank you.

5.48
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to associate myself with the submissions made earlier by the Members. In any case, the Magyezi motion is moved on the basis of the spirit in this House and I think the debate pre-empted it.

The minister, as hon. Akamba said, maybe did not have enough time to give the justification but that is when I would to be very polite not to say that he failed to justify. The minister of Lands discharged her duty cleverly and said that she had no problem. There were people who were giving her contrary instruction.

If you go to the source of the Nile, you would only know that this convention and heritage centre should be one unit at least. Trying to separate the two would have the honourable minister suffer from several accusations both false and true including but not limited to being biased against particular regions.

If the offer had not been made in public, you can be sure that we would be suffering - (Laughter). This offer was made in public and in this Parliament. We should not drag the President’s name into some of these things. The President loves the people of Eastern Uganda - the Basoga - and all Ugandans. Why should we be seen blackmailing him that he does not want this big project to go there but Entebbe?

Entebbe is already crowded with the airbus that we are bringing and State House. Let us expand. On the basis of that and being aware that the debate ensued even before the motion; I would like to move a motion that the question be put to this motion of hon. Magyezi.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the proposal as made by hon. Magyezi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, a word of caution to the Cabinet; they will go tomorrow and say that Parliament does not like development and that it is undermining the President. So, I would like to tell them that this is for Uganda. It is about equity and good planning.

We cannot go on like this; so, the decision is that the convention centre and heritage centre be constructed at the source of the Nile. The minister of Lands is directed to secure land for both and report back to this House by the end of November. Thank you.

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

THE FINANCING MODALITIES FOR THE KAMPALA-JINJA EXPRESSWAY AND OTHER KEY ROAD INFRASTRUCTURAL PROJECTS

MS NYAKECHO: Procedure-

THE SPEAKER: We are coming; let us get the Jinja issues out of the way.
 
5.53
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Uganda’s road network is a key driver of national and regional economic growth, due to the strategic position of this country. It provides core transport linkages to landlocked countries of Rwanda, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan to the sea, primarily through the port of Mombasa in Kenya.

The Government of Uganda is keen to leverage this national advantage to strengthen its comparative position as a key transit as well as regional trade hub to boost economic growth. The primary objective of the proposed Kampala-Jinja Expressway is to support Uganda’s transport sector goal of contributing towards sustainable and inclusive economic development and enhancing regional integration.

The procurement process was launched in May 2018, following the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Act of 2015, leading to the pre-qualification of four consortia; two from China and two from Europe. The financing modalities for the KJE, as we popularly call it at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, have been presented to Cabinet for consideration. 

Let me repeat this: The financing modalities for the KJE have been presented to Cabinet for consideration. Once a decision has been made, I will humbly come back to this House and report to update on the decisions that will have been taken. 

In other words, what I am saying is because the matter is still before Cabinet, I could not come to give you a direct answer as the question has been put on the agenda. However, in the meantime, I would like to share information with you on the following issues, just to show you the progress we are making:

    1. The Resettlement Action Plan

This is being implemented and significant progress has already been made. Approximately 30 per cent on the right of way has already been secured.

    2. Feasibility studies

These have been completed, as well as the environmental social impact assessment.

As far as other key national road projects are concerned, we are looking at all possible financing options in line with our debt strategy. We will also come back to you with details once these financing options have been finalised.

I wish to conclude the statement, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have not told us anything. (Laughter)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From what I heard, there is a big contradiction because the minister said this issue is in Cabinet for review. The second leg he has emphasised here is that those affected – about 30 per cent – are being considered for compensation. How is the review going to tally with what is on the ground in case Cabinet says it is going to make adjustments on the size of this expressway? Will it tally with what has been done?

He should tell us why there is a review at this time. If there is a review, it is going to have an impact on what has been planned and what is being implemented. Therefore, he should clear the air by answering why there is a review at Cabinet level so that we understand the roadmap. Thank you.

5.59
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Those who use Jinja Road know that that is the most stressful road in this country. Jinja is about 76 kilometres from here; it should be taking about 40 minutes to one hour. Now, you need about four hours from Jinja to Kampala.

When I listen to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – who, by now, should have valued the cost of going to Jinja or coming to Uganda through Jinja because that is an economic cost to this country – he should not have come to Parliament with this kind of information and waste our time.

The Kampala-Jinja Expressway is a road that was needed yesterday. Madam Speaker, I have heard people calling this a Busoga matter. This is not a Busoga matter; this is a Uganda matter because our exit to the world is in eastern Uganda and the biggest source of economy of exports and imports. You hear the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development coming to dilly-dally before Parliament, talking about such a road – necessary as it is to this country – in such a manner.

Let us talk about going back to Cabinet. We heard about this Kampala-Jinja Expressway about three or four years ago. If there is anything that was needed for review, it could not have affected the progress going on. However, what he is communicating to us now is that we have put a stop to whatever has been going on. That is what I, as Nsamba, have processed. “We have put a stop to what is going on regarding the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, until Cabinet makes an appropriate approval of the new thing.”

Madam Speaker, we would like to tell the minister and strongly –(Interjection)– This road is very important.

THE SPEAKER: As the minister comes, hon. Oshabe, the road is not for Uganda; it is a regional issue. It is a road for the DR Congo, Rwanda and Burundi.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, on that issue, I fully agree with you. This is not a Busoga or Buganda road. This is a project for East Africa –(Interjections)– I have not said anywhere in my statement that we are delaying. Let me read the question as it is on the agenda; “The minister will make a statement on the financing modalities for the Kampala-Jinja Expressway and other key road infrastructure projects.”

On that one – to make it clear – I have said that the financing modalities of the Kampala-Jinja Expressway have been presented to Cabinet for consideration. Once a decision has been made, I will report back to this House to update on the decisions taken.  Thank you.

Mr Okot-ogong: Madam Speaker, I listened to the minister very attentively. He made a clear statement that this project started long time ago. In 2017, they advertised the road’s procurement. Four companies were shortlisted. How do you start advertising when you are not ready with the financing modalities?

You are telling us today that you are now reviewing your financing modalities because of the huge debts that you already have; and that Jinja-Express Highway cannot receive any money from our resources or donors, but that you are now appealing to private financiers to come and support it. That means that you are not ready to finance the construction of that road. (Applause)

Honourable minister, why did you advertise before you were ready? Companies are ready to even finance but Government is not. Is it therefore, in order for the minister to come here to delay the process of constructing the Jinja-Express Highway? 

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think the minister did not get the gist of our disagreement. This House was not happy that of all the roads in Uganda - we borrow for other roads but that it is a Public Private Partnership (PPP) for the one for Jinja with no certainty about who is going to partner with us. That is the bone of contention and that is why you were asked to explain the modalities. Why Kampala-Jinja Expressway yet it is the most important road in the country because it is gateway?

Mr kasaija: Madam Speaker, let me make this clear. There is no intention whatsoever to stop the project; never. We only need Cabinet guidance on the two alternatives of financing this project.

The first is what we have prepared as a PPP –(Interjections)– I do not know who has refused it. Don’t you want it to be so? Okay, if you refuse the PPP arrangement, maybe we have not given you sufficient facts about the issue. That is why I have said that let Cabinet decide. If this had not come on the Order Paper today, I was not going to come here to talk about this road.
I am praying that –(Interjections)– can I finish my statement? Madam Speaker, can I be protected?
 
The Speaker: Allow the minister to complete his statement. 

Mr kasaija: Let me humbly ask this House to accept my request of Cabinet giving me full guidance on how to proceed. I do not want to come and give you half answers. 

Dr lyomoki: Point of order.

The Speaker: There is no one on the Floor; he has gone.

Dr lyomoki: I had raised it before I stood up. I am raising a point of order against the honourable minister for coming to tell us that the matter is before Cabinet and that we should wait for guidance. The reality on the ground is that serious contradictions have been given to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA). First of all, you should be aware that as a Member of Parliament, UNRA is part of my constituency and so I know what takes place there. 

UNRA had been told that they should suspend everything because they had gone for the PPP arrangement. Then last week, they were told that the PPP arrangement had been suspended and they were now back on the other method of funding. This is the information that UNRA is working on yet the honourable minister is telling us that a decision has not been made when there is already progress on the ground. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister to mislead the House on a matter where direction is already on the ground while giving wrong information to the House to delay the process? 

The Speaker: I do not have all the facts about what is happening and so, I cannot rule on that. However, honourable minister, can you take this matter to Cabinet? I know that you meet on Monday. This issue is urgent.

Mr kasaija: Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– can you please give me chance to say this? Colleagues, we are not at war. We are all working for the good of this country.

Madam Speaker, I could say that maybe the mistake I made was not to request that I do not appear on this issue today. This matter will be before Cabinet on Monday and I think we shall resolve it then before I come back and tell you - the issue is about how we are going to finance it. Otherwise, all the decisions are maintained; do we use a PPP or direct borrowing. These are issues on which I would like Cabinet to guide me so that when I come here, I give you what the position of Government is. 

The Speaker: Honourable minister, the reason for not accepting the PPP is because the World Bank had provided the money, companies had bid but the Government interfered with the process. 

6.12
Mr james waluswaka (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, I was in Washington DC last week attending the Annual World Bank meeting, which you the minister also attended. The lady told us that the money is ready. World Bank is ready to give us the money and the money is there. 

Hon. Elijah Okupa, you will elaborate since you were the leader of our delegation. Anyhow, even the UNRA staff told us that they got calls from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development saying they should halt the process yet they were going to award the tender because the evaluation process had already been finished. I think that there may be a mafia somewhere. Honourable minister, tell whoever it is, even if it is a mafia, that this is a wrong button. 

I would like to propose that no other loan, maybe apart from the hoes, which the President directed yesterday - Honourable minister, you have to bring a supplementary request for the hoes tomorrow so that everybody gets hoes. Apart from that, I will not be party to any loan for anything and I beg members – (Interruption)

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. One thing that I would like you, Madam Speaker, to know is that the ministers bought 800,000 hoes and distributed them among themselves.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us deal with the road. Leave the hoes. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, all the shoes and clothes that all of us are wearing, including the minister here, pass on that road. When we are talking about the Jinja Express Highway, they are not interested; the will is not there. That is why we are concerned. Sometimes the minister does not appear here but I would like to say, for purposes –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, is my colleague in order to insinuate that a man like hon. Kasaija and the NRM Government are not serious to work on that road? Is he really in order? Can he substantiate to show that we are not serious? (Interjections) Let the Speaker rule, please.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is information in this House that the World Bank has money, which is available and ready and that bids had been issued. The Government interfered with the process and started PPP. That is the issue. If it is true that the World Bank provided money, that the contract was advertised and companies applied then you interfered. The money is there.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I am happy that you ruled in a wise manner for the minister to know the proceedings in the House. Thank you.

6.16
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the honourable minister should give us all the background information about this project. Hon. Okot Ogong put it to us that they advertised, eight companies bid and the best were selected. These companies were from South Africa, India, South Korea and China. There was the best evaluated bidder by UNRA. If there was no clarity about the financing, that would not have taken place. 

The honourable minister invited me for a cocktail at Serena Gardens after you had moved with the Board of Directors of the World Bank who own 51 per cent and where our very own, Madam Kabagambe, was. You drove to Jinja with that team and you came back. In the speech that you gave at the gardens, you said that you had seen what we go through. We are waiting for your response to our request; for the financing of this project. Has that response come to you? The answer that we hear is, yes. 

Where was the problem? Madam Speaker, members who sit with me on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure know that there is a company from China that attempted to bribe committee members. They came and met members on the ground floor. They said to us, please help us and make sure that we win this contract. 

Members on this committee know and I wish hon. Waluswaka was still here. We met them. Without an agenda, we do not know how they found themselves in the committee meeting. They tried all ways, including trying to find avenues to His Excellency and mobilising people so that they are given the contract to do that road. 

This is the genesis of the confusion because people want kickbacks. That is why the project is delaying and stalling. I challenge any one here to come and say that I am not telling the truth - (Interruption) 

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to provide more information to my brother. You are aware that the Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway is the most expensive road in the world; 50km at US$ 500 million and at four per cent per annum. 

The feasibility study was done by the company, the contract was awarded by the terms of the company, they did it and Government agreed to shoulder any challenges that the company would encounter in collecting money to recover their money on the highway.

Considering that fact, these companies that we are talking about have already done their feasibility study of Kampala-Jinja Express Highway and the amount is mindboggling. You cannot even talk about it. (Laughter)

They are now saying to Government, “Do not borrow from the World Bank at a concessional rate” and for more years. These private companies are offering four per cent for 10 years and it is a commercial loan, which should be recovered within that period. If Government cannot recover, it should guarantee that they will pay all that the company has spent on the road for all those years.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, what is delaying the Jinja Express Highway are the mafia that have entered into that project. We would like Government –(Interjections)

We have all this information and the minister is aware. This is very clear because when the World Bank and Government were negotiating for this road, the World Bank accepted to finance this road. It was advertised but from 2017 till now, they cannot award that contract simply because the mafia have entered the system. I am just providing information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, how do we move on this issue? 

MR OKUPA: I am still submitting, Madam Speaker. That is why, when we put that question to one of the directors of the World Bank last week, they said that they cannot dictate on the financing modalities that Uganda wants. They said that they are ready to offer but if our country does not want, they cannot dictate on our financing modalities. That is what they told us last week. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think Ugandans need a fair deal. Otherwise, it is because of the good performance of the Government of Uganda in the World Bank, that for the first time, under hon. Kasaija, the biggest shareholders of the World Bank came to Uganda. That is a plus for you. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my committee for resisting that team; the India firm; we told them off. Maybe they have changed their arrangements. 

When the minister is talking about review, it originates from there. If the matter is before Cabinet, how long does it take before it becomes –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: In my statement, I have not mentioned any word like “review”. I only said Cabinet is considering this matter and once they give me their final decision, I will come to this House and inform you what the Government decided.

Madam Speaker, I would like to take the guidance of the Speaker that Cabinet is meeting on Monday. This matter is part of the agenda for Cabinet on Monday. I will come back next week to give all the details including the real cost of the project.

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, if this is not reviewed - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister will come to us on Tuesday next week. This matter is urgent. On Tuesday next week, we want answers on Jinja Kampala- Express Highway.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to thank you for the ruling. However, I would like to say that if they were not sure about the financing modalities, why was this road advertised and evaluated? This is why I am insisting on the word “review” of the financial modalities. Otherwise, if they had not finished the modalities, they wouldn’t have advertised. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I propose that those who have the evidence of the advert should come here on Tuesday so that when the minister will be answering, you will produce them such that we can know why they advertised, when there is no money. Next item.

6.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have observed that we are skipping the issue of the youth unemployment.

You recall that last week, seven youth came from Gulu but you asked them to come today. I do not even see the minister for –(Interjections)– yes, Makerere is very important, but when people come from far – Madam Speaker, it is very expensive to come from Gulu to Kampala and this is the third time the youth from Gulu are coming here.

Madam Speaker, I know that we need to handle the issue of Makerere but we also need to handle the matter of the youth unemployment. In fact, they were asked to come today. So, what are we going to do to those youth who came from Gulu? Otherwise, it is expensive.

Madam Speaker, you told them to come and be in the gallery and that the issue on youth unemployment and equitability of employment will be handled today. I do not see the minister for youth affairs. Surely, the issue of Makerere is important but we should handle the petition brought by the youth on unemployment. Otherwise, it is very expensive for them and to some of us who support them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Speaker did the work of demanding for the position on how the Government is going to sort out unemployment since July.

The minister said we should give her one month and we gave her up to September. She then said after the recess and now she is not here. I think we have done our part and now it is up for the minister to come. That is why I told the young men that we care for them because the matter is on the Order Paper for Tuesday. The honourable minister for youth should come tomorrow. Otherwise, she knew about this matter and we need to advise these young people.

Honourable members, since the Prime Minister is not here, who is acting on his behalf? Honourable ministers, please ensure that hon. Nakiwala Kiyingi comes tomorrow. Thank you. Let us go to the issue of Makerere University.

STATEMENT ON THE STUDENT UNREST AT MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

6.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a statement about the student unrest at Makerere University. 

Madam Speaker, student unrest broke out at Makerere University on Tuesday, 22 October 2019. The main issue that has been put forward to justify the ongoing unrest is a purported tuition fees increment across board at the university due to the New Makerere University Fees Policy.

A new fees policy for the university came into effect in July 2018. The policy was approved following a report of the Special Committee of Guild Representatives, which provided for a new fees structure with a 15 percent adjustment on all undergraduate programmes starting with the 2018/2019 first year intake.

Subsequent intakes pay an additional 15 percent, using the fees structure for the previous year as a base. The fees adjustments are scattered over a five-year period, which implies a 75 percent increase on the 2017/2018 base tuition fees between 2018/2019 and 2022/2023.

The modest adjustment in tuition fees was necessitated because of the ever-increasing cost of delivering university education, which requires academic instruction materials, utilities, modern laboratory equipment, modern delivery platforms, adequate ICT infrastructure and maintenance among others. These are very costly and cannot be fully covered by current levels of government subsidies. 

This notwithstanding, the policy took into consideration the current and projected economic circumstances in the country as well as the fact that Makerere University is a public institution. Even with the adjustments, the fees paid by students at Makerere University will still be lower than what many other universities are currently charging.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I have tried to give a table that shows fees charged for selected programmes in Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda and Makerere University. For example, for a Bachelor’s of Medicine and Surgery, Makerere University students are paying Shs 3.5 million, the University of Nairobi is Shs 17,371,500, University of Rwanda Shs 8,017,040 and so forth. 

The fact that the current fees policy was student-led is quite unique and followed protracted negotiations between students and the University Council. It was provided as an alternative to the earlier proposal that had been passed by council where the increment ranged between 15 and 95 per cent on the different programmes, which would have taken immediate effect in 2017/2018 academic year. 

This means that, with the new fees policy and fees structure, the students determined their own fees which is completely unheard of anywhere.

It should also be noted that the last time fees had been increased at Makerere University was in the 2005/2006 academic year; more than a decade ago and before the new fees policy came into force in 2018/2019. 

The current policy did not affect continuing students who were already on their study programmes by the time it came into force.

New students are also required to study the new fees structure and only pick admission letters if the structure and payment terms are agreeable to them.

Most importantly, the University Management and Council have continued to dialogue with students’ leaders and started to put in place mitigation measures for those who cannot afford to pay by providing for student employment opportunities, dialogue has also been continued on the fees policy itself.

When the current guild leadership reawakened the debate on the matter of tuition fees, Management and the University Council once again opened the doors for dialogue. The Vice Chancellor led a team of management which met with the Guild Representative Council during a special GRC session held on 17 October 2019. 

During the meeting, it was agreed that concerns on the fees policy would be considered at the next meeting of the University Council in line with a petition which the Students’ Guild Speaker had made to the Chairperson of Council.

Additionally, the Chairperson of Council met with the Guild President and reconfirmed that the student concerns would be considered at the next council meeting.

In summary, contrary to the common public narratives, the university did not increase tuition fees on continuing students.

In addition, each privately sponsored student continues with the fees structure against which they were admitted to the university until they graduate. The fees chargeable to privately sponsored students for each programme of study is communicated whenever private sponsorship admissions are advertised.

The advertisements are made in the daily newspapers, the university website and several social media platforms. Students make the choice to apply to Makerere University when they are fully aware of the fees chargeable for programmes to which they apply. The fees structure is further communicated to all admitted students through their individual admissions letters.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to draw your attention to other factors fuelling student unrest:
The situation at the university has been worsened by the now rampant abuse of drugs and other substances by sections of students at the university. 

It is almost inconceivable that students would consider rioting at night, including taking riots to neighbouring suburbs like Kikoni, Nakulabye, and Wandegeya.

It is also important to note that some of the people who have been arrested on the university campus are actually not students of the university but strangers that had been imported into the university to cause chaos.

Another issue was the timing of the unrest. It is important to note that the university experiences cyclic student unrest around October in the sense that some students use it to depict themselves as "strong defenders of student interests and good mobilisers" which would help their political ambitions as they position themselves to contest for different leadership positions in the students' guild. 

Students also use this platform to attract funding from external actors for upcoming guild election campaigns. The guild campaigns will kick off early 2020. This is the 12th week of the semester and exams are due in three weeks' time. Students avoided the examinations time, but also, they did not strike during the first weeks of the semester, yet the fees policy and structure were known to them before. 

The other dilemma relates to the fact that every year the entire Cabinet and the Guild Representative Council expires and a new leadership succeeds with a tendency to deny or reject any positions or decisions taken by their predecessors. 

There will always be a temptation to try to prove that the new leadership is more "of activists" than their predecessors. It is also important to note that, most of the students who were taking part in the strike and those caught in the fracas by the police were continuing students who were not affected by the 15 per cent increase policy. 

Ironically, a great number of them are beneficiaries of several Government’s and Makerere University sourced scholarship schemes such as:

1. 	The Government Scheme where 2,000 students every year at Makerere University are being sponsored by Government. 

2. 	The Loan Scheme with each year having new beneficiaries.

3. 	State House Scholarship beneficiaries each year having new beneficiaries.

4.	The Makerere MasterCard Scholarship Scheme having 1,000 beneficiaries in the last five years. These students have not been affected by the fees increment and their actions cannot be justified in any way.

Madam Speaker, allow me to also update you on the security presence at the university: The Police are responsible for providing security and keeping law and order at the university. 

The current security deployment was effected on the 1st September 2019, which was before the strike. Whenever the Police deem fit, it enlists the assistance of sister security agencies including the UPDF.

A number of steps have been taken to return normalcy to the situation at the university and they include:

    1. Dialogue with students including a meeting of the University Management and the Guild Representative Council held on 17 October 2019, and a meeting between the Chairperson of Council and the Guild President. Another meeting between the Management and the student leadership was called on 28 October 2019; but midway the discussions, some scores of students caused commotion and interrupted it.

    2. Continuous appeal to the student community to keep calm to enable normal university operations while their concerns are addressed by the relevant organs of the university. Meanwhile, lectures must continue and all staff and students are expected to be available for academic services.

    3. Engagement of the public and other stakeholders through the media.

    4. Enforcement of disciplinary sanctions which are provided for in the student rules and regulations. These are provided to every student upon joining the university. The Students’ Disciplinary Committee will meet to handle cases of students who have been involved in offenses that contravene the established rules and regulations of the university.

    5. There is continuous information gathering on students' involvement in drug and substance abuse, which has aided arrests by the Police. The university management is strengthening sensitisation and counseling of students on the dangers of drug and substance abuse.

Yesterday, 29 October 2020, the University Council was in a meeting with the Guild President, the Guild Speaker and the entire Guild Cabinet. The following resolutions were made in that meeting:

    1. On the tuition fees structure:
    a) That the 15 per cent fees adjustment shall continue to be applied on tuition fees for the remaining period of the three years. 
    b) That the 15 per cent adjustment in fees shall not apply to functional fees for the remaining period of implementation of the fees structure adopted in July 2018. Functional fees shall be capped at the rate applied on the admission cohort for 2019/2020 academic year for the next three years. 

2. 	On the student electoral regulations: 
        a) That the student guild provides written proposals of the amendments to the student electoral regulations for consideration by the council. 
        b) That the University Council shall consider the students’ recommendations through its legal, rules and privileges committee. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to inform the House that the Makerere University Council, together with management, are containing the situation and are working with all stakeholders to find an amicable solution to the problem. The university is now calm and lecturers are ready to teach.

I invite my dear honourable colleagues to give the council, management and the entire university all the support possible. I would like to appeal to the students to resume lectures and not be intimidated by the few negative elements. Security is at hand to ensure that order prevails. I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I had indicated at the beginning that there are some petitions. I think it is important that we receive them before we move; hon. Mwiru and then hon. Nambeshe. Let us hear their petitions first.

6.45
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had a discussion with my honourable colleague, hon. Nambeshe and we have agreed to consolidate the two petitions. I will present on the substance and then he will present the prayers. Once I have laid the background to my prayers, I will have no problem consolidating my prayers with those of hon. Nambeshe. I beg to present, Madam Speaker.

The petition is moved under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. 

This is the humble petition of the undersigned students of Makerere University, Kampala, seeking parliamentary intervention in the implementation of the recently approved tuition policy by Makerere University Council, presented by myself, hon. Paul Mwiru, MP Jinja Municipality East constituency and hon. John Baptist Nambeshe. It states that:

Your humble petitioners submit that the Makerere University Council, at sitting of 9 July 2018, approved an annual 15 per cent tuition increment for the undergraduate student for five years.

That your humble petitioners further submit that pursuant to the approval of the tuition policy, the university management began implementing it in the 2018/2019 academic year, leading to strikes at the university.

That the humble petitioners aver that as a result of the strikes, management halted the implementation of the policy, pending further consultations;

That your humble petitioners further aver that higher education is key in the realisation of the National Development Agenda, as explained by the National Development Plan II and Vision 2040 because it contributes to the formation of skilled human capital;

That the humble petitioners contend that increasing tuition in public university like Makerere not only cripples accessibility to higher education, it also denies the country the resultant benefit of having the majority of the country’s population attain higher education;

Your humble petitioners further contend that the implementation of the policy affects private sponsored students, who mainly come from poor families that are below the poverty line and cannot contain the consistent annual tuition increment;

Your humble petitioners further aver that tuition increment requires an extensive, consultative process of all key stakeholders, including Government, the university, students and the public, as well as the undertaking stakeholders’ analysis.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to the prayer, I will seek your indulgence so that I invite hon. Nambeshe to present our consolidated prayers. I beg to submit. (Applause)

6.47
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners seek for your intervention and that of the House with the following prayers in this matter:

    1. That all students who were suspended be reinstated – (Applause) - particularly Ms Siperia Molly, who is still hospitalised as a result of being molested, battered -  actually brutalised - while she was at the university campus. She was unfairly dismissed without being heard. It should be noted that she was suspended for leading a lawful peaceful demonstration.

    2. Your humble petitioners ask for the resignation of Prof. Barnabas Nawangwe – (Applause) – the current Vice Chancellor of the university. The office of the Vice Chancellor has, of recent, been abused by the occupants who are hereby mentioned.

Notable among them are the personal assistants of the Vice Chancellor, a one Murangira Gordon and Dr. Eria Hisali. They have been at the centre of the command of seeing all students treated in the inhumane manner that we have witnessed on both print and electronic media. 

Students have been battered, maimed, molested and even students’ belongings have been vandalised, including damaging university property.

    3. The humble petitioners ask for halting of the tuition and functional cumulative increment. It is very true that there is a 15 per cent cumulative and functional fees’ increment. It is not actually 15 per cent. If you add the two - the tuition of 15 per cent plus that 15 per cent of functional fees - it amounts to 30 per cent.

    4. Withdrawal of the army expeditiously from the university premises. (Applause) Universities the world over are supposed to be places with a conducive learning environment but it is the complete opposite in Makerere with the presence of the Military Police. Soldiers have on several occasions been accused of bullying and mistreating students to the extent of even taking their property, including phones. What happens in Makerere is reminiscent of what has also been happening in Kyambogo University.

	So, the humble petitioners pray that the army steps aside and the police take up their constitutional responsibility.

    5. Lastly, your humble petitioners are seeking for your indulgence to institute a select committee that will probe or conduct investigations into the sexual harassment that happened in those halls of residence, particularly, Mary Stuart because halls like Lumumba were broken into in the middle of the night, including Mary Stuart. That is where you find Ms Siperia Molly was assaulted and she is still hospitalised. 

This matter has greatly affected our female colleagues. We seek your intervention so that the perpetrators of these terrorist acts are brought to book. 

It is our humble request that the above prayers be granted.

We beg to submit.

Mr mwiru:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay on the Table the petition plus the signatures of 693 students who petitioned Parliament for intervention. I beg to lay.

Mr nzoghu: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recognise the time you have put in and the stamina that you have as well as that of the members yet the matter we are about to debate is pertinent and very touching.

However, when I look at the time –(Interjections)– yes, because it is already coming to 7 o’clock. I am seeking your indulgence on two things: the first, we unanimously agree on the time we are going to spend so that every Member has the opportunity to contribute. If not, we can push it to tomorrow if members cannot be given enough time today. I am seeking your indulgence in regard to that so that we can be guided because the country is much waiting for the outcome of this.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the matter is a bit intricate because we have received petitions and prayers and the minister has made a statement. However, at the same time, it is a matter that has gripped the nation for over a week. 

It is hard for everybody to speak but can we agree on how many hours? One or two? 

Hon. members: Two hours.

The speaker: Can we use the first two hours tomorrow on this?

Hon. members: Yes. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, let us use the first two hours tomorrow. No other business; we should go straight to this so that we give it adequate time and attention because there are areas of human rights, among others. 

Mr francis zaake: Madam Speaker, as of now, the Guild President has been kidnapped –(Interjections)– yes, they have kidnapped him. Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected.

The Speaker: You are.

Mr zaake: This is an issue, which is emerging out of what we are talking about. I agree with the Member that we should proceed with this issue tomorrow but as we speak - he was picked from the television station –

The Speaker: What is his name?

Mr zaake: Kateregga Julius. They picked him from NBS Television station this morning and we do not know where he is up to now. We cannot know what they are doing to him. You have been watching videos showing how they have been torturing students by brutally beating them.

Therefore, I would beg that –(Interruption)

Mr Muwanga-kivumbi: Madam Speaker, he was kidnapped while coming from the NBS TV Morning Breeze programme. Students were supposed to have an assembly and a press conference, which he was supposed to address on the resolution they had taken. Instead, he was kidnapped on his way to the university.

Secondly, as Parliament convened today, the police descended on two hostels, locked all the gates and thereafter began to fire teargas. These are still girls’ hostels around Aga khan. 

Therefore, the situation is getting worse and worst. We do not know why security is choosing to target the hostels for female students. Yes, we can debate this matter tomorrow but the situation is very dire and human rights abuses continue; this is on-going. 

The kidnap of the Guild President and the continued spraying of teargas into girls’ hostels - as of this afternoon, it was Aga Khan Hostel and another neighbouring it. They locked the gates, got into the rooms and started to spray teargas – did the police want to scatter or kill them? 

That is why we are asking the minister whether he knows what is taking place at the university as of now? And as you have heard, he is not aware. So, as we wait for tomorrow, can we have a ruling and a directive from the Speaker to the security team to withdraw from the hostels. These are private properties outside the campus. They are escalating the war to Kisenyi and Nakulabye and we do not know where all this will end.

Mr zaake: As I conclude - and to add to what he has just said, the Office of the Vice Chancellor has suspended 26 students this afternoon as this sitting was starting. By so doing, they are trying to intimidate students.

From what hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi has told us, we should do something right now before we debate this issue because it is escalating. What they do to the students at night is worse. We cannot imagine what is going to happen tonight. I beg that we do something before we debate this issue tomorrow.

Ms santa alum: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of Parliament but also a mother. I feel for what is happening to our children at Makerere University. Makerere University was our pride. I am so shocked that as the minister is busy presenting his statement on the Floor of Parliament, intimidation, torture and abuse still continue against the students.

Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that since it is getting late and you have rightfully ruled that we defer this debate to tomorrow - I agree with you because we have students up in the gallery even now. Now that they are attacking them everywhere, left and right, it would be good enough to allow them go back early. 

However, before that, the minister who is seated here should update us on what is happening to our children because we cannot sit and legislate on this matter like this.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I am very disheartened. Whereas I agree with your ruling that this matter be given extra time and attention, I am afraid that we are massaging matters of criminality taking place at the university. The matters are beyond discussing education challenges and debating fees increments. 

As we wait for tomorrow, I would like us to extract a commitment from the minister that one, he knows what is going on at the university. This is because the commander-in-chief, two days ago, said that he did not know who deployed the military at the university. Can we be informed today, before Parliament adjourns, who deployed the military that is brutalising and sexually molesting our children because everybody is denying responsibility? We got information that they were told to withdraw but they are now back. May we know what is going on before we take leave of this matter and wait for tomorrow? 

This is criminality and somebody must answer to this criminality before we take leave. They should take responsibility so that tomorrow, if anything happens at the university, somebody will be able to answer and be held responsible for abusing our students and destroying private property. This is unacceptable. I am hesitant to discuss fees increments in the face of human rights violations, Madam Speaker. May we get a commitment and know who is actually commanding? Who has deployed? We are now discussing this – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, there have been serious allegations raised here that one, the Guild President has been abducted. We would like an update from you tomorrow on where he is before we start the debate.

Secondly, we have been told that now the attacks on the students are not at the university but at the hostels. Can you assure us that the children are secure and who is actually deploying in the hostels? 

7.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government has the responsibility to take care of the lives and property of all Ugandans. 

I have just received some of the information that my colleagues have shared with us this evening from here. However, I would like to entirely agree with you that we sleep over this. This will give me enough time to find out what exactly is happening and to report back tomorrow.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think this matter cuts across because we know that the Police belong to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the UPDF to the Ministry of Defence. Can we have ministers of Defence and of Internal Affairs here tomorrow?

We do not want a situation where the Minister of Education will come and say, that is for the Minister of Defence or that is for the Minister of Internal Affairs. Please, summon these ministers also to explain why SFC, UPDF and the Police were deployed there and why they have tortured, including those that are disabled.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, I think you are the senior minister here. Please ensure that the ministers of Internal Affairs, of Defence and of Security are here tomorrow.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, we shall discuss this matter and debate it tomorrow. However, we are all parents. Tonight, as you are seated here, if somebody rang you and said your child is in danger, would you postpone it to tomorrow? 

Tomorrow we can discuss the issue of the 15 per cent increase but, Madam Speaker, the issue of human rights, the issue of life, deserves a statement from us, even at this time. As a member of the Human Rights Committee, a few months ago, I raised here the issue of torture of our citizens in the forests by the UPDF. We have had the ones on the lakes and now it is extending to the schools. 

Madam Speaker, we shall debate a number of things but I do not find any justification for the members of our forces to beat, brutalise and harass our people anywhere in this country. (Applause) This statement must come out. I hope that even in tomorrow’s debate, there are certain things that we shall debate but there are certain things we must preserve as the Parliament of this country. (Applause)
 
This is the House that safeguards the rights of our people. My child in the hostel tonight is afraid of being sexually harassed. My child is being tortured tonight and somebody tells me, Raphael, wait, we can discuss this tomorrow. No! Let us get a clear statement out to the nation that the Parliament of Uganda condemns brutality and abuse of human rights and calls on Government to stop this.
 
I would like to hear the minister trying, in any way, to justify this. Yes, the increase was agreed to; yes, there may be drug abuse; yes, you are saying that some people want to campaign so they want to be seen as strong mobilisers. Does this, in any way, justify brutality on our citizens?

Madam Speaker, tonight, let us agree that the Parliament of Uganda strongly condemns what is going on at Makerere in terms of human rights abuses and we call on the state to use the powers that they have to stop this immediately. Thank you.

MR ALIONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information that we are getting right now is that security personnel are not allowing students to access the campus. Right now, security personnel are moving around the big hostels. I would like the minister to guarantee the safety of the students here right now.

It is quite embarrassing that security personnel are treating our students like rebels. They are fighting them like thieves. They are handling them in a very rough manner. The minister should guarantee the safety of the students who are here; whether you are going to escort them up to the university or you are going to provide for them accommodation in a safe place. 

MR GEORGE ABOTT OUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I concur with my colleagues. I am a parent and I also graduated from Makerere University. There is a saying in Kiswahili that loosely translated means, when you throw a spear at the pig, you say it is okay but when it comes to you, you begin crying. If we do not condemn in the strongest possible terms how people are brutalised at Makerere University – I think a person who supports this, is inhuman. 

Madam Speaker, we are annoyed with some people who want this Government to look bad. In fact, why should we always take the army at the front, as if police cannot do their work? Why should you beat children when they are peacefully protesting against something?

Madam Speaker, I am afraid for the students who are here because whenever we discuss brutality in Parliament, it continues. They say they are now discussing, what will they do? I think the ministers who are –

I am actually beginning to wonder whether these are ministers. Are they the kinds of people who support bad things? I think we should be the people who can take this country at heart. For instance, when something bad has happened instead of protecting, our ministerial positions, we should be advising the Government that this is bad.

Madam Speaker, since it is getting late, I am requesting that we discuss this matter tomorrow. I know the students who are here are going to be arrested along the road. I think we need to guarantee their safety from this place.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we want the Minister for Internal Affairs, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, and the Minister of Security here tomorrow. Otherwise, we need an assurance on safety of the children who have come to town today. How will they go to their hostels?

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by telling the Minister of Education and Sports that I am very disappointed.

The first statement I expected from any Government leader was to apologise to those children for the brutality they went through. Irrespective of what the students did, they did not deserve what they went through.

When I watched the attack on the students at night –(Interjection)– Madam Speaker, no one deserves to go through what the students endured. If I may ask, the televisions that were destroyed, were they striking? Were the plates which were broken striking? Were the disabled students who were rallying also throwing stones?

Madam Speaker, I called my son and asked him what they were doing but he said, “Mummy, we did nothing. We were peaceful in our rooms but we discovered that they were breaking the doors and ordering everyone to go out.” 

Madam Speaker, I have just watched a video. It is a very short clip. It is very disheartening, if none of us here can condemn what is happening in Makerere. I think we have lost it. Imagine the police was guarding and shooting direct into the rooms. Is this really the kind of country we want? I am actually not sure about the safety of these students. As Parliament, we must ensure that these students go back before we even go back home.  

Madam Speaker, my speech is a miracle. When I came here, I had lost my voice. When I went to the clinic, I was given something to take, although I have been drinking a lot of water. However, I said, God I must condemn this and it must be on the records. I really thank God for that. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister taught me in Namugongo and I respect him a lot. I am happy he read that statement and I am sure that, that statement did not come from his heart. Being a catholic, I know that statement is not from your heart. Please be sincere to yourself.

Madam Speaker, this university is supposed to help the most vulnerable children in this country. If it cannot help –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Ayepa and then the minister.

MR KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let hon. Ayepa say something and then you can come. 

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My sister has suggested that we need to ensure that our brothers and sisters, who are here with us, reach the university safe. The question is, how? I think we should get escorts from here and bus to take them straight to their hostels and we discuss this matter tomorrow.

Madam Speaker, when we shall be discussing this matter tomorrow, we should suspend any other matter like matters of national importance. This issue is more serious than any other matter. Tomorrow, we should come here and talk about the student unrest in Makerere University. It is really too much. In fact, if I had a child there, I do not think I would sleep.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we do not know where the students are living and where they are going. I think it will be putting a burden on this House.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, they must be going to the university. 

THE SPEAKER: Give us an assurance. 

MR OLANYA: They are going to the university and to their hostels.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, matters concerning Makerere University strikes are not partisan. We are not only Members of Parliament but some of us are parents. This is not an issue that is partisan.

Madam Speaker, you ruled rightly that we should make a decision on an informed basis. It is only fair that we debate this matter thoroughly tomorrow and we give the minister a chance.

Madam Speaker, I can tell you there is no way anyone can cover up what is happening at Makerere University. That is why I am saying that the Speaker maintains her ruling and gives us time tomorrow to debate this issue, and time for the minister to bring issues.

Madam Speaker, as you have directed, I will ensure that the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Minister of Educations and Sports will be present tomorrow to respond. Otherwise, this matter must be solved and it is in everyone’s interest that this matter be addressed.

Madam Speaker, it is not a question of condemnation because it will not help the situation.  We only need to find a solution to Makerere University issues.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we cannot postponed is the vote on the motion moved by hon. Magyezi that this House condemns in the strongest terms the brutality meted on the students at Makerere University. I put the question to that 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what happened during the recess?

7.21
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, it is very sad that this Parliament seems not to be serious because the ministers and the Prime Minister disappoint us. Otherwise, all of us have to condemn but we need to make sure that these students go to their hostels. Who is to help them right now? Since last week these students have been suffering.

I remember calling the Minister of State for Internal Affairs to intervene. I called the IGP. I tried to call other police but they could not help. I was in Wandegeya with students for a long time and since then they have been suffering; but the honourable Minister of State for Higher Education comes to just smoothen as if he is not a parent. You are honourable minister.

Even the chairman NRM Caucus was trying to justify the action of Government sending there soldiers to brutalise these students and violate their rights. That was wrong. We are parents and we must feel the pain of being a parent and yet sometimes you seem to be justifying that they are going through this because they are abusing substances; a student is as student including the year fours, threes who are not going to have this increment; should feel for the year ones and moreover education should be accessible to all but not only to the rich.

However, now you want education to be a domain for the rich people not the poor people. Why should we have this increment? For us in Opposition we condemn it to the highest and we also condemn the action of the-

THE SPEAKER: Parliament has condemned; brutality has no party.

MS JESCA ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the honourable minister also confirmed what was raised by colleagues that the situation is not calm, that there is insecurity in Makerere University, in my view we should not only look at the students here but all of them in totality. Government should ensure that nothing happen to our students overnight because it has the power, mercenary, those who were there were deployed.

We need to ensure that our children are safe. If we only concentrate on these ones, the majority are already in the school and others are in their hostels. I am of the view that the security of our students be considered in totality.

THE SPEAKER: I am talking to the senior minister and the Minister of Education about the safety of our students. He is the minister here now.

7.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like my colleagues to know that I am also a parent and I am a teacher. I have students I am looking after who are studying at Makerere University. Whatever happens to the children wherever they are affects me directly.

It is very unfortunate and unfair to me to create an impression about me that I am not caring. I would like to say that I am concerned about the safety and security of our students, and from here I am going to do everything possible to ensure that our children wherever they are whether at the main campus or out there are safe and secure. I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.26 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 31 October 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

