Wednesday, 19 October 2005

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I want to welcome our special visitors, Dr Paul Crouch and Mrs Crouch, together with Pastor Kayanja and other guests of Trinity Broadcasting Network. They have visited the country to see what is going on and have also decided to come and pay us a visit and see how we proceed with parliamentary work. You are most welcome. 

As you are aware, Parliament shall be participating in the state funeral of the late former President of Uganda, Dr Apollo Milton Obote. Today at 4.30 p.m. there will be a Guard of Honour by the Uganda Police band here, and we shall be later receiving the casket of the former President. It will lay in state overnight and tomorrow we shall have a special sitting. So we shall adjourn a bit earlier than usual.

2.51
REV. HAMLET KABUSHENGA (Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. In the spirit of encouraging innovative brains in our country, which contribute to national development, I have the permission of the Speaker to congratulate a young man from Kinkizi who has just won a World Class Award in an innovation built at Kinkizi Community College, which is going to be generating electricity in a very special way. This is Arnold Ahimbisibwe Bakenzana who is in the gallery.

THE SPEAKER: You are welcome and congratulations.

REV. KABUSHENGA: This technology, which is his innovation, operationalised by Kinkizi College founded by the Member of Parliament Kinkizi East and the President’s Office is a record breaking innovation because it generates electricity from the energy we normally use, which we waste when we are cooking our regular meals. It is very special and it was considered so by the Global 100 Echo-tech Awards of Japan who awarded this to Arnold in Nagoya just a few weeks ago. 

The distinguished components of this machine are that it is the only one I know that generates electricity without any extra demand for fuel. As you cook your regular food, the energy that would normally be wasted will be boiling water, which water will be letting out steam turning a turbine and a dynamo, charging batteries for electricity that you can use later.

Secondly, it is a system that can provide electricity without any cost of transmission in that all the electricity is generated where the cooking is being done.

And thirdly, it is a technology that has no bills to pay except the energy that you would normally use to cook and it has no load shedding. So, as I congratulate this scientist and lay this innovation on the Table, I want to appeal to government to help commercialize this. If we can install this in 1,000 schools in this country, then the demand on the low energy reserves we have and the pressure upon our environment would come down considerably.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We must congratulate hon. Kabushenga for the various initiatives he has started in his constituency.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I want to note that there are some two strangers in the House with cameras and I am concerned about your security since they seem to be near you. Can you put my heart to rest that we are safe with these strangers? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think you should not be worried. When I made the introduction of our visitors, I said they are from Trinity Broadcasting Network and therefore, you can understand the kind of work they are doing. And since they have come to visit us, I think they should take an impression of how Parliament operates and I have given them permission to do so. I am safe. Thank you very much for the concern.

MS NAMUSOKE: Okay. Now I rise on a point of clarification from the Government. Three months ago we raised a point on the consumption of alcohol in this country. The Prime Minister promised that he would come back to us with a report on investigations and what could be done on the consumption of alcohol in this country. I noted in my diary that the three months were ending on 14th October this month. I want to know if government has completed its investigations on the consumption of alcohol in this country and if the report is ready for this House to discuss. I thank you.

2.57
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Mr Speaker, thank you very much indeed. I am sorry, I was not aware the honourable member was going to raise this issue but the consumption of alcohol is a very complex social problem. The honourable member would like to know that in the United States at one time they tried prohibition and after this prohibition was imposed on the people, the number of people dying of -(Ms Namusoke rose)- Excuse me, honourable member. I know how to answer my questions. Actually the number of people dying of alcoholic related diseases went up and pathology studies will demonstrate that. Therefore, it is complex and the honourable member would like to know that the studies are going on and when government is ready, we will report. I do not think that the time is much more important than actually providing a very good answer. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the question was referring to what is on record. What is on record was an undertaking that within a given period of time an answer would be given. So they are only asking about what has happened. You can say, “Well, we are still going on”, but I think our concern was the time frame and therefore what has happened?  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Even the most exact theories can find the practical flaw in being implemented. Therefore, I would like to request the House to give us more time to study this matter and report later. Right now I cannot tell you when the report will be ready.

THE SPEAKER: How much time do you need?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, if the question had been put formally I would go back to the professionals who are studying the –[Ms Namusoke: “Point of order”.]

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, I do not want to waste a lot of time on this. The thing is that there was an undertaking according to the member that this would be done and therefore, there was no need to put a formal question. She was just saying that time has passed, what has happened? So, what you can say is that, “We still need more time” and that will end the matter. Let us revisit this matter within two weeks from today.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is something important I want to raise to government –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No! Let us revisit guidelines given to this matter. If you have an important matter to raise after the Communication from the Chair, you must have given prior notice to the Chair that you intend to do so. Since you did not do that, maybe I shall allow you tomorrow.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2005

3.07
Clause 7

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we stood over clause 7 to allow us redraft our proposed amendments to sub-clauses 12 and 13. The redraft has been made and I have circulated copies of it. I now wish to propose as follows; I propose to delete the existing sub-clause 12 and insert the following:

“Where the Electoral Commission:

(a)	Refuses to register the political party or organisation under this section, the applicant may appeal to the High Court against the refusal; or 
(b)	Fails to process the application within the time prescribed in sub-section (ii), the applicant may, in writing, petition the High Court for an order requiring the Electoral Commission to process the application.” 

Mr Chairman, I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: Members, the proposed amendment is clear.  

MR MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want the committee chairman to help me with a petition under clause 12(d), that one just petitions the inquiry. What if the party decided to take the Electoral Commission to court instead of petitioning? What is the difference?

MR OULANYAH: This does not take away your other right under other laws to sue the Electoral Commission for whatever reason or complaint you have. But this particular case is where in the circumstances you have made an application and the Electoral Commission has refused or has failed to act. If it has refused and the decision has been taken, of refused, then you have a right to appeal to the High Court. But if it fails to act, then you petition the High Court for an order that the Electoral Commission should act on your application. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be deleted and replaced as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.)

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete sub-clause 13 and insert the following:

“A person who has submitted an objection to the Electoral Commission under this section in respect of an application for registration of a political party or organisation and who is aggrieved by the decision of the Electoral Commission, or the failure of the Electoral Commission in the objection may petition the High Court.” 

Mr Chairman, I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 13 be deleted and replaced as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I was due to bring an amendment at the time of reconsideration, but I do not know whether I can do it now.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Was it on clause 7, which we are dealing with?  

MR MWANDHA: Arising from the discussion of yesterday, the House was trying to find a way of ensuring that parties, which get registered, have a national character and the committee made a proposal of two-thirds to improve on the minister’s formulation of one-third of the districts in Uganda. The argument, which I had yesterday that received quite a lot of support from members was that you can actually get the two thirds from a particular part of Uganda and ignore another part of Uganda. And, therefore, we wanted to introduce the idea of two-thirds from each of the traditional geographical regions of Uganda. The number of districts will be the same but the idea of this is that you will be able to spread out. A new party would not concentrate on recruitment of support from any particular part of the country; they will have to recruit in all the regions as we know them. 

For example, in this proposal if a party chose to get the two-thirds, they can get it from the three regions and ignore a third region. There are enough districts to constitute the two-thirds.  Therefore, I want to move an amendment to clause 7(a)(b) by inserting the following: “Each of the traditional geographical regions of Uganda listed in the third schedule.” 

I propose that we introduce a schedule, which will be the Third Schedule, so that (b) reads as follows: “A list of the full names and addresses of at least 50 members of the political party or organisation from each of at least two thirds of all the districts or each of the traditional geographical regions of Uganda listed in the third schedule.” 

Mr Chairman, the new formulation will be as in (b), which I have circulated and, therefore, this will be a much better formula to ensure that when parties are registered they are truly national. They should have a national character, which the committee proposed. I support the committee’s position to improve what the original proposal was, in the Bill. Thank you.  

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Mwandha for his innovation. However, I seek clarification on an issue like cattle rustling, which is not a very pleasant economic activity. Assuming we decided to form a party against cattle rustling, how feasible would you find it to recruit members from Karamoja? Can you make it a requirement? Would our ideological position be anti-cattle rustling? How would we go about recruiting people from Karamoja, since it is not very pleasant and we would like to raise some political position? Wouldn’t that be a hindrance and something very undemocratic? [Hon. Omara Atubo: “Order”.] I am seeking for clarification, why don’t you wait for the honourable member to –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, although I do not come from Karamoja, I consider it extremely insulting and disparaging for a whole cabinet minister to stand in this House and impute that if a political party is formed, a certain section of this country cannot be included because they are cattle rustlers. Is it in order for a whole cabinet minister to impute that all Karimojong are cattle rustlers and therefore they cannot be members of a political party? We know very well that they are millions of extremely good Karimojong who do not believe in cattle rustling.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, could you justify why you think the entire population of Karamoja is involved in cattle rustling?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, I was talking about recruitment. I did not impute that all Karimojong are cattle rustlers. As you know, his constituency has been a victim of what I am talking about –(Laughter)- I have never been to these areas. I have never stolen cows from Lango.  Therefore, I think the honourable member is out of order. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: The term is offensive because it is embarrassing to other members. Would you like to withdraw it?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I never expected that my proposed amendment would derail the debate and go into cattle rustling. In any case, the Bill is against forming parties for sectarian purposes. Therefore, any Bill of that –(Interruption)

MR ABURA PIRIR: Sincerely, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Chairman, it is a very serious and unfortunate way of contributing in the House, on the issue pertaining to Karamoja yet we passed a disarmament programme in this august House when the honourable minister was here. This is an indication that truly the Karimojong are not Ugandans. That is why there is nothing on record to say that it is developing or transforming. It is sad that the hon. Minister of Water, Lands and Environment can talk in that manner. Therefore, it is unfortunate that we happen to be Ugandans for we are not Ugandans.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we debated this issue yesterday. The purpose for which this amendment was brought is, how do we achieve a national character? He says you achieve the national character by having membership from all the regions of Uganda, and that would reflect national character. I do not think we shall have another debate on this. Those who were not here should not take us back. I put the question to the amendment by hon. James Mwandha.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 7 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 20

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we stood over clause 20 to allow us redraft to provide for the functions of the National Consultative Forum for Political Parties. I now propose to replace the existing clause 20 with the following: 

“National Consultative Forum for political parties and political organisation:

There shall be a National Conservative Forum for political parties and political organisations.

The composition and terms of office of the members of the National Consultative Forum shall be as approved by Parliament on the recommendation of the minister.

The functions of the National Consultative Forum shall include: 

(a)	Liaising with the Electoral Commission on matters pertaining to political parties and political organisations.
(b)	Ensuring that political parties and political organisations comply with the code of conduct prescribed under section 19.
(c)	Communicating the complaints and grievances of political parties to the Electoral Commission.
(d)	Representing political parties and political organisations in any case where the parties and organisations have to give a common position.
(e)	The resolution of disputes among political parties and political organisations.
(f)	Making recommendations to the Minister on any matter under this Act. 
(g)	Such other functions as may be prescribed by the minister with the approval of Parliament.

Funds required for operating the National Consultative Forum shall be provided for moneys approved by Parliament.”

Mr Chairman, I beg to propose.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Chairman, I am of the view that this committee of Parliament should take just a few minutes off and look at whether it is not possible for us to come out with composition and terms of office of the members that is in sub-clause (2). 

It says we are going to throw it back to the minister and then the minister will come back to Parliament. I am just wondering that since this is not a very complicated matter, if this House accepts it can be done and I have already consulted the chairman of the committee and the minister and my amendment goes as follows:

“One representative from every registered political party or organisation appointed by the party or organisation;

The Chairperson of the Electoral Commission or his or her representative as an ex-official member;

The Attorney-General or his or her representative as an ex-official member;

The Secretary to the Electoral Commission shall be the Secretary to National Consultative Forum;

The term of office shall be for a period not exceeding five years.”

If we are saying that this is a National Consultative Forum for Political Parties and Organisations, then every registered political party or organisation should be a member and should be able to participate.  

The period of not exceeding five years is really what we have already passed that parties will have elections at regular intervals not exceeding five years. So I am of the view that we do not have to disturb this minister to go back and so on. Normally the composition of this important corporate body is spelt straight away in the main Act and we do not have to delay. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Should I understand that what you are trying to say is that you agree with the amendment but you are amending it for purposes of that one?  

MR OMARA ATUBO: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, Mr Chairman, you have heard and have you consulted?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, we have no problem with that proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the chairman in relation to 39(c) and (d). It talks about communicating the complaints and grievances of political parties to the Electoral Commission, then representing political parties and political organisations in any case where the parties and organisations have to give – mainly in (c) it is the chairperson, or is it the committee seeing complaints and grievances in terms of a collective that all these political parties have a complaint as a group? If not, how does this relate to a political party, which wants to – maybe they have sent a complaint or they want to send a petition or they think they are being treated unfairly by the Electoral Commission, do they still have a right to approach the Electoral Commission on their own or they have to go through this National Consultative Forum? I really need to be clarified on that one.

MRS MASIKO: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the suggestion as proposed by hon. Omara Atubo. He said that the composition of the consultative forum should have a representation from every party yet you realise there are some parties that are relatively very small - made up of very few members. So in this consultative forum, why don’t we consider the proportion of the population or the membership of the party to have slots in the consultative forum?  

I raise this because you might find several tiny parties and when they are making a decision over the operation of the parties, they take the upper hand because of numbers within that forum yet they are not representative enough. This is especially if you consider a party that might have more membership maybe it should have more representatives in the country. So I would like us to reflect on that and see how fair this consultative forum would be if small parties dominate it and the big party has a small share.  For instance, if it comes to voting on an issue, how can a bigger party have the same weight with the small parties in the consultative forum?  

I believe that if we have to have this representation it should be proportional in nature so that it is widely accepted and considered to be a serious forum. I thank you.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I would like to give my colleague and friend information to the following effect. Once a party has registered it means that it has met the minimum qualifications in order to be a party in existence. Therefore, when you have such national consultative dialogue of parties you will not be in position to talk about small, medium or big parties. They all come in their capacity as members of a party. I would like to give her the example of districts.  

We have districts composed of various populations but at the end of the day they all have district status. Therefore, if we start categorising parties it would definitely be discriminatory because once you are a party and you are registered according to the law, you should have the same rights as any other party. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: And in any case, what mechanism will you have to know the membership of this party and the other party? Some people may inflate; do you have a way of checking on this? So long as a party is in the register, consider it a party. I think we should leave it at that.

MAJ GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Chairman, I am persuaded by the proposal by hon. Sarah Kiyingi because we could have briefcase parties, shelf parties and big parties because we are all not the same. So, why don’t we go for proportional representation in this case so that in the national consultative forum the bigger parties have a bigger say than the small ones depending on their electoral strength.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, the parties are not obliged to forward the numbers of their membership to the Electoral Commission. How would you know that this party is big, this is small?  There is no mechanism!

MRS MASIKO: Mr Chairman, my suggestion was like representation in Parliament can tell the weight of the party, so that that can be used as a measure. I am sure, if there is a will for proportional representation in any consultative forum it can be worked out.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean the representation in Parliament means that people who have voted for Members of Parliament must necessarily be members of those parties?

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Chairman, although my sister Winnie has sat down, I just wish to draw her attention to the fact that political parties, as we said yesterday, are even going to be representing different ideologies. Therefore, when you go in the forum, the point is that, each people with a different ideology can have a say.  

Secondly, I think we also need to look at the functions of this consultative forum. When you look at the functions, really the point is that everybody is represented and everybody knows that their view has been heard.  

Thirdly, when you look at this Parliament, some districts are big and others are small. But because what we want is that everybody gets represented, we do not have women representatives in terms of proportion. We come here as women representatives because we represent districts. Some districts are so tiny they should not even have anybody representing them here.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think I should put the question.

MRS MWESIGYE: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like clarification from the mover of the motion, hon. Omara Atubo. In a multi-party setting in Parliament we have the Leader of Government Business and one Leader of the Opposition. We do not have many leaders of the opposition, every party having its leader. So, using that scenario, I thought that also within this forum, perhaps that analogy could be followed. So, I need clarification on that. How does the Leader of the Opposition represent all the opposition parties in Parliament, which scenario we could actually reflect upon while thinking about your amendment?

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe before he answers, it is no longer an amendment of hon. Omara Atubo, because the chairman of the committee who moved the first one assimilated it as part of his amendment. But any one of them can answer. Hon. Omara Atubo, do you want to answer?

MR OMARA ATUBO: I think honourable minister, Hope Mwesigye, I just want to say that the Leader of the Opposition in the House is the leader of the majority party and there may be smaller parties. You can see this case in Kenya where Kenyatta is the leader but there are four or five other smaller parties.  

When it comes to the National Consultative Forum created under the law, it is really political parties and, therefore, the political parties will have a modality of saying, “Let us send a representative there.” If the Leader of the Opposition in the House is selected by his party to represent them in the forum, well and good, but if he is not selected, then it is okay. But the party of the Leader of the Opposition will definitely be represented in the National Consultative Forum and that is the way I am looking at it. I do not know whether I got you right.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.)

The Title:

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, the title has two parts: the long title itself and then the second part is the preamble and we propose some amendments to both aspects. 

We propose to insert immediately after the word “their” on the second line, the word “formation”, and a “coma” so that it would read: “An Act to make provision for regulating the financing and functioning of political parties and organisations, their formation, registration…” and then it continues. The word “formation” is missing.

And then secondly, Sir, the citation of the Act that is due for repeal is not correct. The citation in the second last line says: “Political Organisations Act” but there is no such law, which has been passed by this Parliament. So we should insert the words “party and” so that it would read “To repeal and replace the Political Party and Organisations Act, 2002.” 

And on page 4, after the marked paragraph three, we propose that after the word “Parliament” in the first line of that paragraph, we delete the statement “Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of Article 29 and Article 43 of the Constitution.” 

We propose this deletion to improve on the drafting of that. They were trying to reinstate what is in the Constitution but it does not flow very well in the context in which it is put. So, we propose that it should be deleted. I beg to propose.  

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, I just wanted the chairperson to help me with this word “formation”, what does it help by putting it here? I just wanted to know because formation is rather a broad word. What does he mean by this, if he could help me to justify this? 

MR OULANYAH: Mr Chairman, those are the words of the Constitution. We were just trying to put what is in the Constitution. The Constitution says, “formation, registration” and so on and so forth. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, formation in this case means how you go about starting a party, recruiting, and then you end by registering it. Those are the formation stages. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title, as amended, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the Whole House reconsidered clauses 7 and 20 and passed them with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2005

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005 be read the third time and do pass.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I beg to recommit one clause to be able to answer the issues we had raised the other day and yesterday and it is just a minor issue on clause 16. So, with your indulgence, I want to recommit only that clause.

THE SPEAKER: What do you want to recommit?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, you recall we had a definition of a public servant, which was in the Constitution, but we had those organisations of which the majority of the shares are owned by Government of Uganda or wholly owned by the Government of Uganda; they have people working there and they are not defined anywhere in the Constitution yet they are also drawing resources from the Government. That is why I want to recommit that part, to include those officers who work there to be part of the persons not to participate as stated in clause 16.

THE SPEAKER: You have heard that the honourable member wants us to recommit clause 16 for him to be able to insert all other persons employed – I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, this amendment we have passed requires including a schedule. So in the course of the reconsideration I would like also to move that this schedule be included.

THE SPEAKER: Was it not part of your amendment? It was part of the amendment. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2005

Clause 16

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am moving to add under clause 16, sub-clause (1) at the end after “or cultural leader…” that, “Any person employed in a company, which is wholly or partly owned by the Government of Uganda.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you want partly?

MR NANDALA: Majority, where the Government of Uganda has majority share holding. I beg to move.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What the member may want to represent should be like this; that all persons working in organisations, which are fully owned by Government or whose majority shares are owned by Government, would be required to resign three months prior to – and whatever goes with it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But would you like even to interfere in a company where there is a joint venture? For instance Ssekandi or you having a business with government, do you want to restrict people working for me?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to move that the companies, which are wholly owned by the Government of Uganda or voting shares are more than 51 percent - that is the majority. That is better.

THE CHAIRMAN: The voting in public companies is different from voting in a private company because in the private company the person who has majority shares –(Interruption)- but in the public there is a difference.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Chairman, I want to find out exactly what the honourable member has in mind. Could he give an example of the company he has in mind so that we know exactly what he wants to avoid and the reasons why he wants that amendment? If he could give us a list of such companies then we would be able to formulate what he wants.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me give an example of the National Insurance Corporation. Suppose the Government of Uganda owns it and its business is that of the Government, they are not drawing money from the Consolidated Fund Account but the money that was used to set up the company belongs to government. Even if they had 51 percent shares that would still mean that the Government is the one that controls that company. My reasoning is that this person can use these resources that belong to the Government for campaigns to the disadvantage of other contestants.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you restrict yourself to companies wholly owned by the Government?

MR KAWANGA: Mr Chairman, we might run into problems of definition later on. Unless we handle something specifically, 50 percent share holding may become difficult to interpret at a later stage in case there is litigation. I would rather that the honourable member restricted himself to parastatals or organisations fully owned by government. That will be easy and will cover a wider spectrum.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Given the advice of a learned man, I agree that we settle for wholly owned. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. Nandala.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker 
presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the Whole House reconsidered clause 16 upon recommittal and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2005

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005 be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS ACT, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The Bill is passed. Thank you also for the dedication you have exhibited the last two days, please keep it up.  

As I told you, according to the programme I have here we are expecting the casket of the former President within 20 or so minutes. I do not know whether we should proceed with any other business when we have an important matter like this. However, let me say this before the chairman or the minister moves the motion for the parliamentary and presidential elections Bills. 

I have studied these Bills and have noticed that 85 or 90 percent of the various clauses in the two Bills are similar. I have also read the report and I think that we would have saved time if we had decided to amend these Bills instead of creating new ones. Therefore, I am appealing to you honourable members that you read these Bills so that we can minimize the time we spend on the general debate. This way we will be able to concentrate our efforts on only the new clauses in the Bills. It is important that we pass these Bills this month since they are going to affect the elections. This will also enable the Electoral Commission, the voters and ourselves to know the law under which you are going to operate. Please, take time and study these Bills. I know we shall not be able to handle this business tomorrow since there is a special sitting but when we meet on an adjourned date we should be able to expeditiously handle these two Bills. I thank you.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt the proceedings of the House on this matter but I beg your indulgence. We also have a Bill entitled the Police (Amendment) Bill, but I have found a bit of difficulty with it and I guess other Members of Parliament could have faced similar difficulties in reading this Bill. This is because the main Act that is being amended is not very easy to come by. Is it possible for this Act to be made available to us so that we can make cross-reference as we go through the Bill? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think it may not be possible for the Clerk to provide 304 copies for all the members but you can go and crosscheck with the Act in the library. 

We come to the end of the today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. when we shall start with a special sitting. Meanwhile, you are requested to stay around so that we can receive the casket when it comes.  

(The House rose at 3.55 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 October 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


