Monday, 17 September 2005

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you and I hope you had a peaceful weekend. This week, as you might have learnt from copies of the programme for the burial of the former President, the part of Parliament will start on Wednesday evening to Thursday when we shall have a special sitting. 

As you have seen from the Order Paper, it appears the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has concluded considering the Bills, which were sent to it and I want to take this opportunity to thank the chairman and members of the committee for accomplishing that work. Because of that we are going to start immediately with their report. There were four main Bills, which were sent to them dealing with political parties, presidential and parliamentary elections, and local governments; and then there is another Bill with the Defence Committee namely the Police (Amendment) Bill.

You appreciate time is against us because we are making these Bills to enable the holding of the presidential, parliamentary and local government elections sometime in March next year. It is necessary that the Electoral Commission and the people of Uganda know the laws under which the elections will take place. It is also important that we expeditiously deal with these Bills so that they are in place and they can be utilized by the Electoral Commission and interested parties.

Today we are going to start with the Political Parties Bill but this is not new. It just came in to deal with areas that had caused controversy. In dealing with it you should concentrate on those areas that have caused concern to the people. I intend to close the debate on this tomorrow and then on Wednesday I will be starting with another Bill so that by the end of the month, we have completed considering these Bills. Thank you.

2.29
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is just a concern from Kasilo County. For the whole of last week no registration or registration update has taken place because there are no diskettes and the ones, which were submitted there, have got finished. There are no registration forms and the batteries are inadequate. 

I tried to get in touch with the registrar in Soroti and he informed me that the materials they received were very few, they tried to connect to Kampala, but nothing had been delivered. My request to the Attorney-General is that he could help us such that we update our registers by submitting these materials in time to enable us complete this exercise. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Attorney-General has noted that. It is a question of communicating and urging him to take appropriate steps.

2.40
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not only in Kasilo County but I think it is countrywide. In my constituency they have said that they have got one camera for the whole constituency and it does not even have the batteries and the diskettes. If the minister can do us a favour and find out at least he would advise the Electoral Commission to send the cameras there so that the people are registered for voting. 

2.40
MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, when hon. Byabagambi says that the responsible ministers should do us a favour, I think it should not be a favour; it is really a serious responsibility. Even here in Kampala, which is near the Electoral Commission, yesterday people were mobilized, appointments made, the cameraman was to be there, the registrar and the people turned up in big numbers in Bukoto, and there was no battery. “Nga temulimu kanda” in the camera. I think this is a very serious matter and we do not know whether there is a plan to reschedule or to extend the registration period. What arrangements have been made to make this exercise smooth? We need to be told.

THE SPEAKER: This is a serious concern, which you have expressed. Parliament has noted those concerns that the registration of voters in the country is not going on very well and we appeal to the Electoral Commission to ensure that this is done especially when there is – I think we were told that 28th October is the last day for this exercise to be done. We do not want anybody who wants to be registered not registered because of lack of materials from the Electoral Commission.

2.42 
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I have also just come back from Otuke partly to collect my voter’s card, which I have now, but it also helped me to understand the problem that is going on. You see for us who come from areas where voters are displaced, we have a special problem and I have already written to the Electoral Commission on this matter. 

We have 50 percent of the registered voters of Otuke displaced. Within Otuke, that is not a big problem because they will pick up their cards from there, but then you have 50 percent of the voters displaced mainly within Lira Municipality. The ideal situation according to the guidelines or instructions of the Electoral Commission is for people to pick their cards from their respective parish headquarters. It means that a person has to spend money to travel from where he is displaced to pick his card and then he comes back to the camp where he stays. 

For example, if a person is from a place in Otuke called Olilim, to go by any private means, it is Shs 5,000 for a single journey and Shs 10,000 to return to the displaced camp within Lira Municipality. What I have written to the Electoral Commission is that instead of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean the people go to the parish rather than the polling station?

MR ATUBO: Yes, the polling station, the parish or the polling station within the parish.  So, we have asked that special arrangement be made for displaced people. With the 30 days you have, you can spend about two weeks within the constituency and then come and designate the number of days for the displaced people. This was not within the guidelines and administrators in the district would like this clearance to come from the Electoral Commission so that they can open collection centres outside the constituency for displaced people.

The second one is also to register even displaced people because more people who have been displaced also have to be registered outside their constituency. Hopefully in March they will be able to go back and by the time things improve, they may even go back to their homes. 

Another problem we have found and drawn to the attention of the Electoral Commission is that very strangely, people who are displaced have also found their names somehow registered without their consent and a number of them have already drawn their attention to this. For example, Mr Omara who comes from Otuke surprisingly has his card and he picks it from Lira Municipality without having asked for a transfer. All these problems have been drawn to the attention of the Electoral Commission.

Another problem concerns pupils and students who are at school. What are we going to do for them? Are we going to make arrangements for them? I understand schools are closing early in the first week of December. Are we going to make early arrangements in December and also for purposes of voting in March, are we going to ensure that by the time we are voting, schools are on holiday for pupils to vote in their home areas for candidates of their choice? That means rescheduling early enough because pupils are coming early in the first week of December. Are they likely to go early in the first week of January, study for two to three months and be able to go back to vote towards the end of March? I mean these are things, which somebody has got to think of now and plan for. I thank you.

2.45
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of registration is equally disturbing even in areas surrounding Kampala, especially the cameras and the batteries. Someone comes to take photographs, takes about three and then he is saying the batteries have run out. I had an experience of the kind yesterday when I was called upon and there was not much I could do because the man insisted the batteries were out. It is really causing problems because these cameras are scheduled to be in particular villages on particular days. 

At times one goes to a particular village where they are to spend two days and should be able to cover the whole sub-county or parish, but half way in one place, the battery is down. It is creating a lot of resentment when people walk some distances and at the end of the day they do not fulfill their obligation of having their photographs taken. 

The other day I read in the papers the Chairman of the Electoral Commission stating very categorically that there would not be an extension beyond 28th October. What I would like to find out from the minister is whether that means that anything beyond 28th, the Electoral Commission loses time on some of the activities supposed to be done. 

If we are to make the election credible, we should attract as many people as there are that are eligible to vote. Is there a possibility of extension, given the problems that have been faced within the time that has been given? Do you not think that we need to explore that possibility or if that cannot be done, then have this process very efficient? Let us have the cameras really working full length throughout the day and maybe then we shall cover the numbers that we felt need to be covered. 

Mr Speaker, the minister really needs to help us and link up with the Electoral Commission and put forward these concerns. People are really disturbed that the exercise is going the way it is and yet they want it to be much better as we prepare for this transition. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: (Hon. Members rose_) No! Are we still continuing? I think the point has been made and there is need to improve the efficiency of the Electoral Commission. Mr Minister, do you want to say something?

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have noted the concerns of the members. Most of the concerns are not actually new because we had discussed them in the earlier session of registration and I do recall that the Committee on Legal Affairs did interact with the commission on these issues. I undertake to go back to the commission and get clear answers to these concerns and come back to this House and give appropriate responses.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS BILL, 2005

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Political Parties and Organizations Bill, 2005 be read the second time.  

Mr Speaker, as you correctly pointed out in your communication, the contents of the Bill are not entirely new. They seek to improve the Political Parties and Organizations Act, which was enacted in the year 2002, Act No. 18 of 2002. Since the enactment of that law, a number of petitions were filed in the Constitutional Court and the Constitutional Court, I must say, made fundamental improvements in the text of the law. The Bill before this House today takes into account the concerns of the Constitutional Court as handed down in the judgments of court. 

The Bill also comes after the result of the Referendum on Political Systems, which was decided on the 28th of July this year. The outcome of that referendum was to open political space to allow parties to freely function and operate in the new multi-party political dispensation. This Bill among other things seeks to comply with the command of the people in the referendum. Therefore, the restrictions that had been enshrined in the Political Parties and Organization’s Act of 2002 have had to be repealed from this Bill.  

The Bill also takes into account the changes that have been introduced by the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Act of this year, which was passed by this august House; and in that Constitution (Amendment) Act there are two major changes, which have been introduced, namely the introduction of the Consultative Forum for Political Parties and the Code of Conduct for Political Parties.  

This Bill among other things seeks to operationalise the code of conduct and the forum for political parties. The Bill also shifts the centre of registration of political parties, which has been hitherto the Registrar-General’s Office, to the Electoral Commission. The reasons for this shift are that the Registrar-General has been reformed and is now called the Registration Services Bureau. The bureau will mainly focus on registration of business entities. It was found prudent by the Government to remove political functions from the Registrar-General’s Office and place them in the hands of the Electoral Commission, which we believe has the capacity not only to register but also implement and help the political parties to observe the code of conduct for political parties.

The Bill is consistent with the rulings of the Constitutional Court and more particularly the fact that registration for political parties is now a mandatory requirement. That provision has remained unchanged in the Bill. 

Additionally, the Bill maintains the principles upon which parties must be built as stated in Article 71 of the Constitution, namely, “That parties must ensure internal democracy within their structures.”

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which has in record time focused on this Bill and others and has been able to provide a report to this august House. I, therefore, commit this Bill to the consideration of this august House, to discuss the report of the committee and pass the motion for the second reading. I beg to move.

2.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I present to you the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005. The Bill was committed to the committee, the committee examined the Bill under our Rules of Procedure and we now report thus.

Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is as contained in the memorandum to the Bill that has just been outlined by the honourable minister. I would not want to repeat that.  

Methodology: 

The committee conducted public hearings and received written memorandum in a manner considered expedient or necessary to enable it report to the House in time from the following institutions and individuals. Mr Speaker, I have a list of 27 citizens and organizations that made their presentations before the committee, whose views now are contained in the observations of the committee and also in the recommendations and proposals for amendment that we will make later.

Observations:

The committee observed that the spirit of the Bill is a fundamental departure from the spirit and the debate that dominated the enactment of the Political Parties and Organisations Act of 2002. The Bill comes at a time when the country has just voted to change from the Movement Political System to the Multi-party Political System in a move that saw the leader of the Movement campaigning for change of systeMs  

The Bill is a major follow-up in the implementation of the amendments made to the Constitution, which saw inter alia the permanent repeal of Article 269 of the Constitution, an Article that had over the years been a major source of political discourse and protracted court actions. 

The Bill does not seek to reintroduce sections 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act 2002, which were nullified by the court, further reinforcing the commitment to the change of political systeMs

The Bill proposes to shift the functions of registration of political parties from the office of the Registrar-General to the Electoral Commission. Through the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act, the office of the Registrar-General was transformed into the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, a semi-autonomous organization dealing mainly with businesses. The bureau started operating in July 2005.  

The Bill proposes to fund political parties only in respect of elections and proposes formula for subsequent funding for the first elections following the change of political system to the Multi-party System.

It also proposes a formula for subsequent elections. The Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005 proposes to repeal the Act of 2002 to answer requirements of the new multiparty political dispensation.

Mr Speaker, there were very strong submissions against the requirement for public officers to resign before seeking nomination for elective offices; actually the criticisms almost boarded on resentment. 

Despite the political realities of possible mergers and coalitions between and among political parties, the Bill does not provide for regulations to handle such phenomena. We heard the honourable minister trying it out in the press one day so we thought we should put this in a law to clarify the situation.

The Bill introduces the National Consultative Forum for Political Parties but does not set out its functions. The committee observes that the constitutional amendment clearly gave Parliament the powers to make laws creating the functions of this organ. The Bill now seeks to delegate the same power to the minister.

The proposed code of conduct for political parties is for operationalising the operations of the political parties. The Bill proposes a consultation scheme that excludes the political parties in its formulation. The political parties are not supposed to be part of the group to be consulted in formulating the code of conduct for political parties and that is the concern of the committee; that they should have been included.

The Bill proposes conditions, which could lead a political party to cease to exist. The committee observes that there should never be a situation where a political party ceases to exist by the operation of the law without evoking court processes leading to such deregistration. 

The Bill seeks to regulate the amount and method of accountability by political parties for monies received from foreign sources. It was observed that the ceiling set by the Bill does not seem to reflect government commitment to allowing parties to grow.  

Women lobby groups and other human rights organisations called for a 40 percent women representation in political parties. Several studies and many world regional conventions and treaties were cited to bolster the case for increased representation for the women. 

There were concerns raised on the question of who can be a founder or bearer or ordinary member of a political party. The committee observed that there are two aspects to this. First is the issue of the soldiers and members of the other armed forces, and the public officers. Then, whether membership to political parties should extend to persons under the age of 18 years.  

There are ambiguities around the content and implication of the use of the concept national character of political parties. A registration requirement must give a true reflection of national character.

Following the adoption of the dual citizenship in the Constitution amendment and in the absence of a legal regime to handle and regulate the participation of persons with dual citizenship, a situation is created where a person of dual citizenship could easily attain the highest office of the Presidency, which may be detrimental to the national interest of the country.

The committee has made several recommendations, proposals and amendments to the Bill to effect the above observations, as follows:

The committee recommends that the Bill has come in good time and carries a new spirit of political development and deserves the approval of the House immediately.  

The concept of national character for political parties should be clearly provided for expanding what is proposed in clause 5(4) of the Bill. 

In formulating and prescribing the code of conduct for political parties, the minister must consult the political parties. However, the proposed code should only provide for general guidelines and not attempt to regulate the internal affairs of the parties.  

As an operating commitment, the political parties should respect, defend and uphold fundamental principles of internal democracy. 

Functions of the National Consultative Forum for Political Parties should be contained in the law and not to be left to the minister.  

Issues of women representation should be left to the internal processes and arrangements of political parties. However, the committee urges the political parties to observe this as a major operating principle.

Owing to the changes in the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, registration, regulation and monitoring of activities of political parties will better be done by the Electoral Commission as proposed in the Bill. The committee urges government to ensure that there are sufficient and timely funds for the Electoral Commission to carry out adequate civic education.

The law should not bar public officers from becoming ordinary members of political parties except for involvement in activities mentioned in clause 16(1) and (a) and (b).  

A law should be made for the merger and alliance of political parties and to this effect, the committee has proposed amendments to insert new provisions relating to one merger of political parties and coalition of political parties.  

A law to regulate the participation of Ugandans holding dual citizenship should be enacted urgently. 

The committee urges the House to adopt recommendations of the committee and to pass the proposed amendments to the Bill which will cater for the concerns raised in the observations.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. May I now open the debate if there is any? But if there is no debate, I am glad that you all appeared. Those who had the amendments took them to the committee and, therefore, it will be easy for us to handle.

MR MIKE SEBALU: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would definitely like to associate myself with this very good report and thank the chairman and the committee for a job very well done. 

I am just rising on the issue of government to ensure that there are sufficient and timely funds for the Electoral Commission to carry out adequate civic education and just to emphasize the importance of this issue. As we go out there, the exercises that we have been involved in have shown that our people need to be seriously helped in this matter for them to be able to make informed decisions. 

The issue of the system that we have been operating, which has been around for some time, has really gone into them and we really need to get them to appreciate the different activities that are going to be undertaken and how they will be done more so on issues of even voter education and of how the different people can be helped.

This money must be availed as a matter of urgency if the process is to go on smoothly as we expect it to do so that we avoid getting many spoiled votes in the process. I just wanted to support this point among the rest that they have raised, but I have physically come into contact with people who do not seem to know what is going on and indeed they need to be helped out through civic education. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.08
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice and thank the committee for the work well done. My concern is about women representation in the various parties. The committee recommends that issues of women representation should be left to the internal processes and arrangements of political parties but here we have our national Constitution, which has clearly come out to uplift the morale of women in this country politically. If we are to make this continuous and firm enough, I think we should make this law such that the political parties act to affirm what is already in the Constitution by at least putting the numbers as required. 

I mean if it is 40 percent, let it be 40 percent other than leaving it to other parties to decide on their own. We are just coming out to be politically alert as women and if you just leave it in the air, then you will be contravening the Constitution. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think there are merits in what you are saying but do you think the strengths of all parties in Uganda are the same? Suppose you have a party, which has secured registration as a party, but has 200 members or 500 members and those who have registered include only 50 women? How will you enforce the provision, which you have made since there is a difference with the national Constitution and the party? Remember the parties are not the same. I know parties, which have 400 members and others, which have borrowed people to be able to be registered. Yes, it is a fact.

3.11
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for their brief, precise and good report. I would like to make just a few comments.  

One is the issue of organisation and parties. I have been going around my constituency, who of you knows the difference between political organisation and political party? I think this is the time for the minister to explain to all the citizens of Uganda to know the difference between organisations and parties.

Secondly, the issue of representation of women, I think as mentioned earlier by my colleague, it is important to mention the percentage of representation of women. In the report they are saying, “representation in the parties,” that is vague because the issue of entering a party depends on the individual. I would recommend that the percentage goes to the structures of the parties. 

For example, the Executive, their conferences and so forth, we need to have 40 percent representation of women in all party and organisation structures so that it really reflects our affirmative action, which is in the Constitution and it becomes very practical. If we leave it in the hands of other parties, some parties may not be gender sensitive. They may not consider the importance of women.  Therefore, I beg that the 40 percent should be included here in the structures of the parties and other organisations. Thank you.

3.12
MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. I want to thank those who presented the report. I would like to echo the words of hon. Baba Diri, for the women in political parties. We want to stress the leadership in the political parties and to remind ourselves of the constitutional provision of at least one-third of every decision making body being made up of women. We just want to call upon the political parties to observe that provision.  

Other than that, I would also like to touch point No. 5. What do we do with the LC system? How would the leaders be elected?  

Then on recommendation No. 6, the observance of the affirmative action is very vital because we have been in the Movement System of governance, the Movement System will definitely observe the affirmative action and one-third of every decision making body will be women, but what about other political parties? We would like to urge them to think about women. Now that women are politically enlightened we should just not leave the recommendation hanging. I thank you.

3.14
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representatives): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The cause for the emancipation of women is a rational and reasonable cause and my prayer is that it should remain as such. I think the Speaker has told us that there is a possibility that a political party may not have 30 percent of its membership as women, or a number enough to even put 30 percent of women in the structures. This is a possibility and what the Speaker is telling us is that we should not make a law that will make certain parties continuously break the law. I think what the committee is proposing is appropriate and we should just leave this matter and go to the Committee Stage.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I should say this. When the Constitution was made in 1995, women participation was prescribed, giving a minimum of at least a-third. In other words if you read it carefully it only prescribes the minimum that can be provided for. 

Leaving this thing to the various political parties is to provide a challenge for the political parties to address the issue depending on their political obligation to emancipation of the women and would provide a challenge, therefore, for political parties to recognise women as a force by increasing, in their own manifestoes and in their political internal workings, the number of women that they think they should have to stand in for their affirmative action.  

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much my honourable colleague for giving way. Can you, please, inform me of the provision in this Constitution that talks of 30 percent?

MR ERESU: What I am saying - I think what the honourable member might have not picked very well is that in the 1995 Constitution the affirmative action gave a certain number for women representation, which was a-third, and now we are moving to a new political dispensation, which gives, if we take the committee report, it gives a challenge to political parties in their own internal workings to have a number that they think is fit for them. In that way -(Interruptions)

MR MASIKO: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way. We are all aware that women are found everywhere in this country and we form more than 51 percent of the population. In this Bill soon to be an Act, we are telling all the parties to have a national character by law. You have not left it as a challenge; the Constitution enjoins all of us, including parties, to be gender sensitive. Why then are you applying double standards? You leave the issues of women to their respective parties, when it comes to the participation nationally you are making it law, mandatory? 

I tell you we are saying this out of experience, we have just been forming our party structures. Our party is gender sensitive and is supposed to be gender sensitive, the NRM Organization. There is a provision to have a committee, we call it “Mainstream of Five People”. The silent policy or challenge, as my honourable member is putting it, is at least two of the five should be women. If you go down to do your research now to the respective villages and parishes, the women are not there. You would find the men have taken up all the positions; the women would compete but fail. But the clarification is, why are we leaving this out?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you are debating this issue, you have to consider the right of freedom of association. What would happen suppose a new party is trying to recruit people and it goes in villages and women say, “For us we are not joining that party, we belong to this party”, what will happen? Because the problem is that we should not make a law where we shall be saying we are invading the freedom of association; I have gone to recruit people, the women have refused to join this party but I have got the required number; you mean that party will be outlawed?

MRS MASIKO: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking, in this law we are saying parties must have a national character by recruiting so many from different districts; if they do not achieve that, they will never be registered. Why can’t we say even for women because we know the women are everywhere? If they do not achieve the 40 percent then they have failed the litmus test; why are we applying double standards when it comes to women affairs?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I once said on the Floor of this House that if you make a law that is ahead of society, it would fail. What I think one would want to consider is the following: that if a party worth its name ignores women, it will not win. So, I think we are bothering about a party, which will not be significant, because the examples the Speaker is giving where a party goes to the village and it cannot recruit a woman, its chances of winning an election in a country are zero. Because of that kind of possibility to have a law that says, “You must have women”, may actually be against women because you may have to force them or a party may have to persuade and buy membership of women for them to be on their organ; and I think this is not correct. 

The affirmative action –(Interjection)- let me finish – the best argument about affirmative action is to enable society to move and be able to see rationally what should happen in sharing power between men and women. The moment you force society beyond the provision that has been given in the Constitution, you may actually be doing yourself a disservice.  

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I wanted to conclude like this. I wanted to conclude that by leaving it as the committee proposes it is actually to provide a challenge for the various political parties to ensure that the affirmative action becomes one of the most important cornerstones for their political success as a party. But by prescribing it in the law is actually to create a situation where some political parties will be dysfunctional and will be breaking the law, which I think is not the right way to make the law. I thank you.

3.23
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the committee for having handled this matter in record time. I have a few issues to raise on the recommendations of the committee. 

First, on the issue of the code of conduct for political parties, the introduction of this code of conduct in this Bill sparks off the hangover of hate, which we had for political parties. I do not think it is proper for any law to make provisions for conduct of political parties and give that power to a minister; I do not think it is proper. The time has come, Mr Speaker, where political parties are struggling for votes and struggling for votes not from their own members but from members who are not cardholders. 

Now it is very difficult for me who is not a card member to vote for party A when I know that it is not conducting itself properly. I do not think a political party needs a “sword of Damascus” to hang over it in order for it to handle its internal matters properly. Least of all, I do not think that a Minister in Government, which Minister in Government could be an opponent of the other political party, should handle power.

No. 2, Sir, the issue of registration of political parties through the Electoral Commission; I have a problem with this. I think the role of the Electoral Commission should not be mixed with registration and oversight powers for political organizations. I think we should restrict ourselves from giving the powers to oversee elections to the Electoral Commission and establish a completely different commission to deal with registration and supervisory powers over political parties.  

I think we will be running into a problem, a danger of getting the Electoral Commission misunderstood, even being accused of bias in respect of its functioning with certain political parties. We should get away from giving them this headache and form a completely different commission. For example, in Kenya there is a registrar for political parties and political organizations whose role is only to deal with the functioning of political parties. The Electoral Commission has its own functions, and these functions should not be mixed.  

Then the issue of public officers; first of all I think it is important that this law comes out clearly on who is and who is not a public officer. Secondly, Sir, I think it is important for us to know the genesis of having public officers or civil servants not being politically active. 

During the colonial days civil servants were not allowed to be cardholders of any political party. This was important because civil servants deal with all manner of people; everybody in society seeks to be assisted by a civil servant. You run a danger of a civil servant who is an active member or a cardholder of a political party being biased in his approach to certain individuals who may be members of political parties, who are not members of his own political party.  

I think this is the genesis of what is being provided for. I do not think it is right. I do not see anything wrong at all about a civil servant voting; that is no problem. But once you become a cardholder of a political party then inside you, you are already biased. Whatever you do, you are bound to take sides; and it is not right, Mr Speaker, for anybody to allow a civil servant – because we are now dealing with partisan politics, with the Movement sort of politics there is no problem because a civil servant was not being forced to take sides on which policies are better than others -(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Thank you. I want to seek clarification from the honourable member. How can a membership card, in what way can it motivate a civil servant more vigorously against an opponent more than the convection that a civil servant is for a particular party? There is a belief or a feeling that this is the right party I belong to without holding the card, and yet I can defend that part more vigorously even than a cardholder.

MR WACHA: You see the whole idea of a civil servant not participating in politics is even going to the extent of what hon. Onek is saying. Once the law says one should not be partisan, one should not participate in active politics, one should not also be heard to be defending any of the political parties. You should never be heard to be defending because once you start defending then you are taking sides and it is dangerous, the issue of a civil servant being impartial then he is mad by his political beliefs. 

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, hon. Ben Wacha. I do support his view because we already passed here a provision regarding civil servants to resign before they go partisan. The idea of having a card or being a cardholder is an identification, which in itself makes you partisan. Although you may not talk about it, but once one gets to know you hold this particular card, you are already identifying and you are already a member. So, they can vote within their conscious depending on the programmes and the manifestos of parties without clearly being identified with a card.

MR ETONU: I thank you, hon. Wacha, for allowing me to give this information. In fact what the law is trying to do is to protect the civil servant. If you are a civil servant and you actively participated in de-campaigning a particular party and that party happens to win there is always a tendency of those who participated against the winning of the party to lose their seats or to be sacked. So the law should actually protect them.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, hon. Wacha for giving way. I depart a little from hon. Wacha and I would like you to advise me how your position will be reconciled with Article 291(e). I take it that the Constitution gives a blanket right for everyone to join associations, including political parties.  For me if a civil servant is a member of a political party and he does not take up active leadership in a political part, I really do not see any problem.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honorable member, I think the point is this. I am not participating but when you are a civil servant and they get to know that you have a card of a political party, which may not be in government, in carrying out your work by human error you make a wrong judgment, which causes problems with a policy of government, which is in power. They will not say it is an error, they will say you are a saboteur. This is what he is saying that it protects you. You are likely to make a mistake, an error of judgment and then they will always follow you saying, “Is he of our party? No, he is not. Therefore, I think he did this because he is not of our party.” That is the point.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, it is a known fact that you are a Catholic, there is no dispute about that, but I have never seen you act unfairly to those who do not subscribe to your religion. So for me –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is because I am Ssekandi.

MR WANDERA: So, I do not see any difference between religious affiliation and political affiliation. 

MR ERESU: Religious affiliation is different in a sense that it deals with the spirit and something, which you do not see. Therefore, you are accountable when you have problems with someone you do not see now until you die. Whereas political parties deal with all human beings that you see and you will be accountable to them directly as you see them. That is the difference.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I would not have put it better than you –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think you can move to another point.

MR WACHA: I will move to another point, but I think it would be unfair if I did not answer hon. Wandera. Hon. Wandera, if you looked at Article 49 of the Constitution, you will notice that the powers to make laws for the enforcement of the rights under this chapter is given to this Parliament and that is what we are trying to do.  

That particular provision is not absolute, Article 29 is not absolute. So, we can make laws and this is what we are trying to do. I think it is understood. The problem - and let me make this blanket statement - the problem is that we are dealing with a big group of people who never saw political parties operate so they do not really know the inherit dangers of these political parties.  

Now let me touch on something, which might cause me problems, the issue of women representation in the various executives of various political parties. This is the way I look at it. It would be wrong for us to prescribe the number or the percentage of women, which should be in these executives. My understanding is that you are talking about executive positions in the political parties because we cannot make a law about them entering political parties. I think we are talking about the structures, the organs of this various political parties. It would be wrong, why do I say so? Let me put it this way: 

As Mr Speaker rightly pointed out, supposing Action Party of Ocheger decided to form its executive committee and then it does not find any woman to put in –(Interjection)- please, madam, let me finish and these are practical probleMs Supposing Ocheger does not get a woman to come in his executive committee, he has already registered the party; what do you do with it? Remember that registration of these parties take place before the holding of internal elections. Mr Ocheger has already registered his party, Action Party and six months later the law says that he must now go and create his organ and in creating the organ, he does not find the 40 percent to take leadership positions in this party; what should happen in such a situation?

In my view, all political parties want votes; every single political party wants a vote; one vote or another; the more votes the better. If a political party is stupid enough to ignore women participation, then it will not be elected. It will never be elected. I look at it this way: the way the Bill has put it could not have been any better. That when making their organs, they must be gender sensitive and if they are not gender sensitive, they will not be elected. I have been in these political parties and I know how they operate –(interruption) Yes. You can shout and shout, but it is not practical. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.37
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee. I am only going to dwell on women representation in political organizations. The last statement made by hon. Wacha does not surprise me. His party, UPC, marginalized women so much and we cannot take that risk anymore. (Applause). 

This affirmative action is an on-going process. It started in 1995 and we shall not stop until we have the balance of 50-50. So far we have only acquired one-third in the Local Government Act. Now we are saying that in all representation, we should move forward from one-third to 40 percent at least so that by the time we reach 50, then we shall know that the balance has been achieved. So I urge –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I would like hon. Kulany to clarify this. When she opened on the Floor she said that she couldn’t take any risk anymore, because hon. Wacha’s party UPC marginalized women. Is she trying to tell us that she is about to join UPC and threatening us not to join so that we can create ground for her to become the executive?

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, for giving way.  It is common knowledge that the women are 51 percent. That means that if we are voting, women will beat the men. Why don’t the women compete favourably and take these posts instead of wanting to be given force in the law? (Laugher)

MRS KULANY: Mr Speaker, the liberation of the women is ongoing until we achieve that and I want to inform members that the women have their manifesto, which cuts across all parties. So, regardless of what party we are talking about, we want 40 percent representation at least in every party organization.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, we appreciate the observations being made to –(Interruption)- can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: Very much so.

MR RUHINDI: We have Article 78 of our Constitution: composition of Parliament -(Interruption)- let me first finish my observation, please. Article 78, clause (2), which says “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under paragraphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this Article for the purposes of retaining, increasing, or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it.” 

Mr Speaker, sometime back the NPC came to this House and presented a paper on women representation in Uganda and I remember I asked him a question that, “Is your paper based on an impact assessment to see how the current trend has either given affirmative action for purposes of either abolishing it or increasing it or otherwise?” He said no, and he said that should be done. 

In view of the fact that we have not carried out any scientific impact assessment on this affirmative action, I think it would be premature now to begin talking about increasing and even actually going into matters of political parties, which should be regulatory and only be accorded an opportunity in terms of how competitive they are. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall come to the Committee Stage and deal with this specific issue of including it in the law but at the same time we should also take into account that a party can challenge it if it is breaking the law. All these have to be addressed when we are dealing with this issue. It is not a matter of convenience. Suppose a party says, “Well, we have this and we do not have any women?” what are you going to say? There is freedom of association. The policy of affirmative action is very good but in such a situation what do you do?

3.45
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, can I be protected from the ladies representative? I want to begin my contribution by seeking clarification from the committee on a matter related to the sponsorship of political parties. I do not believe that sponsorship of political parties should be restricted to only the electoral period, because we must address the issue of institution building.  

For quite a long time the taxpayer has been paying money to the Movement Secretariat on matters related to strengthening the institution called the Movement. In my view, there must be a provision, which should enable the political parties to be funded in one way or the other so that we can strengthen their bases. In case anyone of them comes to power it would have already acquired the trend capable of scientifically enabling it to run government matters. So, we should not be one-sided. 

There is need to build institutions, build the equivalence of the Conservative Party so that when we come to power we have mushroomed out sufficient capacities to be able to provide a qualitative government. I, therefore, beg to propose that there is a gap and I intend to move an amendment to ensure that the gap is bridged.  

On second thought, Mr Speaker, I am not happy at all with the definition, which was given by the Bill. Possibly the Attorney-General – the definition of a political party is internationally well articulated and the equivalent of the definition in the law belittles the science of the political party perception. In my view a political party is an organization whose principle objective is to contest or form government in specific terMs My definition is realistic because it is in consonance with international scholars like John Rock, Aristotle, Ali Mazrui and many others.

THE SPEAKER: But did you submit your amendment to the committee?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I did.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall consider it. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Therefore, I beg to move that reconsideration be given of the definition. I have submitted it because the one in the Bill is lacking and can be contested by many people if we make it law.

Now we are now in a new dispensation. The political parties have been brought on board and I can see another gap. Political parties are not spectators anymore today in Uganda’s political period. I propose that there should be a way through which political parties should have a say in the Constitution of the Electoral Commission so that we are brought on board, so that we are no longer spectators but participants in the affairs of the Electoral Commission.  

According to Uganda’s history, you know very well that the history of Uganda’s turbulence has a lot to do with bad elections, vote rigging - we are suffering today because of vote rigging. What have we done to ensure that in the new dispensations, the political parties, who are the main noisemakers, are also represented in the Constitution of the Electoral Commission? I propose that there should be a provision to bring us on board now that we are in a new dispensation.

There is also another gap and I smell a rat: if we do not correct this mistake, this Bill may not stand. If a political party is a corporate body with perpetual succession and has powers to sue or be sued, I see no reason why the political parties should be subjected to too much scrutiny as is seen under section 9(3), section 14(3)(a), and section 12(1)(a). 

A political party did not have uniform budgetary making processes with other political parties. I could be extra privileged through my advocacy that when I teach about the republic or give a speech I make money circumstantially. It should not be seen to be a crime for me to make money through advocacy of a public arrangement. Therefore, this scrutiny that you must show how much money you have got, how much you have raised, et cetera, since there is a law and I am a body to corporate, if I have committed an offence, take me to court but do not scrutinize me as if I do not have those corporate rights underlying the corporate law.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion of my remarks I would like to propose that the political parties should remain where they have been, that is, under the office of the Registrar-General. There is no reason why we get subjected to the scrutiny under the Electoral Commission, which Electoral Commission has no base of existence. It is always changing; people are being fired from time to time. Why do we not get our base in the office of the Registrar-General?

THE SPEAKER: They are talking about the Electoral Commission, not individuals; they are talking about the institution.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yeah, but I do not want to debate with you; I am not supposed to do that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am just assisting you; I am advising you that the use of the Electoral Commission was not to talk about Eng. Kiggundu and so on; it is an institution, which is permanent under the Constitution.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, much obliged, Mr Speaker. Much as it is supposed to be permanent, historically it has been so shaky that you have no case point to present as evidence that there is stability underlying it. Therefore, I wish to propose with a lot of humility that let the political party affairs return to the office where they have been conducted in the past. Thank you very much.

4.49
DR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I would like to take it from where my honourable colleague has just left concerning the Electoral Commission. When we give names, it is because there is a culture behind it; it is not just because we want to refer to the organ but because there is a culture behind, of the fact of being electoral and I think by giving the job of registration to an electoral commission it is not putting the facts in a clear way. 

The best thing to do is to find a body, an institution, which should be responsible for the registration of parties, not the Electoral Commission. Then it is not an Electoral Commission, it is a registration office and I think the Government needs to come with something better and clearer, which even the political parties, will accept. The way the Electoral Commission is now is very partitioned and we do not know if there is a law, which is going to be brought in place to make sure that it is quite comprehensive and able to take on the different partition issues, which the next political agenda will bring.

My second issue is that we are going into multi-party politics and the issue is that the parties are going to be partitioned. They are going to be many and partitioned. Therefore, each party is going to come with its agenda. How does it look at the policy of youth-employment and gender? It is an issue, which each party will have to deal with. If you begin prescribing to the parties what their policies are supposed to be, then what do we have for parties, what agenda are they going to bring to us? How shall we make a choice when you have given prescriptions in the form of law? “You must have this otherwise you are not a party!”

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to seek clarification from the member holding the Floor on this issue. We have the East African Legislative Assembly, which clearly spells out the number of women who should go to the East African Legislative Assembly. Here, we have the Local Government Act, which clearly stipulates the percentage of women on the Executive. The committee is talking about national character and it is talking about the number of districts. If you we are going to expand this national character, what would be wrong with including a percentage of women, since women compose half of all Ugandans? Is it too much to ask for this, even when you consider that the African Union has already prescribed that we should only send there a delegation of which 50 percent is women? 

I am very perturbed by this kind of reasoning and thinking at a time like this because the point is that left on its own, it will not happen. And if a party is composed of only men, then that party is not worthy of being registered. So really I do not understand why at this point in time, after we have been so sensitive to representation of women, we are now turning around and even asking about implications and what we have attained very well knowing that from time immemorial, women have been oppressed. Do you think that in five years’ time, in ten years’ time, this oppression will have gone away? I am perturbed and I would like you to address this issue.

DR ALEX OKOT: Thank you very much for seeking that clarification. Concerning the East African Legislative Assembly, there are no political parties there and I think if there were political parties, the system they would have used would have been very different. We are thinking of a merit system. We are not going into an individual merit system; we are going into a political party merit system. It is the party to merit; it is not the individual. Where it is the individual, then we can think of affirmative action, which is taken care of prior to the elections but now it is the party and, therefore, each party will have to present a policy -(Interjection)– let me finish this and then you give me information. It is the party to present a policy on gender.  

The issue is not having that UPC consists of 20 percent of the country, or DP 20 percent of the country. Therefore, we should distribute the women so that there are equally 40 percent in all the parties. We cannot do that. A party may even get 70 percent women because it has attractive gender policies and this is what we want. That party must be able to come with an agenda and defeat all the other parties. 

If you think the present issue should really stress gender, come with it. If you think the present situation should stress the youth, come with it. The women are there, the men are there, and the youth are there. They will decide and say, “I think our interest is being more represented in this party and, therefore, we are going to join this party. We are going to speak loud on behalf of this party -(Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much for giving way. For me I would like us to borrow the issue of women representation from Scandinavian countries. In Scandinavian countries, it is almost a policy of the Government, once a government comes into power, 40 percent must be women. In Europe today even if you wanted to call for a meeting, you must have 40 percent women. Therefore, the representation of women is not a matter of happiness. It is a matter of trying to bring the women at per with men. After that we shall not need it. I want us to see that all political parties must have, as a rule, a certain percentage in them. If they fail, it is unfortunate for them. Thank you.

DR OKOT: Thank you for the information. If that is what you believe then you will have to come with a part of the rule, which tells us how we are going to distribute the women in the different parties but I think you will just be confusing the idea of what a political party should be. Now –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, have we not dealt with this subject long enough? Because we will be going into the Committee Stage, has this subject not been exhausted so that we move on to other issues?

DR OKOT: Mr Speaker, the second issue is also related to that, this fact of a National Consultative Forum for Political Parties. I do not quite understand how it is supposed to operate. From my little experience I have had in Europe of political parties, parties have certain tendencies to collaborate with certain other parties. If you create a National Consultative Forum and maybe you want UPC to sit there with CP and they have no interest whatsoever to agree on a policy, on a certain agenda, then you are blocking the freedom of the different parties to associate with other parties, which they think and feel they have intension to collaborate with.  

I do not see any reason why we should institute in our law a forum for political parties. The parties know that if they are more than three or four, there is no way each party is going to rule at the same time. They will need the collaboration –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is to regulate their mode of conduct among themselves. It is not for their policies but how do you behave as a political party against the other? That is all, to regulate the mode of operation.

DR OKOT: If that is the case, I think it should not be a national consultative forum; it should just be put as a general condition where they may collaborate. But I have seen Ben Wacha saying that even the code of conduct should not be allowed. I cannot understand this national consultative forum for any reason. I do not see any good reason for it. I know that parties will always work and each party wants to take power; so you cannot behave badly in order to take power. 

You cannot fight against the youth in order to come to power, you cannot come with bad policies in order to take power; you cannot conduct yourself in a bad way in order to take power. So what you are trying to prescribe shows that we still have a lot of fear of political parties and if we go to a multi-party system with a lot of fears then we have everything to lose because we have no good expectation of a multi-party system arrangement. Let us go with a lot of comfort and interest –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I just want to take you back. A few weeks or months ago there was a report here where people were recruiting people using cards. They went to the camps in the North and said, “If you do not get a card, you will not get food.” This is the kind of thing, which can be regulated by the forum to tell people not to behave that way. Without following their policies, they should not go into camps and say that, “If you do not get this card, you will not get the food.” That is not the way to do it; it is the forum to deal with that kind of behaviour.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much for giving way.  Along the position that Dr Alex Okot has taken, I would like to inform him and the House that in other countries like Ghana, there is self-regulation in terms of code of conduct of political parties. 

With me is a copy of the political parties’ code of conduct 2004. It was made by the parties themselves and when I appeared before the committee I raised the same point that if the code of conduct is to be owned by the parties, then we should give them the authority to meet under the forum created under the Constitution (Amendment) Act to decide on how they should behave. But for us to sit here and try to regulate how parties should behave will not go down well with the right of freedom of association and organizing. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR OKOT: Thank you very much. Well, I think the idea you are bringing is not bad. I do not know what kind of forum they use for making those regulations but that is why I said that it should be more of an open forum because if we create this in the law then we are going to put guidelines on how it functions, who the membership should be, and all this kind of thing -(Interruption)

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member, for giving way. In the last Constitution amendment, in what should now be section 15, we passed a provision stating that Parliament shall by law prescribe a code of conduct for political parties, political organizations and provide for the establishment of a National Consultative Forum for political parties and organizations with such functions as Parliament may prescribe in the resolution of disputes among political parties and political organizations. This is precisely the premise upon which these provisions were made. So, unless you want to review this constitutional amendment at this stage, then it would not be so much of help.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, the same Constitution gives this Parliament power to delegate some of this legislative authority and that is why some of us are proposing that we delegate these powers to the forum that was created by this Parliament in the Constitutional Amendment Bill to come up with their own code of conduct.

THE SPEAKER: There is no problem with that.

DR OKOT: Exactly, that is what I wanted to say, what he just mentioned. The parties should organise themselves but there are so many things in the Constitution, like the third term, which I did not even approve. So, such a kind of arrangement - that is why even the Constitution does not stop after the amendment. There is continuous discussion to make sure that we always improve on our Constitution. It is not that I am saying that I am not going to uphold the amended Constitution; I am saying that let us continue discussing to make sure that the Constitution is adequately representing the interests of Ugandans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.07
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Still, I do not know the definition of a civil servant and a public servant very well, because I have been hearing people talking of them. I do not know – do they mean that it is only civil servants in the traditional civil service who will not be allowed to hold party cards, but other public officers like in the Government of Uganda parastatals will be allowed to have party cards? 

If “civil servants” includes also those public servants, then it should go ahead to include even political public servants, because it is not good for a minister to own a government property, use it before he resigns three months in advance as the law was made, and that same man is competing with a person who resigned his office and is using no government resources. 

Having said that, I should confess that I am so worried about women but many parties have got what we call the women’s league. If women cannot go through the party structure, we have what we call the women’s and youth’s leagues. These people can benefit from there. Women’s leagues are structures for you where you can progress very effectively because 100 percent of the members are women, there are no men and you should not get worried that anybody will vie for that door.  

Under clause 18, I am not sure if it is the correct clause. I am so worried about the issue of the multi-party system, where it says that the political party might sponsor somebody or somebody will stand as an independent person. I wanted it to become clearer. 

If somebody is going to stand as an independent candidate, when does he stand to be an independent candidate? Because I should not stand in a party then having lost, I say that I want to stand as an independent candidate. It should be clear. If I have stood under NRM/O and lost, that is the end of me and it should become clearer here in this law. If I am an independent I should declare my independence now so that I do not go and participate in any preliminaries because if we do this, we are not creating -(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: I would like to find out from you whether you have forgotten that in Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Act we provided for independent candidates?

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much. I am not disputing the issue of an independent candidate but the methodology of somebody participating as an independent candidate, because if we are talking of party politics, it should be party politics. Nobody should say, “I have lost here so let me run and stand this way”, because that would be distorting party politics. Then it will no longer be the multi-party system, which I am aware of.

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, honourable member, would you like to read Article 29(e) on the freedom of association, which includes freedom to form and join associations or unions, including trade unions and political and other civic organizations? If you join a political party today, is there any prohibition for you to leave it tomorrow? Therefore, I am just trying to assist you to see this point. If a man stood for a political party and then, having been disappointed, he decides to leave the political party and enjoys his right here - that should be the argument.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I can see your argument. The law says that you are free to associate but if I have associated for a period of one month that I should do this then within one month, before it has expired, I go in another contract, I disappear from my first party and say that I want to associate like this; why? That means that these are people who go there to serve their personal interests not the interests of the party, because if I have gone there to serve the interests of the party, if even I lose, I should go back and serve the party in other capacities other than in an electoral post. That is very important.  

Mr Speaker, we should not make laws for purposes of wanting to cross the bridge today. We should make laws, which will live beyond tomorrow. So, what I am trying to put a cross here is that it should come out clearly that either you stand as an independent candidate from day one or if you belong to a party and then you lose an election in primaries, you have no where else to go.

Another point I want to put across is the issue of code of conduct, I am getting worried. Supposing the Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is the one to prescribe the code of conduct, and he is in the ruling party, he would say that, “In order to throw out that party, I should prescribe the code of conduct, which is so tough so that the party is out.”  

I think the issue of allowing the minister to be the one in consultation with the Electoral Commission is out. If we have formed the National Consultative Forum, as we have put it in the Constitution, I think it should be the one to have the powers to deal with these matters, and not the minister. The minister as an individual, in a quest to save his bread, can do anything.

Finally, on the issue of penalties for malpractices of political parties, I have not seen it clearly here in this Political Parties and Organisations Bill, how they are going to operate. How does a party, which errs first of all in recruitment - I will give an example.

I have recruited people below 18 years of age, which is not allowed by law - the penalties, which I will pay, because talking of these penalties I am seeing here, 75 currency points, this is very little money. We should put in place real punitive sanctions in this law to deal with parties, which make offences, irrespective of whether it is whoever. That is the only way parties will mature.

And somebody will say, “If I do that against the contract of the law, I will be held responsible.” But if we leave it like this, there are rich parties; they can do anything knowing that they can pay the fine. Mr Speaker, I will beg the Minister of Justice to once again look at the penalties and come up the best. We should really create a multi-party system, not something near it, but a real multi-party system. Thank you.

4.14							
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report and I would like to make one or two comments.

On the civil servants resigning their posts three months before elections, I strongly support that. Reason? When you join politics you have to take the risks. Why would you like to have your cake and at the same time eat it? Why do you eat your cake and you want to have it? Politics must have devotion. Somebody coming up must have a reason not just opportunistic behaviour of just trying here and then when you fail you go this way. 

In that vein I support hon. Nandala’s submission. People who keep shifting during the electoral period, when they lose primaries in their parties, then keep hopping from party to party. That is a terrible opportunistic behaviour, totally unbecoming, unprincipled and the law must guard our people against such leaders. I think I agree fully with you, hon. Nandala Mafabi, on that one.  

Finally, on the registration of the political parties, I would like to agree with hon. Ben Wacha - although he is not here - that really the Electoral Commission cannot be the same organisation registering the parties and at the same time also monitoring the electoral processes. You cannot be the one recruiting at the same time monitoring. So I see the problem with that one. I feel that there should be an independent body that actually registers these parties and monitors the behavior of these parties, different from the one monitoring electoral processes. I think that is all that I have to add.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.17
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to actually address myself to two issues: civil servants and gender, but these have been adequately covered. Suffice it to say that maybe our women should be more serious. You should not every time hide behind the law to help you. Because after all our law does not prevent women from forming political parties and if they came out and formed political parties and said, “All offices should be occupied by women in these political parties of ours” there would not be any problem.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with different views, which are coming on the Floor in regard to the participation of women and different parties and how they will relate with women. I have no problem with that. I rise on a point of order in regard to the statement that my colleague has just made that women should be serious, implying that women are not serious. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think he has abandoned it.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, if it offended my colleagues - but what I was saying is that they should be more serious. They are already serious but they should be more serious. This is what I said.   

Mr Speaker, 40 percent to me is not good enough.  They should come out. This affirmative action, as hon. Ruhindi was saying, is a transition, which is to help these marginalised groups to mature to a stage where they can take off at par with other people. You see, even these affirmative positions regarding women, we are supposed to help them graduate but they have persistently remained in those positions, preventing other women from coming up. So I think this impact assessment, which –(Interruptions)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform him that women are gradually taking up constituency positions. For example the princess here was the Woman MP for Masindi and then she contested with men. If you take from say in the Sixth Parliament, we had nine women who contested with men and passed. This time we have got 13 women. We are saying, “Give us more opportunities so that you see us rise gradually in the mainstream.”

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I think the honourable member should be more informed about the transformation that has taken place regarding the participation of women in public and economic affairs. In district governments now in the local governments, the women’s participation is very significant.  Many of them are vice-chairpersons and they hold secretarial jobs. For the first time you have the Chairperson of LC V in Kanungu, this was not there before and I would like to really discourage this kind of thinking that a change has not taken place.  

A major change has occurred and in schools now there are secondary schools where the majority are girls, which never used to happen. In primary schools you find the preponderance of girls to boys is getting at par, and so on. So to say that no change has taken place is being oblivious to the fundamental change that has occurred.  

MR KIWALABYE: Thank you for that information, but I already know because I am now an elected chairperson of the NRM at parish level and my deputy is a woman, and she stood on merit and won. This is what I am saying; don’t you think we should put a term or two for these ladies? These ladies should serve at least for two terms and after the two terms they should now go to the constituencies so that other women also can come up.  

Anyway, Mr Speaker, all I am saying is that even at this point in time our women can start political parties. Instead of begging for 40 percent they can start very strong political parties, persuade men to join, and maybe in those parties there will be gender affirmative for men. 

Mr Speaker, I support the idea that the Electoral Commission should not be given the responsibility of registering political parties and monitoring them. I think it should be a separate body if the Registrar-General cannot handle this job appropriately.

Concerning the financing of political parties, Mr Speaker, I do not think the Government can find resources to finance all these political parties for their day-to-day operations. But maybe they should be funded during elections just like the presidential candidates. They could be funded but not for their day-to-day operations. Funds cannot be availed and there is no limit to the number of political parties, which are being registered, so I think that is proper.

The other issue is of discipline because under the multiparty system discipline of the members is paramount. If five members wanted to be elected under the primaries and only one is elected and the other four with their supporters go away and join other political parties or stand as independents, this will weaken the political party.  After losing in primaries they cannot be allowed to go and stand as independents. 

Mr Speaker, this Constitution says if you are elected under multi-party system as a Member of Parliament, for instance, if you join another political party after that, you should be recalled. You have to resign your post and go back because it looks as if you are betraying the people who put confidence in you. So a person taking a decision to be a member of a political party –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwalabye, let us follow this. There will party activities in which parties will select their candidates. The nomination we are talking about is not nomination by parties; it is by the Electoral Commission. Somebody should present himself to the Electoral Commission saying he wants to stand as an independent. Are you envisaging a situation where the Electoral Commission will say, “Tell us your background. Were you in a party, did you stay in that party and they refused you and now you are coming to register?”  They cannot do that. Somebody will just present his papers and say, “I am standing as so and so.” So you see the problem of administration? When it starts going back in conventions about this one and that one and what happened, it may not be possible and it may not be fair to the Electoral Commission if they are to start engaging themselves in such questions. This is my observation.

MR KIWALABYE: You are right, Mr Speaker, but when we were amending the Constitution to make a provision for this independent candidature, we said this Parliament will make laws to regulate that. I am proposing that as Parliament is making laws, a provision should be put in the law that once somebody has lost in the primaries of a political party, that person should not be allowed to stand as an independent because that will go far to weaken that political party. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

4.30
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee and particularly comment on its observation No. 9 where it says, “Despite the political realities of possible mergers and coalitions between and among parties, the Bill does not provide for regulations to handle such phenomenon.” I want to agree with the committee that this is a very important observation and that coalitions and mergers are a trend especially in multi-party settings.  

When we have no regulations, no law guiding us on what happens, then it is likely that in the event that parties have a very close tie after an election, the country will be thrown into a stalemate. It will be very difficult to resolve issues. We have all been closely watching the German elections and if it was not possible to form a coalition government, then I think either they would have gone for a very costly exercise of calling for fresh elections altogether, or they would have continued with a very difficult stalemate and that would undermine most of the processes in the country.  

Coalitions to me mean that it is possible, in spite of our political differences, to put the best interests of the country before the political party ideology that you were championing during the campaigns period so that the country will come first and, therefore, the two parties that came close to winning the elections will be able to move together. It, therefore, reflects a win-win situation. 

I agree with the committee when it recommends that a law be made for merger and coalitions of political parties and organisations. I support this recommendation but urge that it is done as a matter of urgency because we are going into campaigns, and it is possible to sit back and not imagine such stiff competition, such difficulties. But in the event that it happens, the country will be in a very surprised state because we will not know what to do. So, it is very health and –(Interruption)

MR OULANYAH: Actually, those wordings were just not properly done but the committee has proposed amendments, which are created for mergers and coalitions for political parties in the proposed amendment. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chairperson. That gives me the assurance because I was very worried if it was not taken care of and then we go for elections without such a provision. I thank you.

4.34
MR HENRY KITYO MUTEBI (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for a job well done. But, I am not comfortable with recommendation number three particularly the last sentence which says: “However, the proposed code of conduct should only provide for general guidelines and not attempt to regulate the internal affairs of the parties.”

Mr Speaker, when a party is formed it is not a social club, it is neither a charity; every Ugandan must have an interest or a stake in any party, which has been formulated for one simple reason that that party can take state power and rule this country.  If we are so liberal with their internal democracies, one day we may be surprised to get a party, which does not observe and members agree with the way they regulate their democracy, which is not in line with the Ugandan Constitution. 

For example, the bill says that there will be regular elections. Regular elections would be after 10 or 20 years. We have seen parties here, which have not had elections for the last 40 years. I would say that a party must have a timetable with a regulating body that, “We shall be electing our leaders every five years” so that the regulating party can know that the actual elections have taken place and also the parties must follow the Constitution and should be checked.  

I would like, therefore, Mr Speaker, for the good of this country and the history we have seen, really on the part of internal elections within a party to be regulated. It is very important to have democracy within the parties and the country. I would like to submit, Mr Speaker. 

4.36
MR ANANG-ODUR LAKANA (Kwania County, Apac): Mr Speaker, I also thank you for this opportunity to contribute to this debate and I wish to thank the committee for the job well done.  

Mr Speaker, I am happy that we are talking about this bill, which will govern all of us. I have a feeling that this has made our work much easier.  You remember what happened when we were discussing the Act, which we are now amending and I am sure that nobody would wish to have a law, which will not allow us to operate as a party effectively wherever we shall be.  

Mr Speaker, the issue of women representation has become rather hot but I want to appeal to my sisters because I would like to look at this question from two angles:  One, we have a court, Constitution and other laws which talk about representation or special groups and I am sure that if any party were to act contrary to this fundamental law, the matter could be charged in court. I think it is better that we leave it as broad as that so that whoever is not happy with what is happening in any party can challenge it in court.  

But more fundamental, Mr Speaker, I really would appeal to them to listen to this very carefully.  You see, if we insist on being allocated places in any organisation, the little, which I have been reading in the press is that it is taken for granted that it is because you are weak that you are being given that position. There is a tendency for your contribution to be undermined or underrated. 

We have had debates on the Floor of this Parliament and I remember a lady Member of Parliament who came through the constituency was talking in such a way that in her opinion, she was more effective than the ladies who came through district representation. This was on this Floor of Parliament and by a lady.  

You see, for me, women would be more effective if they could fight and win positions in any organisation whether in Parliament here or in the parties. If you do that, you will win your position, earn it without anybody taking it away from you and not taking you for granted. This is the way I want to look at it because frankly speaking, women will not win their freedom by just allotment. Women are going to win their freedom and equality by effective struggle, mobilisation and organisation to society and that is the way you are going to find a situation where women can even contest for the presidency. (Interruption)

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. I want to seek clarification from the honourable member holding the Floor whether it is because of that attitude that women who have held the flag of UPC very high were maliced at the grass root selections. These are women who have struggled, they have worked so hard but were maliced and thrown out at that level. Is that what women even at that level deserve, women of that status? What will happen to the women if we really don’t take affirmative action in political parties?  
Those are the things that we want to fight as women. Can the honourable member clarify? Thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I guess that we are talking about hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s case in the last elections in parishes and honourable –(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform the House that actually it was not only a woman representative of UPC that was barred from standing, but equally hon. Atubo, who happens to be a man, was also stopped. I would also like to inform my honourable sister that those people who were fraudulently stopped are free to join NRM where women are free to participate.

MR ANANG-ODUR: I wish to thank you for that information and I think that almost is sufficient.  The problem was not about women in UPC, in our opinion the problem was a broad issue and we are handling it quite efficiently.

Mr Speaker, I would not like to dwell on this point. At every forum where I have talked about this issue, many people know my position on women liberation. I am a strong supporter of women liberation and I think this is because of my own history, which I do not want to tell in Parliament.  

But I want to encourage the women of Uganda to be strong and competitive as it is the only solution to women emancipation. I think if you look at this from that perspective, I will struggle in trying to support you. I think that is the right position and not prescriptive, legalistic but a prescription of a win position.

On independent candidates. I think if I want to go and be nominated, I should be free to be nominated at any point. You should not say this man has lost in the UPC primaries therefore he cannot stand. I mean for what reason? Ladies and gentlemen, some of you are very new in these political parties. The games, which people play in political parties, some of you will shade tears when the time comes. Let nobody come to you and say, “Oh! You see, institution building.”  But what is it about? 

You see, the best opportunity for institutions to build themselves and follow the regulations and rules is when they realise they cannot play with you; when they realise you have got an option that is when they will put regulations and follow them. That is when some big fellows in some parties will not come and say, “We do not want this fellow.” They will organise money to de-campaign you, because it is just a few people at the preliminary level.  

So, do not allow to be laid waste leave the door open because if you do not, by the time you cry, it will be too late. This is a warning for all of us.  There are some parties where some top leaders will say, “We are the founders, we are the ones to decide who should be where.” When that time comes, it will not be very unpalatable. I think we should be wiser than what we think.

Mr Speaker, funding political parties: I think it is unfortunate that we are a bit poor. But it is necessary for government to fund parties. For me, I would prefer that parties be funded in between elections and not for elections, because if you fund parties for elections, you encourage some people to form organisations, this has happened, to get some money.  

You know, in the referendum elections in the past, there were indications that some people were just forming organisations to access money, which others have even failed to account for. So for me, if people are serious, we should finance parties for their operations in between elections. That is the only way we are going to encourage them to build strong institutions, which can run government and do political work.

MR MAO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. If the principle is accepted that we should support parties financially, there are some countries that have been doing this for many years and we can learn from them.  

One such country is Germany. They tie the amount of money given to a party on: first, you must qualify for funding by getting at least five percent of the national vote. So, that eliminates the Mickey Mouse parties and some people say, who decides what is five percent? So, every party will be very friendly to voters in order to get at least five percent. I think this will eliminate this incidence of brutality and so on.  

Then, they usually decide to give one euro per vote, which you get. Let us say for argument’s sake that we can say; for every vote that a party gets, you will be receiving Ugshs 1,000. So, if you actually get one million votes, that is one billion shillings for your activities; but it comes after the elections, because there must be a formula for determining that you are really committed to this tournament of deciding who rules the country.  

I have discussed this before with the Chairman of the Legal Committee and I know we have to agree on some kind of formula on how to give money to parties. But, if we are going to stick to this funny formula of giving money to parties just on the basis that they have a registration certificate, then you are going to end up with joy riders who will be moving around the country at the cost of the state.  

I invite the House to be very serious about considering this formula of a percentage threshold to eliminate bogus parties and – I hear there are serious parties that also want to form bogus parties. So, that will also be a disincentive for them and they will not form bogus parties.

Secondly, if you tie a money value to an individual vote, people are not going to be caning their voters because you know everybody you cane, you are losing money. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, hon. Mao, for that brilliant intervention and I wish to leave it at that. I request the chairman of the committee to concede very seriously.  

Lastly, just to register my support on the coalitions and alliances as presented by hon. Alaso, I think this will be very important in guaranteeing security, peace and tranquility and so, we should consider it along those lines. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

4.50
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to say that the question of funding is a serious matter. You remember assigning a committee of some Members of Parliament to study the funding of political parties with hon. Ben Wacha as chairperson. We looked at this funding in detail and I hope that the committee received the report through your Office.
 
I would just like to emphasise what has been said, that a political party is a state institution that should be supported by the state to ensure prosperity. What hon. Mao said is also done in the UK, and political parties even have a pool of funds from where they draw money. Likewise in the US under the national endowment for democracy, political parties are also funded. Therefore, I want to emphasize that funding should not only be for elections because this does not contribute to the building of a party.

In the same line, Mr Speaker, I see that the bill proposes that a political party should not receive funding from a source in excess of the value of 5000 currency points. Whereas this may have good intentions for the time being, some of us have been lobbying for money and the 5000 currency points is equivalent to only Shs 100 million. If you may recall, I believe President Museveni’s candidature cost more than Shs 10 billion while Dr Kizza Besigye’s, where I was a secretary general, cost slightly more than Shs 3.0 billion. 

Now most of this money might have come from a few sources. If we go ahead and enact this into law, we might find ourselves dealing with a provision that we might not be able to comply with. Furthermore, parties are going to dodge this. For example, up to now NRM has not submitted its accounts to the Registrar General, which by the way is a requirement by law. Therefore, I would like to urge Members to raise this figure from 5000 currency points to 50,000 currency points. This way FDC will be able to talk to Coca-cola or Microsoft worldwide to give us say Shs 1.0 billion and when we capture power, we will in turn support them in Africa. 

I would like to add that there is need to provide for a situation under this law so that the framework for political parties to submit names of their candidates for political positions as well as the time frame for independent candidates to submit their names is fixed. This is because I remember that in Kenya a certain political party submitted names twice and because in the Kenyan system the independent provision was not allowed, if somebody weighed their constituency and discovered that they could not win under say a particular party, the next day they would submit their name under another party. As a result, the Electoral Commission had total confusion simply because the lists of names by the various parties were handed in at different times.

Therefore, we should state the exact time frame for all parties to submit the names of their candidates as well as a time frame for individual candidates. Although this is a matter for the Parliamentary Elections Bill, I thought it would be a good idea to mention it now. 

There is also the issue of barring independent candidates, which issue I raised during the constitutional amendments but lost unfortunately. I have consulted with a certain legal council and they said now it may be too late. Therefore, the best practice may be to allow individuals to cross from one party to another if the chances in one’s party look grim since this cannot be avoided. Furthermore, an attempt to bar this may mean we are creating a situation and barring say a cardholder of NRM from voting for an FDC candidate like Mr Ekanya who is very good, social and can promote democracy and development.

MR MAO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the honourable member holding the Floor to actually realize that the majority of citizens worldwide do not belong to parties despite the fact that they have interests. They simply wait and listen to political leaders then decide who has impressed them the most. Actually the Conservative Party in Britain has only about 3,000 members. Likewise, the parties in America have between one million and 1.5 million members. 

In Uganda, the parties here are actually quite dubious about their real membership numbers. They keep claiming that they have distributed millions of party cards but in truth the society is always layered into three in the form of a triangle. I would like the honourable holding the Floor to know that on top of this triangle are the leaders who are the people whose faces and voices we know. In the middle are the activists who are the people who actually go and register to become party members and so on. Then the rank and file are the people who can throw you out of office if you annoy them and these do not need to belong to any party. So, actually we are not making party membership compulsory.  

I would also like the honourable member to consider an additional issue, which is how to keep motivating people so that politics is an interesting preoccupation. Later on, I will be introducing an amendment to cater for what I call political foundations. We need to encourage political parties to have foundations that keep on doing the work of civic education in between elections. Again I will give the example of Germany. Each of the parties there has a political foundation. They do not give money to candidates but organize seminars that talk about important issues. For example, currently they are talking about the entry of Turkey into the European Union. 

They also mobilise young people and target women. The CDU party, for example, has the Konrad Adenauer Foundation; the SPD which is the Social Democratic Party has the Friedrich Ebert Foundation and the Green Party also has a foundation. In Britain, the formula is a bit different. They have what they call the Westminster Foundation for Democracy and the Government gives money to that foundation. I do not see anything wrong with the Uganda Government putting aside money for such a venture. If anything we are giving money to NGOs to fight Malaria yet in fact the biggest disease we have here is political problems that we also need to target. 

There is nothing wrong with having a Yoweri Museveni Foundation receiving some money for purposes of mobilising people. Likewise, there is nothing wrong with having a Milton Obote Foundation or a Norbert Mao Foundation, since you are insisting. We need to create provisions in the parties’ law to cater for political foundations so that we do not mix up the money meant for elections with that for political activities of interested people in between elections. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Mao. I am conversant with what you have said but I appreciate your contribution. What I was saying was that these are the reasons why you find that this time the Democratic Party in the US is winning the elections yet come next elections the Republican Party wins. This is simply because voters keep switching sides depending on the prevailing party programme.  

Mr Speaker, I believe that during the constitutional amendments we provided for leaders of the opposition and provided that the Rules of Procedure of Parliament would be retained and how they would work. Likewise, I think that it is important for us to provide in this law exactly how coalitions will operate. Otherwise, it will become complicated in case ten parties come together with one person as a leader of the opposition. 

I know that we shall put that in the law sometime but there is need to do it even earlier because we may be faced with a situation where we have five parties coming together. In fact, in other countries the leaders of the opposition are really the chief whips. Therefore, there is need to provide for this in the Rules of Procedure since as we speak political parties have no forum for agreement. Similarly, we have to ensure that the leader of the opposition who may be the chief whip will not whip members simply because there is no detailed legal structure in which to operate.  

Even if parties have their individual informal arrangements but are not backed by law, there is potential for crisis when people assume power and resources. In fact Kenya is facing a similar problem and if it had not been that Odinga remembering the suffering of his father, he was also going to face the same problem and be sacked by – I would not wish to mention names since this may have diplomatic implications. However, I really think that the chairman’s proposal to create a possibility for a merger or coalition is very fundamental and should be supported.

Mr Speaker, we have also discussed the question of registration of political parties. We have been studying this issue in detail together with that of financing political party committees. There are a number of countries in the world where their equivalent of the Electoral Commission is in charge of registering political parties and regulating them. Likewise, there are countries in the world that have independent registration bureaus. 

However in Uganda’s case, it would be good for the beginning to have an independent institution. For example, the other day FDC took the Registrar General to court for delaying its services. Now, if the Electoral Commission is taken to court yet at the same time they are supposed to organise elections and so forth, I think this will create some difficulties. I would like to ask that for the time being we leave the Registrar General to do the work of registering parties and then maybe in the future we may be able to change that. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

5.02
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the committee for the work done. I want to start by looking at the title of this bill which states, “The Political Parties and Organisations Bill, 2005”. The words “organisations” and “parties” are defined in the bill but when you look at these definitions, you hardly find a difference between the two definitions. I am wondering whether the committee took time to address themselves on this matter. 

This is because they seem to be talking about the same things such as sponsoring political agenda, platform, political office, governance etc. The only difference I see is that the word, “political organisation” has more words in its definition than “political party”. In my view, there is no justification for having the word, “organisation” as part of the title unless the committee and the minister can come up with a convincing reason as to why this word should be included in the title.

Mr Speaker, I want to agree with colleagues who propose that the code of conduct of political parties be a matter for the National Consultative Forum.   

On the issue of registration of parties, I also concur with colleagues who propose that we should have a separate organisation to register political parties. I think experience has shown that the current system has not been effective enough and I have no reason to believe that the Electoral Commission, that is already burdened with a lot of functions coupled with limited funding, will not do a good job.  

Concerning the participation of public officers as members of parties, I agree that public officers should not be involved in political parties in the capacity of party members. I think good reasons have been given and I concur with those reasons. I would also like to add that should military officers wish to contest in elections, they should also automatically resign from the forces for the same reasons that were advanced for public officers.

Concerning the issue of women, I think we should look at this in relation to Article 32. This is because Article 32 is more embracing and refers to various groups of people who have been marginalized on the basis of gender, age, disability and any other reasons. I believe that if we took up the spirit contained in Article 32 this would be good enough instead of what honourable colleagues have been advocating for. This is important because if we are to have a country that caters for everybody’s interests and one where everybody has a role to play, this is the way to go. 

Mr Speaker, there is also the issue of recruiting people below the age of 18. While it may be a good thing to recruit future political leaders below the age of 18, I think this can be overdone and a situation may arise where even students at school level may be politicised. In my view, I think recruitment of party members should be restricted to adults who are able to decide for themselves.  Mr Speaker, that covers the points I wanted to raise. Thank you very much.

5.09
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Worker’s Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to address Parliament on the proposal to ban political parties and from the outset I would like to state that I am opposed to it. The law must have a social basis since it is made particularly to cure a certain evil –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I have been in this House from the beginning and I recall that at the end of the report that was read by the chairperson, hardly anybody wanted to debate on it. Furthermore, when the issue of women representation was raised, I remember that you gave hon. Martin Wandera an opportunity to contribute, which he did. 

In fact, he said that the percentage should not be attached –[Members: ”He was giving information”] – No, his contribution was not information. I was here and in fact he moved that you put the question so that we can go ahead to committee stage. Therefore, is it procedurally right for him to be given a second opportunity when our rules say – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Was his contribution a substantial one? I understand he was giving information to the honourable member for Kayunga District who was holding the Floor. 

MR OULANYAH: Just to set the record straight, I have hon. Wandera as number 5 on my list of people who made contributions.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, it is true that I have spoken but on the occasions that I spoke it was to seek clarification from hon. Eresu, hon. Nandala and hon. Wacha.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, there is a doubt but you may proceed. Make your contribution brief.

MR WANDERA: I feel injured, Mr Speaker, but thank you very much. I was saying that any law must have a social basis and in this particular case there should be an evil that Parliament should be seeking to cure by proposing that we fund political parties. A quick look at the problems that have bedeviled political parties in this country does not indicate that one of their major problems has been financing. The biggest problem of political parties in this country has been lack of internal democracy, poor or weak leadership, lack of an ideology to pursue and the pursuit of narrow goals.  

I have been wondering how giving political parties money will introduce internal democracy in those political parties. On the contrary, money received by political parties that lack internal democracy will be a cause for internal wrangling in those parties.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to disagree with hon. Ekanya who said something to the effect that political parties are state organisations. I know they serve the public good but political parties are not the only organisations that do that. We have trade unions, NGOs and even private companies that play an important role in promoting the public good in this country. 

As a student of Political Science I was told that political parties are a group of people with a common policy programme, who want to take over state power. Now, I would think that if you want to take over state power you must demonstrate that you are able to organise. As we speak, save for UPC and DP the other two big parties are not selling their cards yet the sale of membership cards and annual subscription is the biggest source of funding for political parties. 

Their argument is that if they sell their cards they will not get as many members. However, as it has been said, not everyone who supports you needs to be a member of your political party. Similarly, you do not have to have many members for you to be considered a serious political party.

Therefore, before parties seek the support of the state and before the state seeks to support political parties financially, parties must prove that they have exhausted all possible means to finance their activities. As I speak, no political party in this country has done any fundraising despite the fact that out there is goodwill. One of the political parties is said to have given out about 13 million cards. I was just doing simple arithmetic and if each of those cards was sold for Shs 100 that is already Shs 1.3 billion. With a little fundraising you can raise this money. My other worry -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: In Kwania County, many of the cards of that particular party you are talking about were left behind for those people whose names were written on them, which people are less than willing to pay any money for them. Therefore, they could not have raised the money you are talking about.

MR WANDERA: But I thought I did not mention any particular party.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I think people should talk about their parties because –(Interjections)- yes speak from an informed position. Furthermore, every month some money is deducted from my emoluments for my party. Therefore, it is not correct that NRM has not fundraised. If you have not fundraised be informed that for us it is daily.  

MR WANDERA: The other point I want to make is that funding of political parties will lead to proliferation of parties. There is plenty of evidence of this during the two referenda that we have held. Without mentioning names, there have been indications that people just enter this process to make money and this is also true concerning NGOs. The driving force behind the formation of most NGOs here is to get money or access funding. As a result, I will be moving an amendment during committee stage that this proposal be dropped.

Finally, Mr Speaker, UPC and DP at least in the 60s had structures all over this country despite the fact that they did not have any state funding. We also have evidence of parties that have been funded by the states in Africa but these parties have never turned out to be the best political parties. As someone coming from trade unions, I want to say that to build a strong organisation is not about money but about belief. If you look at all the parties that exist and you ask, “What is your ideology, what are your values and what do you believe in?” The membership simply does not know. 

Recently, some Members of Parliament from the Conservative Party spoke to people in NRM - and I am sorry hon. Rwamirama but I have to say this. They also spoke to FDC, to DP and other parties. At the end they asked one Member of this House, “We have spoken to all these political parties but there seems to be no ideological difference. What is the ideology of these parties?” 

The strength of a party is based on belief. If people believe in something failure, there will not be something to fear. The people who went to Luweero did not succeed because they had money but because they believed in something and they were willing to do a lot of good work without money. We on the other hand are encouraging money in everything to do with politics and this is dangerous. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.19
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I will go straight to Clause 22 of the bill which states: “Where any appeal under this Act has been determined by the High Court, any party aggrieved by the decision of the High Court may appeal to the Court of Appeal against that decision”. Sub-clause (4) states: “The Chief Justice may, in consultation with the Attorney General, make rules of court to regulate the procedure in the High Court and Court Of Appeal under this Act”.  

Sub-clause 5(a) states that rules made under this section may, “Prescribe the time within which an appeal may be made or when any step connected with the appeal shall be taken.” Mr Speaker, I have got worries about this having undergone an experience where sometimes these courts are under the influence of the ruling party or government. An example is Malawi. The Malawi Congress Party took UDF to court and they were faced with the same situation because the court had the right to prescribe the time within which the appeal would be completed. 

The Malawi Congress Party appealed from the beginning but unfortunately they were given the judgment when UDF had handed over power to another person. In other words, the President was no longer in power. It took the Malawi Congress Party about five years to get their verdict.

They went ahead to say that the court, “shall proceed with the matter expeditiously” without giving the time limit. In the current law, if I can recall, you cannot appeal, I think, after 14 days. I need to be guided by the legal experts on this one. I do not see the reasons why in this law we cannot put in the limit when somebody should appeal and when the appeal should be completed.  

Point number two, I wanted to support honourable Martin. We are in our elections now, but what we are seeing on the ground, the issue tends to concentrate on money.  Even before they start doing any small job, the question is, how much are we going to be paid? So, in other words, the issue of money has entered into our blood that we cannot do anything without getting or expecting money. I think to me really giving political parties money is going to bring more chaos, as honourable Martin has said. We are yet to see more Ocheger’s parties here of one person; you go to the registrar, you fail even to get where he got the signatures.

I think one of the reasons why they want registration of parties to be moved from the registrar to Electoral Commission is because Electoral Commission has got facilities to verify the signatures. The Registrar General never had that capacity. Some people went on the streets and registered the parties, and the aim is only one, to have money.  

Time has come for presidential elections; there is that money which is tagged to each candidate. We are going to have about 20 candidates standing for the presidency and the aim will be money. We had Chapa Karuhanga here, he was moving alone in the vehicle soliciting for votes. I met him in Kamuli, only one in the vehicle, and he turned around, so he did the job and there he pocketed the money. I think to me really funding these parties is going to bring more chaos. So, I would support that let each party support itself by using its own means rather than giving them money.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking, what about that party which has access to the central bank?

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think, Mr Speaker, we are making laws. I think these laws, which we are making today must apply to all parties, including even the party which is in government. Therefore, if there is a party which has got access to the central bank, then it is not being controlled by these laws which we are making today. I do not know whether that party is there.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Sir, I follow your argument very closely. In the African situation, where the party in government has accessed the public funds and the civil society has no capacity to have control on government using public funds, it assumes that therefore public funds should find their way in the election campaigns and party activities of the party in power. I think that has been stated. In such a situation, Sir, what now will happen to the other parties, which have no access to fund more so when you realize that the business community in these countries tends to be very optimistic? They tend to support parties in government. The examples are abandoned. How then will you be able to help these other parties complete in their registration, Sir?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for that question. Mr Speaker, the honourable member is here making laws to regulate the parties. And really when there is a government in power, even if it is a UPC or a DP or NRM, it must adhere to these regulations. If it goes ahead to get that money, it is getting it illegally and stand to be challenged.

Secondly, we have seen parties which have lost power when they are in power. Take an example of Kenya, where is KANU as we talk today? It was in power, getting all the subscriptions of the businessmen as you have stated, but it was thrown out. So, I think the issue is not money as honourable Martin stated. The issue is the faith you have in your party; it is the vision; the ideology. I think that should be the driving force.  

Therefore, I do not support giving parties money. They will end up fighting themselves; you will see how the parties will start fighting among themselves internally, fighting for that little money which they are going to get from government.  On top of that, it is little money. Somebody said it is Shs 100 million. Now, if a Member of Parliament can spend Shs 100 million to solicit for votes then what about the party? What is it going to do? Except that Ochegere with his personal party, that one it is money.

MR PAJOBO: Mr Speaker, we have been mentioning names but these people have no chance of defending themselves in this House. It is very difficult to prove, like Chapa Karuhanga moving alone in the vehicle. Is there a rule that he should move with ten people or 20 people? In fact, the Shs 20 million, which was paid to them, was not enough to go around the whole country with a convoy like President Museveni is fond of doing. It is very wrong to castigate the people who move alone. If they have supporters, why should they be castigated?  

Secondly, you cannot say that these political parties do not have support. Apart from those you mentioned, even CP does not have offices in most areas across the country. However, if they move to look for votes, they cannot go with convoys from Kampala. Therefore, I feel we should try to discourage these people from standing. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you very much for discouraging me about the parties, although you gave the example of CP as a party that does not have members. I thank you for that. However, Mr Speaker, I was only giving it as an example. I was in Kamuli recently, and there was nobody to address the gathering. The vehicle simply turned and went away. Why can’t we speak the facts? I thank you.  

5.30
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I thank the committee for the precise report. I agree with the committee on recommendation number two. We should expand the scope in order to cure the old ills. Fifty members in half of the districts of Uganda is not adequate. This will cure sectarianism, scare away weak parties and reduce anarchy of parties. Political parties should respect, defend and uphold fundamental principles of internal democracy.  Without this, we are not building democracy. 

I support this and I think the code of conduct must reside in recommendation number four and five.  The function of the national consultative forum for political parties should be contained in the law and not be left for the minister to decide. All the parties must subscribe to an independent body. This should enforce the code of conduct and must be included in the law.  

The issue of women representatives to be left to the internal processes and arrangements of the political parties is a bit controversial. I have heard arguments for and against, but I would like Members to reconcile three principles: One, freedom of association; two, competence of individuals; and three, absence. If you do not have women as members of the party, what happens? Do you stop the party? In my constituency, it seems women are heading for one party. Therefore, if we go by those who subscribe that we must put 40 per cent of women representatives, then those parties will be deemed to have failed in those areas. 

Freedom of association does not know sex. You may have both men and women associating, you may have men alone or even women alone associating. I agree with the committee that this should be left to the internal process and arrangement of the political parties. We must put laws that will not be difficult to enforce. I see a problem here.

Mr Speaker, I do not agree with this statement: “Law should not bar public officers from becoming ordinary members of political parties, except for involvement in political activities mentioned in clause 16(a) and (b).” I want us to consider both the civil servants and also the politicians. One can vote for a party without owning a card. However, the dangers of civil servants being identified with particular parties is that even if they made rational decisions and something backfired, they would say, “He did such and such a thing because he did not support the parties.” 

Experience is not what happens to a person, but it is what that person does. Let us remember what happened during Obote I . All the civil servants who were characterised with red shirts were sacked. We had people who were not trained and yet, they joined civil service. We had an economic war here in Uganda. What followed then was that the economy went down, we lost professionals some of whom we have not even recovered up to today.  When Idi Amin left in 1979, those who were characterised with the then fashionable caps were equally sacked. This was all because they indulged in political matters. 

I wonder why we are not learning from the past. Why do we want to bring this back? I think we should allow civil servants to vote, but they should not participate in political activities. Despite their independence and rational decisions, they deal with all sorts of people of DP, CP, NRM and many others. Therefore, they must be seen as neutral. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. You have talked about all governments, but when you reached the Movement time, you did not show anybody who was sacked because of his views. I will help you by giving you an example. We had Nkutu who was working with the New Vision. When he openly expressed his views, he was sacked. Therefore, it would have been fair if you had given other examples.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, people who do not understand some of these things normally make wrong conclusions. NRM has been all-inclusive. It is even seen in this House. People who have served in all regimes are here. Therefore, there is no way I can say the Movement has changed the system. We are still under the Movement system. Finally, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I really was very reluctant to rise on this clarification. In 1986, when the Lutwa Government was overthrown, that government had inherited generally wholly the civil servants who had been serving the Obote II regime.  I did not quite follow when my colleague hon. Bright Rwamirama was talking referring to my colleague there when he said, he does not understand certain things.

Mr Speaker, is it not a fact that indeed in 1986 when the NRA/NRM came to power civil servants who were associated with the former regime of UPC were thrown out of their work and sometime even out of their homes. I thought the example, which was being given was simply to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think both of you are agreeing that being a member of a political party when you are a civil servant will endanger you. With examples or without examples, it seems you are agreeing that this happens so, what is the argument? 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I simply wanted to put it on record of Parliament that let us be honest –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Another example is that, in 1986 –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: - and say what the truth is, but I totally agree with him on the analysis. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague hon. Anang-Odur for agreeing with me. In 1963, I will quote an example of one of my constituents, Mr Kalema who was serving as an ADC. Because he was putting on both hats, a civil servant and a politician, he had to suffer. It is against this background that I am totally opposed to mingling civil servants with politics. 

Finally, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. You have stated that whereas you do not wish to see civil servants being party card holding members, you recognize their right to vote. I take it that under a multiparty dispensation they will be voting in a partisan election. Now, what is it that you are trying to avoid because during the voting they will be voting either CP or Peasants Party!

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you. Honourable member, let me explain. When you hold a card for a party that means you have to attend meetings, you have subscribed, there are records that you belong there –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Now, the difference in voting and not being party member is that, if you are a party member you are identified with that party. But for a question of voting it is a secret voting, question of identifying you with this and the other does not arise.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: As a matter of fact, a civil servant may vote a particular party on the basis of the programme that they have submitted. In the next elections they may vote for a different party, we do not know, after all they are voting by a secret ballot. So, really by voting for a party does not necessary mean that you belong to that party, it means that you are convinced by the programme of that party.

THE SPEAKER: No, this issue has been exhaustively dealt with.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. But before I go to the last point, I would like to inform Members that by allowing civil servants only to vote and not to own cards and participate in party politics you make them nomads in voters. They go with what they think is appropriate for them because they are stakeholders.  

Finally, I am totally also opposed to funding of political parties for the following reasons: One, is experience in Zaire where you had about 40 something parties registering. Here they are 33, Mr Speaker, you know that most of those parties are individuals and they are aiming at getting Shs 100 million. So, if a political party cannot survive on its own to hell they have no credibility to show around. I was amazed sometime when we were voting for political party systems here and one of the political parties had actually its membership on radio and television. I never heard of any other person speaking for the party except two people and they had their money and the programme elapsed. So, what are we promoting, Mr Speaker? We must see that parties are competent, they have members who are credible. 

Actually, we must have even criteria for allowing parties to exist. If a party can gather 50 signatures in half of the districts of Uganda, those members if they cannot raise money to organize a delegates conference then to hell with that party. Mr Speaker, we are a developing country we need money for social infrastructure, our people are dying of poverty if people cannot raise money for their parties to survive to hell they go. I beg to move. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.44
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that on the hills of a successful referendum to change political systems we have yet another political organizations Act to handle the management of politics in this country. In my tenure as a Member of Parliament for Bugabula South this is the third political organization’s Act that I am having to debate. My question has been, what is different about all these three? And I was waiting to hear from the minister and from the chairman of the committee on what is new.

Mr Speaker, at the beginning of this motion, the minister did say that they are proposing the Electoral Commission to register the political parties because the bureau was specifically for registering businesses. By that I understood that he meant registering companies, patents, trademarks only but the law that was passed for setting up the Uganda Registration Services Bureau was consolidating all kinds of registrations under the bankruptcy Act, Birth and Deaths Registration Act, Building Societies Act, Company’s Act, Customary Marriages Registration Act, Marriage Act, Partnership Act and all this. I thought that in the line of registering and registration this responsibility still fits within this bureau, the registration service bureau. 

I do not see how and why we should take this responsibility from a bureau, even when it only started working in July of this financial year.  Why would a bureau leave out registration of parties, which to me looks like its natural home?  I would like the minister and the committee to convince me that registration of parties was not the business of the registration service bureau. 

Mr Speaker, I will now address myself to the Electoral Commission. The first recommendation of the committee reads that the bill has come in good time and carries a new spirit of political development. I have not seen the spirit. The purpose is to increase the political space and participation, not to narrow it. What is in the place of increasing choice looks like an administrative arrangement called a national consultative forum. 

I agree that this forum is good, but under the hand of a minister, it does not provide the spirit of political development as the first recommendation suggests. If this was allowed as a forum for consultation under an independent body, I think that would serve the purpose for which consultation and consensus is built.

My experience in political parties tells me that it should be the packaging of the content rather than the laws. The practice of what we are legislating and debating today, in my view, still limits us to the same spot of political latitude. I would like to see that when we bring proposals for amendment, they will be seen in the light of increasing political space.

This morning, I was at the Electoral Commission to consult on a matter. I did not get the impression that the Electoral Commission is independent as provided for in the Constitution. It will get into partisan issues over time and this will surely take away its time and capability to conduct free and fair elections. 

You ask political parties to comply with the compliance that is enforced by the Electoral Commission. If, for instance, we were to end up in court and the Electoral Commission loses the case, would that be enabling the Electoral Commission to work and grow as an independent institution? It is better we leave the responsibility of registration, compliance and audit with the registration service bureau.

When we were debating dual citizenship, here was a matter that I thought would require a separate law of how this is affected. Recommendation number 11 just re-emphasises that and for me this opens a bigger question. What is citizenship? The right to vote is the most important right of citizenship.  It was my belief that that right would be expanded to all the places where Ugandan embassies and high commissions exist. 

The Electoral Commission has chosen to interpret sovereignty in a physical geography and specifically the borders of this country. They keep saying that this House has not legislated for them to have people to vote or to apply for registration as voters at embassies. We need to add within our laws that the laws of the Electoral Commission will work extra territorial.

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, thank you. I would like the honourable member holding the Floor to know that in other jurisdictions, it does not stop at registering to vote, but includes voting. Take the case of passports. You may be born outside Uganda and yet get a Ugandan passport from wherever you are. 

I would like to ask; which of the two, a passport and a voter registration card, takes more time and costs more administratively? I believe that we should have a comprehensive provision, allowing people to register and vote from outside the country. We shall soon have troops going abroad for peacekeeping. Will they be disenfranchised?  Assuming we sent troops to Somalia. Shall we say that our 2,000 troops will not vote? They would sue us for denying them their right to vote.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we not broadening the debate? I think you may have a point that we will be able to vote outside the country. However, don’t you think that this debate will be appropriate when we are dealing with parliamentary and presidential elections bills? The bill we are dealing with is just to allow parties to register and operate. I have no doubt that there are merits in suggesting that we can vote at the embassies. However, I suggest that we deal with this issue when we are dealing with presidential and parliamentary elections bills.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am mindful where the debate belongs. I am only drawing the attention of this House to the limitations of the Electoral Commission even in interpreting its own powers. I think we are taking a risk of putting all our eggs in one basket. I propose that we minimize the risk and the attention that surrounds electioneering and registration of parties. We are just getting back into this trade of political parties. Why can’t we reduce concentrating too many things in one entity? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The minister and the chairman will wind up tomorrow and thereafter, we will see how we proceed. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 October 2005.)



 

