Tuesday, 8 October 2013

Parliament met at 3.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As you are aware, we are preparing to go on a short recess and we had planned to kick it off the day after Independence.Tomorrow is Independence and we are supposed to sit on the 10th as the final day for this particular Meeting of Parliament. We will be taking appropriate decisions as we proceed with business today.  

Honourable members, yesterday the Office of the Speaker hosted the international guests who came for the National Prayer Breakfast for this country, which is on the 15th. I want to report to you that we had a very successful dinner. We had dignitaries from West Africa, Southern Africa, Europe and the Americas. The guest speaker, who was invited to come yesterday, could not make it but he came this morning - Dr Myles Munroe. Some of you have read his work while some of you have heard his preaching and teachings. He is a very inspirational speaker and he was able to come today and he spoke. 

I also wantto report to you that the prayer breakfast today was very successful.The only problem is that it took very long that by the time it was ending, all the breakfast had been digested and we needed a prayer lunch. (Laughter)I think the budget of the organisers would not accommodate a prayer lunch, so we left when we were very happy and inspired but also a bit hungry.  

Honourable members, you know the events that have been happening in this House. You know that on 1stAugust something happened in this House which has never happened anywhere. It has never happened in the history of this Parliament, but it happened on the 1stof August and some decisions were taken by the Speaker presiding then on the conduct of Members who had been engaged in these activities. A suspension was issued to three Members of Parliament and that day, the House degenerated even further. 

We should remember that the rules that govern this House are really about civility and courtesy. If we exceed those limits, we cross the line and become like anybody else and we stop being Members of Parliament. That is why these rules are important and that is why we must observe them so that we do not have to enforce them when the time comes. 

Those events were excessive, so at the next sitting of Parliament on 6th August,I communicated the details and the parameters of the suspension I had issued.I required that those bars should be drawn and that the Members that I had suspended should come and apologise to the House - not to me as an individualbut to the House - for that conduct. Really, that was all that was asked.

However, there seems to have been miscommunication and when I was not chairing the House, the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, after the suspension allowed the Members to come in.We had discussions about this for a long time - that it might amount to something that would not be very regular. On the 26th of last month, she did communicate to this House that she had not been given the details of the suspension but the Members affected should comply with those conditions.
On the next day, the 27th of last month, the Clerk extracted the orders and submitted them to the affected Members. 

Honourable members, you all recall what happened last week in this Parliament when failure to observe those rules happened. What happened was because Members, who always find it easy to apologise on the Floor of Parliament, - each time you use words that are unparliamentary and you are asked to withdraw and apologise, you doit with ease - on this occasion, I think found some difficulty in apologising. I do not know where the difficulty comes from, but Members found it difficult to apologise to their colleagues in the House and that is what led to that scuffle - because the orders were not followed to the letter. 

We have had discussions with the Leader of the Opposition and we have come to the following: For the business of the House to continue, and being what I am, and since I have found occasion to even apologise for things I have not done sometimes just for the sake of peace - I have done that and I do not feel any smaller because of making an apology. I do not feel any weaker by apologising even for things I have not done and I think that should be the spirit. (Applause)So because of that,and since the Members find it so difficult to apologise, I apologise on their behalf.(Laughter) (Applause)

Now that I have apologised on their behalf, I will allow them to come to the House - (Applause) - so that we can proceed with business. However, make no mistake, keenly make no mistake; these rules are meant for the better management of this House, for the orderly conduct of the business of this House and for the orderly processing of the business of the people of Uganda.Anybody who will come against the rules should not count on my magnanimity next time.  

I truly apologise to Uganda for the things that happened. We all saw what happened. Was it really necessary? I do apologise. So, the Leader of the Opposition, you can bring those Members in and maybe you want to make a statement.

3.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank the Speaker. I met him and we talked for quite some time.This is what we call leadership, if you did not know. This is what we call leadership –engaging.We have engaged and I want to thank you, MrSpeaker, for coming to that decision.

Honourable members, if there is anything my side has erred in, not only my side but also your side, I also want to apologise for all of you. (Applause)Mr Speaker, this shows that you are promoting democracy and it is being built. This is the best way to move and I will call on our colleagues also to learn to be like that in action.

The only huddle I have, which I would want you to know, is that on the day hon. Ssemujju was pulled out of the House, he was pulled under your instructions to the Sergeant-at-Arms and the Sergeant-at-Arms should have done that. However, in the process, there were strangers who came into the House –(Interjections)- Give us a chance; we are trying to move on now. 

Strangers are not allowed in here according to our rules; there is a way in which strangers can be admitted.So, as Parliament, we must find a solution to this issue of the strangers who came into the House and the charges that should be placed on them. It is a serious matter. You may think it happened to hon. Ssemujju today but tomorrow it could be you.

Mr Speaker, I raise this issue because some of our colleagues here think that what happened here can never happen to them. I want to tell them that if you are a politician, there are three things you must be sure of: prison, exile and death. So, if you cannot appreciate all those three, then you have a problem. 

Mr Speaker, at an appropriate time, I will come again to you to discuss the issue of the strangers who came into the House to lift hon. Ssemujju. Aside from that, I want to thank you for having agreed to meet us and having proceeded in this way. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to applaud you for your magnanimity, but I also want to say that the conduct of some of our colleagues that day was an assault on the dignity of this House. I have given notice of a motion that I will move that this Parliament considers that conduct in order to restore the sanctity and dignity of this Parliament.When we resume, I intend to move it. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, we are not going to debate this matter as we have a lot of business. Let me have hon. Otada.  

3.36
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank you for what has just transpired in this House this afternoon. I want to congratulate you for that spirit of consensus. 

What happened should be a clear testimony to all of us about what can potentially happen if we all decide not to play by the rules. It can get to that. Regrettable as it may be, I want to add that it is avoidable.When we find ourselves in such a situation, then we are left with one option and that is what you have just given us this afternoon, for which I thank you.I think in a multi-party dispensation such as the one we are trying to build, consensus building should be the name of our game. 

I have seen today in the newspapers that I changed my position and I did this and the other. I want to put this on record;I want to say that where there were three players, then the blame cannot go only to one side. The fact is that the Members were suspended and Mr Speaker, I think we all accept that there are rules that we play to and in an institution, there must be a leader and if a leader renders a decision which you think is not correct, there are ways of challenging that decision. That is the point I was making.

I want to add that for some of us who enjoy games, a referee may hand you what you think is a bad decision but there are ways of challenging that decision. You do not become violent against that decision, and that is the point I was making. Mr Speaker, I think if we submit ourselves to the leadership position in this country, we submit ourselves to playing by rules, which also sometimes include rules that may not be correct but then we have to challenge them in a way that still keeps us with our dignity, that still keeps us looking good in the eyes of the public.

I want to end by saying that consensus - May the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition, the Office of the Speaker and all of us who are stakeholders in this House find time to always strike a harmonised position whenever controversial circumstances arise.This is not the last; they are still going to arise and many more will come.So, that is the spirit that I am praying for, a spirit of consensus building.

I pray that we come together as people who are stakeholders and we strike a balance because usually in a political dispensation such as this one, it is the behind-the-scenes discussions that build the most consensus. By the time you come to the Floor here, we have harmonised ourselves behind the scenes.That is how civilisation works. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us leave this now. We do not want to get into debate. I will have the Member for Bukedea.

3.40
MR STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on anissue of national interest.

Mr Speaker, all teachers of Bukedea senior secondary schools have never been paid their salaries from the month of July to-date. This is a great concern.The teaching standards in Bukedea have been affected; students are not getting quality education because our teachers are not able to teach.

My memory tells me that we passed a supplementary budget here in order to clear all the salary arrears for teachers countrywide. Bukedea is in Uganda and I am wondering as to why Bukedea senior secondary school teachers were left out.

I am also aware that recently, we passed the 2013/14 budget.To my surprise, up to now the teachers of Bukedea District continue to go without salaries. These teachers have pupils and are parents but they cannot pay for their own children’s fees. My prayer to the House is to compel the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance to really harmonise– (Interjections) –Yes, I will take the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have the matter in your hands, what information do you need?

MR EKUMA: Okay, Mr Speaker. My prayer to the House is to compel the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance to come up with a comprehensive payroll in this country. We cannot continue having teachers not being paid. The next time we will be talking about the Police and the other time we will be talking about nurses. What are we doing in our country?

In order to arrest the situation in Bukedea and Uganda at large, I want to urge the Ministerof Finance to explain to the country how the teachers of Bukedea were left out and when they will be paid. This must be done immediately. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. This is a veryfocused issue; it is about salaries for secondary school teachers in Bukedea and the information now is that it is across the country. So, can we have the government comment on this matter? Yes, Minister of Finance.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija):Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the honourable colleagues. Allow me to explain how we, at the Ministry of Works – sorry, at the Ministry of Finance – (Interjections) – I cannot apologise for a slip of the tongue. 

Allow me to explain how we dispense money. We pay in accordance with the work plan of sectors. In this particular case, we release money in accordance with the payroll. We donot pay the individual payee and the amount of money that is due to that individual employee. Using our computer system, we add up all the money that we have been advised on by the sector, in this case the public service, and we remit this money to public service. It is the Ministry of Public Service that will prepare the individual breakdown and submit it to Bank of Uganda. Bank of Uganda then sends the money to the individual accounts. 

This case that my colleague is referring to – First of all, I must say that I am hearing about it for the first time. I did not know anything about it and I was with the teachers’ leaders yesterday, UNATU – (Interjections) – I meant the national leaders; I am not talking about Bukedea. I am talking about the leadersof UNATU, which I am sure you all know,Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the only thing I can promise is that I will go back to the ministry with the details of Bukedea collegesor whichever other institutions have not received their pay – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to find out whether it is in order for the minister in charge of our monies in this country to come here and start to meander with words, trying to tell this House that he has to first go to the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Education and Sports and all other line ministries.This is the same rhetoric, not knowing and simply forgetting that a short while ago, this august House passed one supplementary after the other to pay the arrears of teachers. 

Secondly, it is also to the knowledge of this House that monies for the first quarter have already been sent to all districts to pay all workers for all the departments of Government. So, is the minister in order to come and lie to this House that he has to first go and find out, when he is actually the one in charge of our money? Mr Speaker, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say, “to come and lie that he is going to find out”? (Laughter) Please, honourable minister.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker and my dear sister, I thinkI donot want to take too much of Parliament’s time. Maybe we need to come here and give a statement on how the system operates. I donot know –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, as you rightly guided earlier, this is a veryfocused question and it is also very simple. Have you paid them? The answer is either yes or no.Two, if you have not paid them, why? Taking us through the process of how you pay does not answer the question. Is the minister proceeding well by standing here and instead of answering the question whether these teachers have been paid and if notwhy, he starts promising how he will come to educate us on how they pay?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that from the time I spent as a teacher, even after joining Parliament, this is the method finance, education and public service use. That is why you will realise that hon. Jessica Alupo has taken off; she has gone out. Whenever you ask about such payments, they will refer you to Ministry of Finance and after that, they will refer you to Ministry of Public Service and after to the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

As we talk, Mr Speaker, Makerere University lecturers are on strike. They are not teaching evening students because of payments. Don’t you think it would be procedurally okay, Mr Speaker, to hear from the Prime Minister, and public service is also here? They are all here and they know what they are telling us. That is the method they use every time it comes to teachers’ payments. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I think this is a matter for Ministry of Public Service, not so? 

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, the matter of teachers has been a daunting one. The matter that has been raised by my colleague is a very serious one. It would be unfortunate to just put aside this matterand leave it to the minister –(Interjections) – Mr Speaker, you can appreciate that the two sector ministers have walked out – public service and that of education.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of Government Business is here.

3.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, obviously this is a very serious matter; it is not a light matter. It is totally unacceptable that people who are in the public service performing important duties of bringing up our children are not paid their dues promptly and on time.I have, therefore, asked them to find out because they told me they didnot have answers.I have asked them to go and find out and comeback during the sitting of this House to give us the answers to that question. Thank you. (Applause)

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, that is perfectly okay, but I want to raise one very fundamental thing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we wait on this matter now so that we can –

CAPT. MUKULA: While we wait, I want to raise one very fundamental point. It has become extremely disturbing for teachers whocome from Moroto, Nebbi or Kabale, for example. When they reach here, they are taken to the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Public Service before being sent to the Ministry of Education and Sports. I am of the view that we should have – (Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that actually, these teachers are even issued with payslips showing the amount of money they are supposed to get but when they go to check on their accounts, there is no reflection of money having been paid. 

This issue does not only affectBukedea. I have more information here; these are documents from Kumi, Bukedea and Ngora districts. Some of the teachers have been paid Shs 70,000 for the last two years. So, some have decided to resign after moving left and right trying to sort out their issues but not being listened to. That is the information I wanted to give. 

I also want to request that after the response is given by the minister, a thorough investigation should be done on the payroll of Ministry of Public Service for all public servants including teachers to establish how these public servants are handled. Thank you for giving way.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, you can appreciate that that information has deeply enriched the submission I have been making. Comrades, we have so far spent about two years here; matters of legislation are very important but dealing with issues of our teachers is even more crucial.

Mr Speaker, I want to strongly recommend that we have a one-stop centre for the teachers - let it be the Teachers Service Commission - so that all matters of entry, discipline and finance are managed by one body.In that way, our poor teachers will not be sent left and right as they try to establish what is right and due to them. 

You can appreciate, Mr Speaker, that some teachers come from as far as Katakwi District to go to Soroti to check whether payments have been remitted to their accounts, only to be told there is no money and they have to travel back. You can appreciate the amount of money a teacher loses in that movement. They move three or four times and almost all their salary is eaten up through transport.Therefore, I suggest that the appropriate committee comes with a strong recommendation to ensure that the teachers are not subjected to ridicule and inhuman treatment by our own government. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Let us now take the position that a statement is going to come, so that we can have some time to discuss it in the course of this sitting; not tomorrow, not any other day, but today.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas the teachers are suffering, recently they were on strike and we convinced them to go back to the classes but to add insult to injury, their money is not on the accounts. Recently, I got information from my district that there are even some teachers who have worked for years without getting paid.

Is it procedurally right for us, as the Parliament of Uganda, to continue debating when actually we have not talked about the issue of teachers? I am wondering whether it wouldnot be procedurally right for us to suspend the sitting for some time so that we can wait for a response from the Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I said. I said we can now wait for the response from the people who have gone to get the answers. 

MR BAKKA: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek procedural clarification from you. When we were convincing the teachers to go back to class, I did tour my constituency. While there, I was informed by health workers in Bugiri District, and specifically, Nabukalu Sub-County Health Centre III, that they have not been paid since the beginning of this financial year.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Prime Minister to consider the whole package - not only teachers but also health workers - so that we can get a broad answer? If there are districts that are not affected, at least Bugiri District is affected. Health workers have not been paid and I was preparing a petition to this House. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for him to consider the full package and include issues of the health workers and explain why they have not been paid? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have said that weshall wait for more information so that we can discuss this matter conclusively to see how to propose a way forward. For that matter, we will now roll out the business; the Order Paper is long.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.00
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Annual Report for the Parliamentary Commission for the financial year 2011/12. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I know that the item coming up is about money, but we have had an issue where the Ministry of Finance borrowed money without authority. This is a serious issue. Parliament passed a resolution– (Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. The information I want to give is that this issue was initially raised by the Committee on Finance. The last time it appeared, a decision was taken that the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy comes up with a report on all the issues that were raised on the Floor. That report was supposed to come within two weeks. I think that is when that matter will be resolved. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, maybe we can have an update from the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. He might guide us and update us on what the honourable Member for Bukedea has just said.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Last week on Thursday, the Minister of Finance brought a statement here to the House requesting Parliament to separate the inquiry of the Auditor-General’s findings from the item of new borrowings. The Auditor-General’s findings were to the effect that there was some borrowing that happened without following the process of parliamentary approval.

The matter came to the Floor of Parliament, it was debated and we were given two weeks to give a report on the inquiry.The minister’s plea was that we do not harm the other new loans, and the House agreed  that the new loans should be allowed to be committed while the inquiry continues by the national economy committee, which is interim,and PAC which is mandated to handle the Auditor-General’s reports. That was the position.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have listened to the chair but the Constitution is clear on borrowing and this does not need an inquiry. If Government needs to borrow, the process is very clear.If it is very clear, why are you talking about an inquiry?This is another way of not doing our work. We are talking of Shs 1.4 trillion borrowed without authority. If they can borrow Shs 1.4 trillion, why can’t they borrow this Shs 500 billion without your authority? Why are they coming on this one?

I think as Members of Parliament, we should be serious on this. We should not be the ones to defy the Constitution; the Constitution says Government shall not borrow without authority from Parliament and it is very clear that they have borrowed without authority from Parliament.Is it procedurally right for us to approve loans yet Government has already borrowed without the authority of Parliament, and we made a decision in the House that until they resolve that issue there is no more borrowing? Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Some of these things were handled when I was not here.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, this matter came up last week when my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, was not present. We debated it extensively and this House took a clear decision by resolution.

First, the question about whether Government borrowed in contravention of the Constitution is not a given fact.Whereas indeed the Auditor-General reported that by signing the agreement, that in effect was a commitment by the Minister of Finance of the Republic of Uganda to a loan without approval of Parliament, it was clearly specified in the response that even for Parliament or the committee to approve, it must have before it the terms of the proposed agreement.Therefore, when they do sign, they sign a document with what we call “conditions precedent”.

It is very well known that the Constitution of Uganda requires Parliament to approve any loan.These banks, including the World Bank,also demand that the Attorney-General of Uganda gives a legal opinion before the loans are operationalized.Therefore, it is a fact that without the approval of Parliament, without the legal opinion of the Attorney-General, there cannot be a loan commitment. 

We,therefore, said that both the national economy committee and PAC would look into this issue, get the details and give us their findings.In the meantime,however, we should not hold the rest of government activities at ransom or shut down government business while that inquiry is going on.So we passed a resolution in this Parliament that we handle the new loans without delay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it clearer now?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I agree with the Leader of Government Business. It is very clear in our Constitution that there is no contract, like that on borrowing and others, that can be signed unless it has been cleared by the Attorney-General.However, what we are talking about is how Ministry of Finance can sign an agreement before we have authorised them to sign.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, what the report was saying, and what the Prime Minister is saying, is that no commitment was made.What was done were the preparatory works leading to documents coming to Parliament for approval.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if you read the Auditor-General’s report, it says that the moment you pay fees, it means they are charging the loan.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week,this issue was on the Order Paper andit was debated extensively.We agreed that while an issue had been raised that loans had been acquired without parliamentary approval, it was resolved by this House that the two committees of national economy and PAC do handle the issues.

This House resolved that whereas there is an issue of Government acquiring a loan without parliamentary approval, Government had now come to seek for approval of a new loan. We agreed that there is no way the mistakes that had been committed can hinder the new loans as we try to compel Government to explain if it actually happened.

Government is now seeking approval of new loans whose budget we have already passed. Is it procedurally right for the Leader of the Opposition, a member of this House, to continue derailing the proceedings when we have already made a decision and resolved through a motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are two issues here; one is that there was likelihood that certain procedures had not been followed in acquiring certain loans in the past.Now, there are also new loans for which the authority of this House is being sought and they are fairly urgent. The last time I read them: Opuyo-Moroto electricity transmission line; rural transformation adaptability programme; Hoima-Nkenda power transmission line; Kampala-Entebbe power transmission line; and I think for national food security through increased rice production. 

Those are the loans that are here and they are part of the budget that was passed. I am just showing you what was brought to the House.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Iam rising to be guided because I am deeply concerned.The Prime Minister stood here to say that because there are preconditions, among others the legal opinion of the Attorney-General and the approval of Parliament, the signature by Government would not constitute this into an agreement. I find it extremely disturbing that the Government can say,“We have signed but we have not committed the nation”. 

I think we should be guided by you, Mr Speaker, on whether the signature by Government constitutes a commitment or not.For somebody to say we committed you and then not– (Interjections) -Surprisingly, my colleagues, including the Member for Bujenje, want to take over the role of the Speaker in guiding me. In all honesty, I can only take guidance from the Speaker.

MR BAKKA: Mr Speaker, did Government of Uganda borrow without authority from Parliament? That is a question whose answer is to be determined by two committees of Parliament, PAC and national economy.

Will Government stop borrowing? The answer is “no”. Government is not going to stop borrowing because yesterday there was suspicion that Government failed to get authorisation from Parliament. In any case, that question is under determination by the two committees. 

The other day we were here fully constituted and we resolved, while Members were wilfully on their private business– (Interjections) -Mr Speaker, this House was fully constituted and we took a resolution after a lengthy discussion. Is it, therefore, in order for some Members to come and take us back to where we started from the other day and yet we passed a resolution to seek parliamentary approval for the new loans? Is it in order for Members to take us back?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, indeed a decision was taken in this House that the new loans should not be delayed because they are urgent. Let me take the opinion of the Attorney-General.

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I rise to comment on this matter as follows:

It is unfortunate that I wasnot present in the House when the debate on this matter took place because I was out on other official engagements. However, one thing I wish to say is that this borrowing is a process.That process, as the Prime Minister said, has inbuilt mechanisms, inbuilt conditions that must be fulfilled in one way or the other to make that process legally effective.The entire process is legally effective when the Attorney-General issues a legal opinion indicating that there are no other legal formalities required to make this loan effective.That legal opinion has always been issued by the Attorney-General on the basis of a resolution of Parliament approving the loan request.

It is not true that during the negotiations for these loans, the Attorney-General’s Office is not involved. The Attorney-General’s Office is always involved at any stage in the negotiations of these loans. If there is anything to the contrary, certainly I cannot associate myself with it. What is true and correct in my mind is that the office of the Attorney-General is always involved in the negotiations and it issues the final legal opinion indicating that the process gone through is legally effective. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do agree with the concern of the Leader of the Opposition. I am a member of the finance committee. Let us agree that the work by the committees on audit queries is known and the practice and the norms of this House are known. If an audit query appears in the Auditor-General’s report, it can be dropped or brought to the whole House for debate.This is work that is still before PAC and to deal with it would be pre-empting the report of PAC.

I request the Leader of the Opposition to wait for two weeks. It was the finance committee that recommended and we agreed that if this is an audit query, let it be certified by PAC.They will bring that report here and we will have answers but now we are debating in anticipation. The Public Accounts Committee can bring recommendationshere but now we are debating in anticipation. This matter has not been concluded by the committee.

I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker,and the Leader of the Opposition; we should wait for the two weeks to resolve that matter. We should carry on with the business and not delay. The audit must come to the Floor and PAC must bring the report to deal with it here. That is when we shall take a stand. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must confess I was not here when the motion was passed; we had gone to Serere for a burial.I am trying to understand the idea behind the concern about monies borrowed without parliamentary approval and also the idea behind parliamentary approval itself.

If had to carry my feelings up to this point, I would be thinking that you are concerned as a House about the possible ceilings- how far can Uganda borrow -about performance of what has been borrowed, which we have not looked into, and about sustainability of this borrowing. If you looked at those parameters, they have a direct impact. Whether we say we will borrow today or we will not borrow today, those parameters that should have been borne in mind in the motion have a serious bearing on this particular matter. So - (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I raise this point of order with a lot of pain because my colleague is a senior member of this House and she knows the procedure you go through if you want to reintroduce a subject that has been voted on in this House. What she is discussing now is exactly what we discussed on Thursday and we resolved in a motion. She is trying to reopen debate without following our rules of procedure. Is she in order to open debate on issues that were resolved in a motion? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said this and let me say it again: a decision was taken to defer those particular issuesuntil the Public Accounts Committee reports and then the details can be exhaustively discussed and a decision taken at that time. A second decision was also taken that the loans that are now before the House should be considered so that they can feed into the Budget, which has already been passed, because these are the sources of funds to finance that budget. That is what was agreed to the last time. So, please, if it is a concern about previous borrowing, let us wait for that time and deal with it then.      

The question on if a particular loan pushes us beyond the necessary limitscan be carried to the debate on the actual loan. The particular loan here, for example, is US$80 million; how far would it go? The minister would now tell us, “This is how far we have gone, so this loan would be safe.” I think that is where we are going now. One by one, we can then see if particular loans are still falling within the required parameters, which we are trying to suggest. That discussion can still come in when we are dealing with the actual motions. Is that okay? Please, let us do this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are not objecting to your ruling and I know Members want to be satisfied. 

When we were swearingin here, we were given the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure. I heard a colleague of mine, the hon. Nankabirwa from Kyankwanzi, saying that mistakes have been made.This Constitution came into force in 1995; if these mistakes were made in 1996, 1997, 1998, you would be right but now I think you better read your Constitution very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, next item. The motion is already on. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW ID 53,390,000 (US$ 80,620,000) FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (UDB) FOR FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION OF OPUYO-MOROTO ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVLEOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$80,620,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of the Opuyo-Moroto Electricity Transmission Line Project. 

This is a very important project for the country. We know that the Karamoja region has not been easily linked to electricity, so we think that this loan will contribute to the economic growth and improve the living standards of the people of Karamoja in particular. It will provide electricity supply and meet the demand in the Karamoja region.It will result in the provision of sufficient power transfer capacity through the commissioning and installation of a 132kV line from the existing Opuyo line.It will reach the 132kV line and eventually cover 527 kilometres of 33Kv lines to cover the districts of Moroto, Nakapiripirit, Kotido, Abim and Kaabong.

This loan will finance 78 percent of the project and the 22 percent of the project will be financed by the Government of Uganda. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy. Mr Chairman, would you like to report on this. Is the motion being moved for the first time? Is it seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of State for Works, the Minister of State for Energy and the Minister without Portfolio. Yes, Mr Chairman.

4.28
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to present, on behalf of the Committee of National Economy, the report on a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$80,620,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the construction of the Opuyo-Moroto Electricity Transmission Project.

First of all,I want to thank the Speaker and the House on the eve of the 51stIndependence Day anniversary, and after a national prayer breakfast, for giving this country hope that leaders in this Parliament can resolve matters by consensus. There is no better Independence gift you could have given Ugandans than that. (Applause) 

We did commit ourselves last week, and we requested the Business Committee, to bring two reports very urgently. One is on the debt stock and the performance of loans. I am sure when we come back from Independence, we shall debate that. 

We also did request that the different sessional committees in charge of different loans being disbursed should study the report by Ministry of Finance, which is always laid on the Table during the Budget time. That report has information on the performance of loans, grants and guarantees. I am pretty sure every Member of Parliament has got a copy in their pigeonholes. That will help us follow up the non-performing loans and see how to handle the problem.

Mr Speaker, we have four loan requests for the same sector - energy. I seek your indulgence that since these loans are for the same sector and some of the policy recommendations, findings and recommendations may actually appear in the next requests, we be allowed to present all the four energy loanrequests together. Three are for transmission.Since we are generating power we need to transmit before we can distribute it. 

I request that I am allowed to present them in sequence to allow Members get the bigger picture and discuss from a bird’s eye view. Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence, otherwise we would have to go loan by loan. The resolutions will be made loan by loan but my request is that we do not debate the four loan requests of the same sector piecemeal. It is a request. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member is saying that the loans are related and they are from one sector. The motions can be moved and he speaks to them one by one so that we can debate them one by one and we start taking decisions on each of them. However, we could receive all the motions because they are related and they are from the same sector. That is the proposal. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, each loan is given by maybe a different country. The Attorney-General clearly explained that before it reaches that stage, it will have gone through the Attorney-General and they make different comments. This enables Parliament understand under what circumstances we are going to procure that loan. So, if you bring them together, we shall not actually understand the reasons behind each loan. We shall not understand the intricacies involved. I would find it strange to just say, loan no. 1 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the presentation is going to be done individually. The motions are going to be moved one after the other and the minister will speak to them and then the chairman will speak to each one of them in the different reports.We shall then debate them together and take the decisions one by one again, not all of them together, so that the debate is organised. That is what they are proposing. Is that clear now?

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, let me go by your advice but I would like to request the chairman; when reading these reports, you skip a lot of things. I am worried about my district, Kalungu. Whenever it comes to paying back, Kalungu has to pay but Kalungu is not one of the beneficiaries of these loans. So, when talking about details, please indicate those areas which will benefit. That is my major worry.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I seek further clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is nobody on the Floor; who are you seeking clarification from?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: No, I am seeking guidance. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, the loan has an impact on the environment and therefore, I seek clarification - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait and then you speak to the motion? Why don’t you wait for when the motion is properly before the House, when the chairman has reported, and then you can debate and raise your issues? You cannot seek guidance before there is a matter on the Floor. My guidance is that you wait. 

The decision is that we will receive all the requests and then you make your presentations one by one. We will then debate and take decisions also one by one. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable colleagues – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can you now allow the minister to move the next motion. You cannot present a report on each of them before they are moved. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW AN ADDITIONAL SDR 8,000,000 (US$ 12,000,000) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE UGANDA ENERGY FOR RURAL TRANSFORMATION (ERT) ADAPTABLE PROGRAM LOAN (APL) – PHASE II PROJECT

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow an additional US$ 12 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Uganda Energy for Rural Transformation Adaptable Programme Loan Phase II Project. 

Mr Speaker, this loan is meant to increase access to energy and ICTs in rural Uganda. The project will construct and commission distribution lines and schemes in Soroti-Katakwi-Amuria, Ayer-Kamdini, Bobi-Minakulu, Ibanda-Kazo-Rushere, Ntenjeru and environs, Ruhiira Millennium Village, Gulu-Acholi Bur, Opeta-Achokora. It will also extend lines between Masindi-Waki-Buliisa and Nkonge-Kashozi. 

The project will also install, operate and maintain ICT infrastructure in commercially non-viable rural areas, including the construction of at least 550 community information centres and internet connections in 16 sub-counties. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Minister of State for Works, the chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources and the Minister of State for Energy. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$ 23 MILLION FROM THE FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT (AFD) FOR FINANCING THE HOIMA–NKENDA POWER TRANSMISSION LINE AND ASSOCIATED SUB STATIONS PROJECT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$ 23 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) for financing the Hoima-Nkenda power transmission line and associated substations project. 

Mr Speaker, the purpose of this loan is to help increase access to affordable electrical energy through construction of the Hoima-Nkenda transmission power plant and associated substations along the way, to boost generation capacity. The project will specifically provide transmission infrastructure to evacuate power generated from power plants in the project area including Buseruka, Kinyara, Muzizi in the short term, and also Kabale totalling 200 megawatts in the medium to long-term, to the load centres of Hoima, Fort-Portal, Kasese and the rest of the grid. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the chairperson of the Committee on National Resources, the Minister of State for Ethics, the Minister of State for Energy and the Minister of State for Works. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW EURO 15 MILLION FROM THE KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAN (KFW) OF GERMANY FOR FINANCING THE KAMPALA-ENTEBBE POWER TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow €15 million from the KFW of Germany for financing the Kampala–Entebbe power transmission line. 

Mr Speaker, the Kampala-Entebbe transmission line will strive to meet the energy needs of the Ugandan population for social and economic development through increased availability of affordable electricity energy in an environmentally sustainable manner. 

The construction of this line and associated substation projects is to strengthen and expand transmission capacity in order to meet the energy needs of the country. The specific objective is provision of adequate transmission infrastructure to enhance supply capacity and ensure that reliable power is supplied to Entebbe and its environment. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Member for Kiboga East, the Member for Mukono South, the Member for Soroti Municipality and the Minister of State for Works and the Minister of State for Energy. These reports are from the same sector; are we going to handle the other one separately?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the four for the energy sector are the ones we want to handle in sequence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, because there are four loan requests, I will try to do a quick summary. We shall start with the Opuyo-Moroto Electricity Transmission line worth US$ 80,620,000. 

We interfaced with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Energy, Uganda Electricity Transmission Company, Electricity Regulatory Authority, Rural Electrification Agency and the Committee on Natural Resources. May I request the Clerk’s office to also give Members the minister’s brief. The loan requests are accompanied by a brief to Parliament, which the minister read in his motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: While they are distributing that, may I recognise some people; in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kagadi Parents School represented by hon. Ignatius Besisira and hon. Robinah Nabbanja. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have pupils and teachers of Golden Treasure Nursery School, represented by hon. Gabriel Aridru and hon. Christine Abia. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee looked at the brief to Parliament on the loan requests. We looked at the project appraisal documents and at the draft loan financing agreement, which in effect informed members of the terms and conditions of the borrowing. 

I will now go to page 2. The Karamoja sub-region has an estimated population of close to one million people on an area of 27,000 square kilometres. The sub-region suffered significantly during the just ended decade-long internal conflict. Government of Uganda developed a development action plan for this area, which currently is being implemented, to ensure the development and integration of this area into the national economy. The existing power supply in Karamoja is from very small generators with a capacity of 600kw to the main town of Moroto and a small electricity network. 

The existing electricity supply is inadequate and inefficient in meeting the demand for the target areas, which is projected at about 43MW by the year 2025. The project is critical as it will facilitate the implementation of the Rural Electrification Programme in the Karamoja sub-region. It will reduce the high transmission losses in the sub-region and improve the system efficiency, stability and reliability.

The project shall, therefore, contribute towards the national electricity access rate of 17 per cent to 100 per cent by 2040 – this is our target. This will be done through the extension of the national electricity transmission backbone and the connection of 2,009 new customers in 26 villages and 51,829 customers in Karamoja sub-region by 2017 and 2040 respectively. 

Agriculture and livestock are the major economic activities in the sub-region. I do not know whether I should go through all these details. In addition, the sub-region has deposits of limestone and gypsum. As a result, this project will support the industrial development in the sub-region by providing electricity to the country’s planned third cement factory. Colleagues, you are aware that we are currently loading the raw materials from Karamoja and transporting them up to Tororo. The foundation of the factory was laid in October 2012 and is projected to create about 10,000 jobs.  

The projectalignment to the country’s strategy is in fulfilment of the goal of the National Development Plan (NDP) of providing physical infrastructure in the energy sector to support the structural transformation envisaged by Vision 2040. Rural transformation is a priority in the NDP and the development of Northern Uganda is a major goal of Government of Uganda, given that this region is the poorest in the country and is emerging from a decade-long internal conflict. The Government’s Peace, Recovery and Development Plan for the Northern Uganda aims at, among others, revitalising the region’s economy by reactivating the production sectors through the provision of critical infrastructure.

Project objectives 

1. 	To contribute to economic growth and improve the living standards of the country.
2. 	To provide electricity supply and meet the demand in the Karamoja sub-region.
3.	To achieve reliable electricity supply by providing for sufficient power transfer capacity through the installation and commissioning of approximately 160 kilometres of the 132kV transmission line backbone from the existing Opuyo 132/33 kV substation to the proposed 132/33kV 50 Megavolt Ampere substation at Moroto town; 527 kilometres of 33kv line; and 82 kilometres of low voltage network in 26 villages.Colleagues, you are aware that if you have a poor technical line, you will increase technical losses and that was earlier mentioned in the report.

The project location is clear; it is from Soroti District in Teso sub-region in eastern Uganda to Moroto and Nakapiripirit in north-eastern Uganda and Kotido, Abim and Kaabong in the northern Karamoja sub-region. This, of course, goes through Katakwi.

The project consists of the following components:

a) 	The electricity network. The details are given. 
b) 	The support project management unit.Mr Speaker, I am summarising because we still have three other reports.
c) 	The environment and social management plan.
d) 	Consultancy services.
e) 	Financial audit.

Project costs and financing

The total budgeted cost, including physical and price contingencies of this project, is estimated at US$ 103.7 million. The project will be co-financed by the Islamic Development Bank (US$ 80.62 million) and the Government of Uganda. You can find that on the table, which illustrates estimated projected costs.We have the components, the local and foreign costs and their total. You can look at the items, right from the electricity network to the grand total. 

On page 7, we also have the project costs and financing plan with components in US dollars. There is also the Government of Uganda’s dollar equivalent in Uganda Shillings and then the total cost.

The terms and conditions were given by the Minister of Finance; it is a 20-year repayment period after a gestation period of four years and an interbank offered rate plus 155 basis points. 

The conditions 

    • Satisfactory evidence that the execution and delivery of this agreement on behalf of the recipient has been duly authorised or ratified by Parliament, and this is always a requirement. 

    • The legal opinion of the honourable Attorney-General of Uganda, stating that the terms and conditions of the agreement constitute enforceable, binding obligations upon the Republic of Uganda.

    • Evidence that procurements are conducted in a transparent and fair manner in line with the provisions of the PDDA laws.

    • A copy of Government of Uganda’s duly adopted and approved implementation plan that includes inter-alia resettlement action plan with respect to land required for the project - indeed, in the field, we found some of these challenges - and financial statements including quarterly progress reports, audited financial statements as may be required by the laws of Uganda. 

Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) shall be the overall executing agency for the project and the project will be housed in UETCL. The Rural Electrification Agency shall be responsible for execution of the electricity distribution sub-component of the project and UETCL shall be responsible for the rest of the project scope. 

These two agencies all fall under the supervision of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. We had to go to Karamoja with both REA and UETCL because we were interested in the peripheral areas of Karamoja, those on the Sudan border and the Kenyan border, to see how they can benefit from this project. We wanted them to explain what connection they are making in Abim, Kotido and other such areas.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I request that I go straight to the observations and recommendations. The committee observed that the IDB financing estimated for this project includes 15 percent contingency, equivalent to US$10.52 million. This is due to the envisaged cost overruns that are likely to be encountered due to the behaviour of inflation and physical changes in quantities for implementation of transmission lines that are usually common with electricity transmission projects. Cost overruns are highly linked to misuse of project funds and high cost of construction materials. 

The committee recommends that Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and UETCL should ensure that anti-corruption and anti-fraud provisions are embedded in all bidding documents and contracts of contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers that relate to this project. The committee, and indeed Parliament, is always very allergic to any contingency fund.That is why we took the trouble to alert the ministry and the sessional committee which will handle the implementation to follow up these matters at the time of implementation. 

The committee observed that there is a lot of pressure from leaders and communities to have electricity extended to their areas without focus particularly on grid extension, whether or not it makes financial or economic sense.However, many of the demands could be met by other means like solar electrification. Given the set-up of settlements in the rural areas where homesteads are scattered, grid access could remain a big challenge. 

The committee recommends that Government should not only promote foreign private sector participation in increasing the hydropower generation grid but also explore mechanisms of promoting their participation in solar electrification, especially in areas fairly far away from the grid. 

For domestic use, the committee believes that not everybody should be on the grid. Solar PV connections have the potential to accelerate and even overtake grid connection. This would address such pressures as long as reasonable financial resources are committed to the extension of the grid.

The committee further observed that acquisition of rightsof way and wayleaves for the energy project in Uganda is still a big challenge for the energy sector despite the existence of an elaborate process under the framework for compensation of project affected persons. 

The committee recommends that Government should adopt an effective and efficient participatory approach in preparation for infrastructure projects. Continued community participation and sensitisation of people living along proposed infrastructure projects should be intensified during the implementation of this project. This will enable the timely project execution by contractors and maintain good relations with the local communities. 

Mr Speaker, this is a critical matter in almost every utility project. The Constitution provides for prompt prior and adequate payment, which is not friendly to projects. That is for Parliament to consider at the right time. 

The committee noted thatone of the lessons learnt from the implementation of projects, especially those financed by externally borrowed funds, is the untimely release of Government counterpart funding and the low absorption capacity of project executing agencies.Colleagues, we should not pass the budget without counterpart funding for projects. 

The committee recommends that Government ensures that adequate counterpart funding for the projects is timely, integrated into the national budget during the project implementation period – (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, taking into account the time we have, and since Parliament will be adjourned on Thursday, I propose that the chairman of the Committee on National Economy summarises probably with the conclusions, so that we can be able to quickly deal with the matter on the Floor of Parliament. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I am only reading recommendations and observations. If it is the conviction of the House that we do not read the observations then I am ready to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the issue is that these things are similar. Are there any distinctions? Maybe now that you have read the first one, you can only cite the distinctions in the second one so that you do not have to go through the entire report, if they are similar.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I will take information from the chairman of the sessional committee because he is the onewho will look at the implementation of the recommendations we are giving here.

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, given your guidance, I would request that my colleague summarises the paragraphs preceding the recommendations and observations; but the observations and recommendations are important because that is where we derive conclusions during the debate. The rest can be summarised but we go through the observations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, there is a recommendation on procurement processes, for example; does it run through all of them? If so, must you repeat all of them four times if the procurement issue reoccurs in there? The chairman should pick out issues that are different in each of them so that we can understand where to debate.

MR MUKITALE: I would request that for Karamoja, this being the first ever big project, you let me go through their recommendations and I will see how to navigate the others. Thank you so much.

The committee further observed the low level of co-ordination among government institutions and other relevant service providers when implementing infrastructure projects. During the construction of the electricity power evacuation line for Buseruka interconnection project in Hoima, for example, the contracted company had completed erection of poles in some sections of the line routes and afterwards, UNRA informed them that the line under construction was on the road reserve. How can UNRA and Ministry of Energy fail to agree when these projects are being mapped?

The committee recommends that prior to the start of construction of electricity transmission lines in the project area, UETCL, REA and other service providers like UNRA, National Water and Sewerage Corporationwork as a team all through thewayleaves procedures. This is due to the number of infrastructure projects and the upgrading of roads to tarmac that are about to be undertaken in the Karamoja region.In other words, all infrastructure providers should work together even regarding conduits. 

Again in Karamoja, we found the tarmac encroaching on a bit of the new power line and they have to transfer.So, I think that should be followed strictly. Even in Bwaise, you can see that the water project has tunnelled through the Northern By-pass which was done just two years ago.

The committee recommends that this route be aligned as Moroto-Kotido-Kopus-Kaabong-Karenga-Namokora with a turnoff to Kidepo.

The committee further recommends that REA includes the following additional areas of Karamoja region on the list of project areas that are to benefit from the extension of low voltage transmission lines under the project: Kaabong teeoff to Kalapata (24 kilometres); Kaabong teeoff to Lolerya (14 kilometres); Kaabong-Kapedo teeoff to Kawalakol (12 kilometres); Kotido-Losilang (6 kilometres) – (Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Mr Speaker, since we have the reports, I would beg the chairperson not to read this particular part of the proposed additional areas.

MR MUKITALE: Colleagues, I am actually concluding. That was the conclusion.However, I did mention that Karamoja has been at the periphery for some time and they are beginning to benefit from this programme, therefore it is important that this matter is covered.

In conclusion, the committee has noted that in the context of Uganda’s economic development and poverty reduction strategy, the government is aiming at massively increasing access of electricity to the country’s population. This project will provide sustainable power supply to Karamoja region by providing sufficient power transfers from cheap hydroelectric power in central Uganda to meet the electricity demand in the region.

This project will also address some of the energy sector challenges that range from the use of small isolated electricity grids with small diesel fuel generators, huge investments required for electricity transmission and distribution, and the high electricity demand growth rate.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow US$ 80,620,000 from the IDB for financing construction of the first ever Karamoja Opuyo-Moroto electricity transmission line. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Let me just recognise that in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers of St Jude Primary School, Wakiso. I hope they are still here. They are represented by hon. Joseph Balikudembe and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would request that a member of the committee summarises the next report since I have four reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us receive the reports then we have the general debate. This is what we had agreed.

5.08
REV. PETER BAKKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy on a request by Government to borrow an additional SDR 8 million equivalent to US$ 12 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Uganda Energy for Rural Transmission (ERT) Adaptable Programme Loan (APL) phase two project. The request-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I can only have one member standing at one time.

REV. BAKKALUBA: The request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and accordingly, referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration in line with rule 166 (2) (b) of the parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

Under the methodology, we interfaced with different ministries as you can see in the report. I beg to lay on the Table the committee minutes, issues of REA clarification, the project appraisal and financing agreement. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

REV. BAKKALUBA: I will skip the project objectives and move to the project components. The project consists of the following components:
    • Cost of connections. You can read those.
    • Terms and conditions of the loan.The loan amount as stated is US$12 million. Maturity period is 40 years with a grace period of 10 years and the service charge is 0.75 percent per annum.

I want to go straight to the observations and recommendations. The committee observed that although a number of major milestones in the implementation of rural electrification programmes had been marked, the government’s target for electricity for all by 2035 may not be realised mainly due to inadequate and inconsistent appropriated budgeted funds for this programme. More so, Government continues to seek partial funding for implementation of rural electrification projects. 

The committee recommends that Government commits adequate funds to support the rural electrification programme through accelerating efforts of adequate resource mobilisation to develop the required infrastructure and scale up access to meet the target.

The committee observed low performance of outcomes achieved under ERT II on account of start-up constraints and delays in procurement especially as regards the ICT component. The component is implemented by the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC).

The committee went ahead to recommend that UCC expedites the completion of the uncompleted aspects of the ICT component in order for ICTs to contribute to the improvement of the productivity of rural enterprises under the project.

The committee observed that despite the continued development of rural electrification infrastructure across the country, connection rates have remained at a low level, often ranging from about 10 percent to 20 percent of the targeted consumers. This is attributed to power connections being unaffordable. The committee welcomed the project’s intervention of financing the initial connection costs in the project area for this project as this will significantly increase electricity access in these rural areas.

The committee observed that the government borrowing strategy is currently focusing on only switching to alternate financing from only the traditional source of multilateral and bilateral creditors. There is very little emphasis on utilising other effective and efficient market-based infrastructure. The committee recommends that Government explores other possibilities of accessing other market-based instruments such ascarbon finance and others as you can read.

The committee observed the low productive use of electricity, which reduced the financial viability of rural electrification initiatives because end users are not using electricity productively. The committee recommends that Government embarks on rigorous sensitisation programmes for the masses especially in the programme areas.

The committee observed that although this particular additional financing has no requirement for Government counterpart funding, there exists a number of other on-going and planned projects that REA has planned to undertake according to how -You can read the rest. 

The committee recommends that Government provides the necessary counterpart funding as I stated above. 

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, the committee has noted that in the context of Uganda’s economic development and poverty reduction strategy, the government is aiming at massively increasing access of electricity to the country’s population. 

The purpose of the ERT project is to develop Uganda’s rural energy and information communication sectors so that they can make a significant contribution to bring about rural transformation. These sectors will facilitate a significant improvement in the productivity of rural enterprises as well as the quality of rural households. 

This additional financing will help finance the costs associated with meeting the financing gap and achieving the scale-up of the on-grid connection target of the original project from 109,000 to 120,000households. Thus, this additional financing will help accelerate the access to electrification in the country, contributing to attaining Uganda’s goal of universal access by 2040 under the sustainable energy for all initiative. 

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow an additional SDR 8 million, equivalent to US$12 million, from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Uganda Energy for Rural Transmission (ERT) Adaptable Programme Loan (APL) phase II project. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Please Members, note your issues then we can have a debate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you so much. I now go to the request by Government to borrow US$23 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) for financing the Hoima-Nkenda Power transmission line and associated substations. 

The methodology is the same. We went to Hoima with the natural resources committee. We met the ministries concerned as indicated. I will start from page 3, the project objective.

The objective of this project is to provide the transmission infrastructure that will enable the evacuation of power that will be generated by power plants in the project area of Buseruka, now called Kabalega- nine megawatts; Kinyara, five megawatts; Muzizi, 40 megawatts- of course Kabalega is very important- and Kabaale, 50 megawatts in the medium to long term, to the load centres of Hoima, Fort Portal, Kasese and the rest of the grid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You might have to declare your interests. (Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, Kabalega being what he was, a hero, and we are celebrating Independence tomorrow, it is important that we have a project named after him.

I will move to the components. The project consists of two components: 

a)	The construction of a 226 kilometre 220kv line; the upgrade of the 132kv Nkenda substation and the 132kv Fort Portal substation; and the construction of the new 133kv Hoima substation. This will be a new substation to evacuate electricity generated from the earlier production scheme. 

	This component will support the construction of the 227.7 kilometre, 132kv double circuit line traversing five districts already mentioned. The component comprises of the 49.5 kilometre –Colleagues, can I go through all this? I go ahead?

b) 	It will support UETCL in implementing supervision, capacity building and training. The component shall comprise of project management, project planning, procurement planning and management, follow up and control in the construction period, erection, implementing and updating the designs, pretesting and commissioning.

Project cost

The estimated cost is reflected in the table below. The estimated cost for the project is US$96.3 million. This will be co-financed by the Government of Norway (US$53.7million); French Development Agency (US$23.7 million); and Government of Uganda counterpart funding (US$19.6 million). The table on page 5 illustrates the financing components to 100 percent.

On page 6, we have the terms as read to us by the Minister of Finance in his motion. The figure is US$23 million at 1.8 per annum on disbursed and outstanding amounts; maturity period of 20 years; commitment fee of 0.5 percent on undisbursed amounts.The conditions are also given. I will repeat this for emphasis. 

Conditions 

    • The legal opinion of the Attorney-General on legal validity of the loan. This is very important.
    • Prior noobjection of the lender to provisions of the on-lending agreement and delivery to lender of signed copy thereof.
    • Delivery of documents evidencing that the governing bodies of co-financiers have agreed to extend financing as set out in the financial plan.
    • Acquisition of the grant funds from Norway.
    • Submission to AFD as follows -

I think I can skip the project implementation plan and go straight to observations and recommendations.

The committee observed that Government has prioritised the implementation of electricity generation projects in the country by both public and private actors. However, implementation of generation and transmission projects has not been able to move at the same pace to ensure that all the power generated by both the public and private sectors is fully evacuated to the grid and connected. 

Findings of the committee, when we visited Kabalega Hydro-plant in Buseruka, Hoima, revealed that though the plant had an installed generation capacity of nine megawatts, actual generation is only three megawatts because of the evacuation capacity. This was caused by the low transmission capacity of the existing line that was constructed to evacuate power from the plant. As a result, this had caused poor electricity coverage in the whole neighbourhood of Hoima and the surrounding areas of Masindi, Kibaale and others. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and UETCL should ensure that for every new and upcoming power generation project, including Karuma, Isimba and Ayago, plans for evacuating power from these plants should be prepared well in advance and timely implementation done to ensure that the built power plants are fully utilised. This will save the country from incurring losses as a result of paying for power that is not generated by these plants.

We hope the matter in this next observation will be taken seriously by both the Ministry of Finance and the Committee on Natural Resources. The committee observed the low realisation of electricity projects particularly in the generation and transmission segments. While some progress has been registered on mini hydro projects, large projects have hitherto taken too long to get to the development phase. The committee recommends that the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development and UETCL should accelerate the development process of projects in the generation and transmission segments in order to attract long term financing in the electricity sector. 

The committee further notes the slow progress in the implementation of the national grid development plan that envisages total coverage of electricity to the entire country as well as development of the high voltage grid. There has also been slow progress in the implementation of the interconnection of electricity grids of the five Nile Equatorial Lakes countries project that was approved by Parliament in 2010. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development together with UETCL prioritize the interconnection of the country’s electricity grid with that of all its neighbours in the region by expediting the implementation of the interconnection of electricity grids of the five Nile Equatorial Lakes countries projects. This will increase the supply and demand of electricity in the countries. Mr Speaker and colleagues, this is very critical not only because we are in the East African Community and not only because we are in the Nile Basin, but the only way we can get the cheapest power is to allow competition. The cheapest generator should put the cheapest power on the grid and should be consumed by all its neighbours. Also, the best way to make the East African Community a reality is to have shared joint venture utilities. 

The committee observed that experiences from similar projects have exhibited continued delays associated with payments to project affected persons especially those land owners that have agreed to valued compensation rates. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development ensures that Government counterpart funding for land compensation is adequately and timely budgeted for. They should also scale up the processing of project affected persons to ensure that the transmission corridor is handed over to the contractor in time once the assessment is finalised. 

Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) should further expedite the process of registering the acquired rights and secure the corridor in order to guard against future encroachment. We already mentioned this matter earlier. 

The committee observed that although the project has an existing resettlement action plan for existing project affected persons, experiences from similar projects have shown that land owners continue to reject electricity transmission projects from being implemented on their land. The rejections are out of the perceived health impacts from the high voltage transmission lines or because of injury caused on their land by high voltage transmission lines traversing through. 

The committee recommends that UETCL ensures that it utilizes its communication strategy in order to provide adequate and timely information to the project affected persons on issues such as health impact of high transmission lines so that the project affected persons observe the 30-metre way leave. Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited should further ensure that any grievances arising from affected persons are dealt with in a timely and adequate manner. They could possibly learn from the telecoms on how they resolved the fear of the masts making people infertile.

The committee further observed that the route for this proposed transmission line will traverse a number of forests that are purely privately owned. Some of these forests include Bujawe Forest belonging to BAT and Core Woods that is used as a research station for Makerere University. According to UETCL, the owners of these forests have licenses from the National Forestry Authority to grow trees in areas where the natural forest was degrading. 

The committee recommends that since both UETCL and NFA are government bodies, they should ensure that there is effective collaboration between them in order to ensure compliance with all respective requirements, especially when compensating for the parts of these forests where transmission lines will traverse, in order to avoid unnecessary delays. The committee further recommends for increased collaboration between government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) especially when it comes to implementing infrastructure projects on land that was originally owned by MDAs and compensation has to be made. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, in conclusion, this project aims to support the Government of Uganda efforts to implement planned infrastructural and institutional platforms to improve electricity generation, supply and reliability in the country. This will boost socio-economic growth in the region through provision of power for the manufacturing/ industrial activities and service delivery in the area. The project will increase electricity availability and connectivity, and increase supply, quality and quantity which will result into an increase in the gross domestic product for the country. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the committee therefore supports and recommends that this House approves the request by Government to borrow US$ 23 million from the French Agency for Development for financing the Hoima-Nkenda power transmission line and associated substation. I beg to move. I now lay on the Table the draft financing agreement, the brief to Parliament we scrutinized and the project appraisal and implementation plan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much. Can we have the next report? 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I now go to the final report and that is the Kampala-Entebbe line. It is another very straightforward project. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I beg to report on the request by Government to borrow € 15 million from the KFW of Germany for financing the Kampala-Entebbe power transmission line project. The methodology is as usual. We scrutinised the same documents and we met the relevant ministries.

Background

The benefits of urban electrification overlap with those of rural electrification but not entirely. Some of the benefits of providing electricity in the peri-urban and urban areas include the following: Increase in education levels; reduced violence on women; boost in social status from social exclusion to social inclusion; security from street lighting; more investments in housing; and improvements once the neighbourhoods are secure.

The main goal of this project is to meet the energy need of Uganda’s population for social and economic transformation through increased availability of affordable electric energy – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, why don’t you go to the observations.

MR MUKITALE: The minister read the terms and colleagues can read the components for themselves. Let us now go to the observations and recommendations. Let me just mention that the component on details of the environmental impact assessment and settlement action plan is therein. “The Man” had raised issues of environment. 

We now go to page 7, observations and recommendations. The committee observed the high dependence on consultancy services in conducting feasibility studies and designing transmission lines projects by UETCL despite their successful implementation of several electricity transmission projects. There has been slow progress in translating this success into building sufficient capacity – we are talking of national or domestic capacity in conducting feasibility studies and designing electricity transmission projects. 

The over-dependence on consultancies poses an agency risk, especially where the consultant’s objectives end up not coinciding with UETCL objectives. This tends to cause delays in projects.

The committee recommends that UETCL scales up plans for building the capacity of their staff, especially in conducting feasibility studies and designing electricity transmission projects, in order to cut down on the exorbitant costs of the project fund spent on consultancy services for conducting feasibility studies and designing the transmission projects. This also reduces the time lost while waiting for the consultancy procurement.

Secondly, the committee observed the continued delays in the construction of transmission lines. The delay in completing the transmission lines was due to the delay by UETCL in handing over the power line corridors to the contractor. The delays are further made worse by an increase in numbers of people eligible for compensation for various transmission projects. This results into UETCL management failing to compensate all affected people within the planned framework. Given the trend of transmission projects, it is doubtful if with the estimated 24 months’ implementation construction duration from the date of engineering effectiveness will be attained.

The committee recommends that in future projects, Government in conjunction with other agencies and bodies should plan ahead and secure way leaves for transmission lines and investments like the oil pipeline, the communication networks and the roads. All these should be prior planned and not wait for the project money to be found. We earlier mentioned in the other report that this should happen jointly. We should not have ICT and then tomorrow you have the roads and the next day energy.

Mr Speaker, the committee further observed that there was a risk that this project would not start on time –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I am only owning the report of the committee – due to the protracted process of acquiring wayleaves and rights-of-way as exhibited in the majority of electricity transmission projects.

The committee recommends that that UETCL ensures a close liaison with the office of the Chief Government Valuer to ensure the speedy evaluation of the land where the high voltage transmission line will traverse.

The committee has noted that in the context of Uganda economic development and poverty reduction strategies, the government is aiming at massively increasing access to electricity to the country’s population. This proposed project is, therefore, part of Uganda Government’s strategy to improve access to electricity and connectivity in the country. The project is in line with Government of Uganda priorities in the energy sector and all proposed actions thereto take into account Government provisions, priorities and objectives in the sector.The project will provide affordable electricity for social economic development of the populace in the project area and the country at large.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow € 15 million for financing Kampala-Entebbe power transmission lines.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move and I thank you very much for the pre-independence and post-independence national prayer breakfast consensus.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and your members of the committee who were able to process this issue and bring it back to the House within time. 

Honourable members, as we agreed, we will now debate these issues and I think we will just give ourselves short interventions. I did not know there were a number of Members who wanted to debate.Let us start with the Member for Rukiga and then I come this side to Buvuma District.Two minutes, please.  

5.38
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May I know from the Minister of Finance when these projects are going to start? Two, if they are going to start this financial year, is the money for counterpart funding in the budget, because lack of counterpart funding delays these projects?

Three, the committee recommended in the first project that power be extended to many other areas, won’t this increase the amount required? I want an explanation on that because if you recommend that a project goes to county X and Y when originally you had planned for three only, won’t this require more funding? Where are we going to get this funding?

Lastly, for the Entebbe project, it appears the high voltage power is from Kampala to Entebbe; we have compensated people from Entebbe to Kampala twice in this country and now I can see you talking of compensation. I hope the relevant ministry will take note of that so that we do not again pay for this compensation. I thank you.

5.40
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also have a few points to make. I want to put it to this august House that ever since this country was created, ever since Buvuma District was made by God -(Laughter)- it has never benefitted from the Ministry of Energy.

We approve loans here every day, but Buvuma has never benefitted.Look at this loan request at No. 4, No. 6 and No. 7; even when you go back to No. 5 for rural electrification, Buvuma is typically rural!Can you imagine, sincerely, even the health centre IV we have in Buvuma does not even have anything like solar electricity.If a midwife is going to help deliver a baby, she has to put a touch in her mouth and then delivers the baby; can you imagine such a situation!The mother must have dry cells so that she can be helped; if she does not have, it is us, the politicians, who come to help the health unit with solar power.

We are fighting for regional balance, which is also stipulated in the Constitution. So, on No. 5.0 where they refer to the construction of 550 community information centres in sub-counties, battery charging facilities for community information centres, broadband internet connections in at least six sub-counties, at least let us put five sub-counties in Buvuma – (Member timed out_)

5.42
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I strongly support this loan and I thank the Government for this loan and Parliament in advance. On page 4 of the first project, the project location for electricity included extension of electricity from Kotido to Abim. But in the recommendations of the committee in page 12, they left out Kotido – Abim. 

I would like the chairperson of the committee to give me an explanation why they left out Kotido – Abim. There is a place called Alerek between Kotido and Abim, it has gold. I thought electricity would move from Kotido to Abim and then at Alerek where there is gold; we would divert it to a place called Wilera where there is also gold. That gold would benefit this country. 

So, I want the chairperson to explain why they left out the plan to pass electricity from Kotido to Abim. I also want to thank honourable members for supporting Karamoja generally. You see, when the rest of the regions wait for Karamoja to develop, it would take Karamoja 13 years to reach where the rest of the regions are. So I really thank Government for supporting Karamoja by extending power and I want to thank the honourable members of Parliament in advance. Thank you.

5.44
MR PETER ERIAKU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at loan No.1 which is to support Karamoja and loan No.3 which supports, among others, Amuria. When I look at the terms of the loan, for loan No.1, the contingency is 15 percent. For loan No.3, the contingency is only eight percent. 

When I look at loan No.1, the contingency is in-built in the loan. But for loan No.3, I see contingency of US$2 million without indicating where it is going to come from. When I look at Katakwi – Amuria and Karamoja – in terms of inflation and physical changes in quantities, they seem to be similar. 

So I would like to find out from the minister, do we have any standard criteria when negotiating these loans, or do we just work on them on a case-by-case basis? You have a loan without a source for the contingency; what happens if inflation takes over; what will happen if the quantities change? Won’t the work have to stop half way? 

5.46
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for the reports. I also support the motions moved by the minister. But I have three issues to raise. First, is an issue a colleague has talked about; of Moroto transmission line where there is a big contingency of 15 percent. 

Mr Speaker, my concern is that when a project is implemented and the funds that are meant for the project, especially if the funds for contingency are not provided, what happens to the savings on the project? I want to know because it is possible for us to have Shs 15 billion for contingency, but we might not spend all of it. So where is it put after wards?

On railway transformation, I have observed that many regions are covered by this loan except Busoga. And on several occasions, Busoga has been taken for granted. We generate the power but a big part of Busoga does not have access to that power. I am glad to report that Kaliro is going to generate power adding to the national grid. But only one percent of Kaliro uses that power, yet we are going to sell power to other parts in this country. 

It was in plan for the rural electrification agency to extend power to Kaliro and it was supposed to be funded by the Government of Norway. It was later changed and I now find it covering other places. So I am concerned; why is it like this? Please, do not take the Busoga for granted –(Laughter)

5.48
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report, but I have one plea to the minister and perhaps to the committee. Since last year, I have been crying for one thing in Budaka. Since we started appropriating loans, I have been looking through those loans and Budaka is missing out. Even on this one – there is a loan catering for Soroti – Moroto; there is one catering from Kampala – Entebbe and there are these ones moving from one point to another; what about Budaka? Budaka is left in isolation; not even a generator or a transformer. At least give us a transformer because we have the wires running from Mbale to Iganga. But we do not have a transformer to connect that power to the people. Get us a transformer to connect power from those lines to our small trading centres. Thank you. 

5.50
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is the same problem and I said this before. I do not know the criteria this ministry uses to determine the areas to benefit from the loans. Why do you give Entebbe more power – Entebbe of all places - for street lighting, when I in Kalungu I am looking for light in people’s houses? Secondly, I want to caution the ministry –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you my brother for giving way. Entebbe as we speak has a distribution line taking power there, not a transmission line. For that matter, even the airport air conditioners are not working. That is why there are blackouts in Entebbe; if the line is overloaded, it cannot work. We have to take a transmission high power line to Entebbe.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. This is the most interesting part of it. You are talking about blackouts in Entebbe, but for us we want to see the beginning of some lights in Kalungu. Where there is a blackout, there is at least some life –(Laughter)

Secondly, we shall continue complaining about this – I want to caution the ministry about UETCL – in Kalungu, we have areas which grow trees for poles and they have been there for over ten years, but there is nothing taking place. Why should we plant poles and you just deceive us - One time I went to some areas in Sembabule and there are so many poles everywhere but power was not there. This is a fact that we cannot run away from. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of Members complaining here about their areas is because the criteria being used are not known. What I am happy with is that I am in the Opposition but even the NRMs are complaining –(Interruption)

5.52
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for moving this motion. I have a concern coming from the observations of the committee on page 9 where the committee observed that there is a lot of pressure from the local leaders and communities to have electricity extended to their areas.

Mr Speaker, the local leaders are giving a lot of pressure simply because electricity is not reaching the intended beneficiaries. For example, in my district, I have cases from almost all the chairpersons LC III that most government institutions like the health centres and schools are not connected to the grid.

This brings me to the question that I would like to raise on the Floor of this Parliament because I can see that my district once again is also a beneficiary of this. With all these complaints that most schools and health centres are not benefitting from this, I would like to know whether this loan is going to cater for the different institutions like schools and health centres, which were left outside the grid. 

Secondly, I would also like to know whether the affected persons will, this time round, be compensated. This is because there is a component talking about compensation of the affected areas. Until that is cleared, I would find a lot of difficulty in supporting this loan. Thank you. 

5.54
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to bring Agago into the picture. Agago is bordered by Kaabong, Kotido, Abim and Namkora to the eastern part. I want to make an amendment, if possible, to this report because when you come to Namkora and make a tee off, it is a few kilometres - Just like I said, we border the place that has been put into this report; from Namkora to Mia Anyima is just 36 kilometres. Omiya to Paimol is five kilometres and Paimol to Lapono is six kilometres. If a tee off is made from Namkora to these places I have mentioned, we in Agago will be in high gears to support these loans.

I should also bring this on board because when you see Acholi Bur in Pader, indeed this is to support rural electrification and to support our social and economic development. The committee proposed very clearly that if this could be recommended to REA, Omiya Pachwo and Abilang would be in support of this within these few kilometres. I thank you so much.

5.56
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. However, I want to use the same opportunity to seek clarification from the Minister of Energy about the tee off. How easy is it to get a tee off? Mr Speaker, I have got an on-going power line, Kabale-Kisoro power line, which starts just opposite Bubaalo sub-county. It is not even a kilometre and hon. Mbabazi knows the place. There are so many developments taking place in this area but unfortunately, there is no power. So how possible is it to get a tee off from Kabale-Kisoro power line in order to accommodate that area since it is very close to the municipality and the area where the project begins from?

Regarding the Karamoja loan, the minister mentions the Auditor General appointing an independent auditor to look at the finances. My question is, how is this auditor going to be appointed and how is he going to relate with the Auditor-General of Uganda?

Thirdly, looking at different reports that have been presented to us and looking at the project cost and funding plan, I expect most of these activities to be similar both in terms of how they are designed and also in terms of costs. However when you look at costs on sub stations for instance, one report talks about US$ 5.39 million and another one talks about US$ 23 million. I would like clarification from the minister on what brings this variance –(Member timed out_)

5.59
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for having come up with a very good report. I also support the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow the said money especially for Moroto.

Mr Speaker, there has been need for power supply in Moroto and Karamoja at large. My concern is, now that we have authorised Government to borrow this money, how soon are the projects going to be implemented? This is because the implementation is one part and borrowing another part.

Mr Speaker, in the case of Moroto as we may be aware, this district alone has a lot of minerals ranging from marbles, gold and so many others. There have been many investors who have been interested in Moroto and currently we have six investors. I know some of them have been asking us when the government is going to give them power so that they can mine these minerals. 

I also know that by creation of this power line, our youth are going to get employment, which is exciting. It is so good and I know that by also having this power line, people in Moroto district are going to enjoy a lot of business. Currently, we have a lot of people who are interested in investing in Moroto District.

The other thing that I want to emphasise is that by having power in Moroto, Nakapiripirit and Kotido are going to benefit. However, I do not see Amudat and yet it is part of Karamoja. Yes, the report says that Karamoja as a whole is going to benefit but this is contradicting. 

I am asking the ministers in charge, where is Amudat? Being part of Karamoja, when is it going to benefit? It has not benefited from tarmac and now we are talking about electricity and Amudat is out of the picture. Are we talking of uplifting and transforming Karamoja? If you look at all these districts, they have got minerals so there is need for Government to think about the rest of the districts.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you colleague for giving way. I have this information to give that many at times this House has come and approved loans especially of this sector which go to REA. But many times there has been a requirement of counterpart funding but because Government has failed many times to give the counterpart funding on time, many of these loans remain redundant and many of the projects stall because of not fulfilling that condition.

I therefore was giving you this information so that the minister can come in to assure this House that as we pass these loans do they need counterpart funding? And if there is a need for counterpart funding -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member.

MS MARGARET IRIAMA: Thank you for that information my sister. Mr Speaker, as I conclude, the other thing I wanted to talk about is about compensation because when I listen to most of these reports there is compensation that is going to be awarded to the affected areas –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he a member? Yes, procedure?

MS EGUNYU: I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true we all agreed that we discuss the four motions at a go. But I wish to find out, on motion 5, they said they are going to construct 550 community information centres. May we know where these community centres are going to be constructed? 

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Member is too smart for the Speaker. Kassanda North.

6.04
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I strongly support the idea of borrowing provided that the electricity will be distributed equally. In Kassanda North I have five sub-counties but only two of them out of the five are benefitting. Imagine, people are voting 100 percent for NRM and they are wondering whether they are part of Uganda. I want to know from the hon. Minister whether he can visit Kassanda one time and see how people are suffering from total darkness. The President has been promising year in, year out and people are eagerly waiting but up to now there is nothing like a sign of electricity poles. Why don’t we consider rural areas and we concentrate on urban areas? 

I beg to inform you that we are tired of supporting programmes which we cannot benefit from - (Laughter). And that is the voice from Kassanda North. We are worried that we are always endorsing and supporting whatever programme comes but we are not benefitting. What are we doing in the Parliament, Mr Speaker, if we cannot represent our people properly - (Member timed out_) 

6.06
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support three loans where they propose one on Kampala-Entebbe power transmission services. Mr Speaker, when you look at these three loans in terms of the interest rate it clearly comes out that there is a variant in as far as the interest rates are concerned. When you read the terms and when you look at - for instance, when you compare it with the one of Nkenda Power Station and look at the terms and you look at the one for Kampala-Entebbe Highway it clearly comes out that if you are to arithmetically look at the interest rates and the attendant costs therein - actually if we did borrow from the right source we could finance more than one project. 

So, the reason as to why I am objecting to it - it is not that I am objecting to the loan per se but I am objecting to the terms of the loans. Unless maybe the Minister explained the variance because when you look at the one I am talking about it has the loan amount of €15 million, interest rate of 4.6 percent per annum, commitment fee of 0.5 percent and a management fee of one percent which literally translates into like 6.4 percent. And when you go to the one of Nkenda, it is $23 million; it has interest rate of 1.8 percent and; it has a commitment fee of 0.5 percent. If I am to understand it from that perspective, then that would mean that if we are not hurriedly trying to borrow from a source or in terms of PR - because we have been borrowing from very many countries and this seems to have been left out and so we need to borrow from them to show that actually in terms of PR we are also dealing with them. This would mean that if we borrowed from the right source then we would be in position to finance more projects than what we are doing.

Lastly, counterpart funding: it has recurrently occurred in Public Accounts Committee that agencies normally show that they did not undertake the project as they are supposed to do because Government did not provide the counterpart funding - (Member timed out_)

6.09
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. I would also like to submit on loan No.1: proposal by Government to finance the project of extending power to Opuyo, Moroto District. It is true that Karamoja is one of the poorest areas in Uganda and it is recovering from a long internal conflict. It is against the above that power and other social amenities should be extended to the Karamoja region.

The committee has mentioned that Karamoja has large deposits of limestone and gypsum but it also has various potential and large mineral potential which has not been exploited due to lack of power, water and roads. Mr Speaker, I support that power be extended to Karamoja so that the mineral potential can be exploited. (Applause)

I am aware of two factories that are failing to be constructed in Moroto due to lack of electricity; it has actually stalled the progress of this project. Mr Speaker, I request that we really support the extension of power to Karamoja so that this potential can be exploited. 

Mr Speaker, as we approve these loans, you remember recently there was an issue of the supply of poor quality of equipment. We did mention the poor standard of transformers –(Member timed out_)

6.11
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support all the loans but I would like to seek the following clarifications from the Minister of Energy:

One, do we have a master plan for rolling out electricity to the countryside? And if so, can a copy be laid on the Floor of Parliament such that I can be in position to access it and tell my people that according to the master plan electricity is coming here between this period?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, what is the current coverage of electricity in the entire country? At one time we were told it was 12 percent but what is the status quo currently?

Thirdly, hon. Minister, when are we fully rehabilitating the 33-KVO Lira–Soroti line and this originally was Lira via Aloi, Abako, Amogu , Amuria to Soroti. It was one of those very powerful lines in the olden days. When are we fully rehabilitating this line? As a representative of the rural community, it is not only the urban areas that need electricity. We, in the rural areas, also need electricity for value addition for our agricultural products. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a proposal that the members from the municipalities have power. What are they going to talk about? (Laughter) 

6.13
CAPT. MIKE MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I rise to support this motion and this position on the Floor because of the following reasons: One, let me first give a broader aspect; the African continent has only got two percent of the total electricity in the world. It is the darkest continent in the whole world. It is only South Africa and Egypt which are seen from the satellite. 

Secondly, Uganda has only got coverage of 12 percent of electricity and 60 percent of the electricity in the country is in Entebbe, Kampala and Jinja. So, it is important for us to note these points as we discuss and support these provisions on the Floor. These are really the bottlenecks of our growth in the country. 

I now want to raise a question to the minister. We have supported generation; we have put in Bujagali, Karuma and we are putting in Ayago, Isimba. These together will give us close to US$5 billion but there is a mismatch between transmission and distribution. If you do not have evacuation capacity, you are going to have very serious issues which have emerged like you have heard in areas like Buseruka where you have nine megawatts but no capacity to evacuate this power in terms of distribution. So, it is important that as we load and put money out to roll out electricity, let us match the distribution. 

Finally, the cost of electricity –(Member timed out_)

6.15
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that the loans be borrowed for extension of electricity because of one fundamental reason; that it is the commitment of the Government of Uganda to ensure that there is universal access to electricity for all by 2035 and as we stand now, you have heard we are still at 12 percent. That means we have to move faster and that is why I support this motion. 

Mr Speaker, I have also noticed that most of the electricity extensions we have in this country are getting funding through loans, including the four we are to pass today. My concern is, if we have agreed we are going to get loans to support extensions of electricity, then why don’t we move and get these loans and give electricity to all the areas that are demanding for electricity because there are policies, except that we would go for those ones with lower interest rates to enable us get  electricity. But my concern is, why should we get loans for electricity only to put wires running in rural areas and they are not being tapped in the houses and yet we will be required to pay for the loans? That is why I support the position of the committee that in order to motivate the people, we need to meet the initial connection costs after power is extended to the rural areas so that people begin to pay and then we would benefit from that.

Mr Speaker, the committee also talks about alternative power but I want to know from the minister why the cost of solar power which was supposed to be subsidized is beginning to go up. What is happening? Are we monitoring it? Are we supporting it?

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to know the capacity of rural electrification. We have approved so many loans. If we are to have timely implementation, do we have capacity to ensure that the loans we are passing now and those that we have passed are implemented to enable us get electricity – (Member timed out_

6.17
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana):Mr Speaker, thank you very much. For three years, I worked in Karamoja and in order to access power, you had to move over 600 kilometers to Mbale. So, when I heard of members talking of electricity being taken to their sub-counties, Karamoja has really been lagging behind. So, I thank government for this. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, at times members complain about distribution. I urge Government that we should have a standard. If we say we want to connect all districts to the main grid, then the next step should be to connect all Health Centre IVs. That way, people would not be complaining because they will say, much as we are complaining about connecting a parish but there is a Health Centre IV where power has been connected. 

Mr Speaker, another thing is about Government relations looking into how we can improve the economic wellbeing of our people because even where power has been extended, very few people are using this power because power is expensive to our people. 

I also want to support loan No. 3 about the power generation and evacuation. If you generate power and do not evacuate it, then it cannot benefit the people. So, I want to support this. On the issue of step down transformers especially where the major lines have been passed, we should also look for a loan to have step down transformers. Take an example of Hoima Road from Busunju up to Namigavu, there is a line but there are no transformers. People are not using this power. So, if we cannot even provide transformers for at least these people to access power in the small towns along this road - our people are not benefiting from this power –(Member timed out_) 

6.20
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Bukwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to support the electrification of Karamoja. When Moroto Regional Referral Hospital experiences power cuts, then you know that the blood within their fridges is going to go to waste and the people will not have transfusion, like I saw a couple of months ago. Therefore, it is a noble cause to have electricity in this sub-region. 

Mr Speaker, I want to do further scrutiny for those who scrutinize on behalf of Parliament and ask the following questions; what is the total energy need for Karamoja sub-region from which when we provide for this loan and we provide electricity out of this loan, then we know how much more we shall need in future?

Secondly, there is a precondition for this loan, for instance, about the PPDA compliance but within the same document, it is stated that UETCL will be the implementing agency; which were the rest of firms that competed for the same implementation? 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, we need also to scrutinise and get educated on the repayment plan of these loans because it is one thing to get money in terms of loans but we also need to ensure that our people understand how we are going to pay it back. How are we going to pay back this money? Let our people know what we shall forfeit in future.

6.22
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I congratulate the people of Uganda and more so the people of Buganda who actually achieved their independence on the 8th of October. (Laughter) I am therefore not surprised; if I had known I would have also appeared in a busuuti. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to congratulate you upon being present at the Prayer Breakfast and I thank God that the Holy Spirit is on the move that there is apparent peace and presence of the Holy Spirit in the House. Mr Speaker, I wish you could give me just one extra minute.

On the issue of Karamoja, I would like to draw the attention of the House to page 25 of the Constitution on the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. I will read only part (XII)(ii) and (iii) together jointly: “The state shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.(iii)The state shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.”

Mr Speaker, within our principles, nobody should argue about the necessity of electricity in Karamoja. (Applause) 

The second point I would like to raise is that issue which was raised on the borrowing of $23 million. On page 2, the committee tells us that for two decades this country has been involved in the reform of the sector – (Member timed out_)

6.26
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion for Government to borrow loans. But the purpose for these loans is to increase access to power in rural areas and to reduce losses. But the challenge we currently have is that the cost of power is very high and I do not think the rural people will be able to compete with other citizens. So I suggest that as leaders, we can exercise “price discrimination” such that the rural people can get lower rates as people in urban centres have different rates. Otherwise, cases of power theft are on increase. The issue of way-leaves – we compensate for way-leaves but we again find that people have settled on them. The minister has been raising this issue in the committee but I wonder what their policy on way-leaves; after compensating people you find them again under the lines. So it is important that your policy on way-leaves should be clear after compensating them. 

Now on the issue of counterpart funding, some of these loans we pass but you find that there is no money. Let the Minister of Finance assure us that there is money for counterpart funding in the Budget to take care of the loans.

Now, there is a line which runs from Muyembe and goes to Nakapiripirit via Namalu; that line was completed in March 2012 but up to now – (Member timed out_)

6.28
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its good work and I stand to support the motion that we borrow the money to have electricity transmitted to almost all-over the country. And more especially I am happy that Karamoja is remembered, given the fact that it has potential to become very productive because it will attract investors; and given the fact that the rocks from Karamoja are being transported all the way to Tororo to get lime. This spoils the roads which would have been saved if Karamoja had electricity and factories. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I support that Karamoja gets this electricity because it will also boost the tourism industry given that many people could be scared of visiting the place because of darkness. But with the electricity, I am sure they will go there.

However, I would like to inform the minister that much as other places have got power lines, it is unfortunate that only high-voltage lines have been put in place and yet we need the domestic lines. How do people really benefit from this electricity if the only lines they have are high-voltage? I pray that the minister thinks about this given that the local people cannot afford to get the domestic lines by themselves –(Member timed out_)

6.30
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and specifically to commend Government for this effort. In my opinion, I think we are beginning to see leadership with a very strong vision for this country. This is because to have moved from the two percent access in 2005 to about 12 percent now it is a tremendous achievement within that short period of time. This is really encouraging because wherever you go now, you will see people constructing roads, transmission lines – I want to commend the ministry and the government in general for this initiative. And this is the way to go; we should supply energy and roads. And if we should continue like this, I think the sky will be the limit for Uganda.

So, Mr Speaker, for me it was just to commend the government for this effort. Of course, Ntenjeru has not been covered in this initiative but only few days ago we were commissioning the construction of a dam in my constituency. And I hope that in the next submission, Ntenjeru will definitely be there. Thank you.

6.31
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its report and on the issue of independence celebrations. I think it is a big message for the people of Karamoja that 51 years later, this country and the people of Uganda have decided to think about the development of that region. Thank you very much Ugandans!

Secondly, this is the second milestone in the change that is coming to Karamoja after disarmament. We are also happy to report about the progress in tarmac roads. You may not believe it that in my constituency which is about 90 Kilometres from Mbale, children always ask, “Why isitthat bush-fire is always burning on top of mountain Elgon,” and I tell them that it is electricity –(Laughter)– so for the first time the bush-fire is going to come to their villages! (Laughter)

Thirdly, when I read the report accompanying this request, I found that the appraisal document was proposing to pass the lines in places where there are no people. I want to thank hon. Mukitale and the committee for coming physically to check where people are settled now compared to where they were 50 years ago. 

I hope that the amendments they have made on the report based on their visit to Moroto on page 12 will be followed by the honourable minister. For example, they were proposing that electricity should move from Kokoth to Namokora, without understanding that since they are taking a line to Karera, from Karera to Namokora is a few kilometres compared to the 126 km they had proposed from Karera to Namokora, which is about 20 km –(Member timed out_)

6.34
MS JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I support the motion, I have a few issues that need clarification from the committee chairperson. First, on page 7 of the first report, on Moroto electricity transmission line, I have a problem with the terms and conditions of the loan. The interest rate is not stated. How much are we going to pay as interest for the loan? Down there they have written, “Charge rate” and they define charge rate as “London Interbank offered rate”. But they do not indicate the percentage of the interest rate. It is in the interest of this House to know the interest rate this country is going to pay.

I am also concerned that for a loan of US$80 we are getting 15 percent of it as contingency fund.  That is too much. I want clarification from the committee why it is that high. Contingency is money whose use is not properly defined. So let us know why this 15 percent of the money – which is a lot by the way- is going to do. Otherwise, I would like this august House to redirect this money to build a power line between Adilang – Lapono because they are bordering Kidepo, then it would connect to the home of the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, hon. Oryem – (Member timed out_)

6.36
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion for Government to borrow funds for electricity. I also want to thank the President for his good policy because in this financial year, he is putting emphasis on developing infrastructure including electricity and roads. 

Mr Speaker, electricity is essential for the whole country and when the Government comes in to borrow money for electricity in the North, I do support them. If this country is to be transformed into a modern economy, then we need electricity. I know that in all parts of the country, many other developments will come up; like factories will be put in place and we will have employment created for our youth, especially those who graduate from our universities. 

I have three issues to emphasize for Government to put into consideration as they borrow this money. Some Members have already mentioned the issue of compensation, but I want to repeat it for emphasis. Ntoroko District has electricity. But the problem we have is that people were not duly compensated. So they remained disgruntled despite having good service. I hope this will not happen in the other place. Let people be duly compensated as the law provides – (Member timed out_)

6.38
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Power connection for families or domestic use is very important not only in the areas which we are approving right now – some of us are overburdened by having to make contributions because our people cannot afford buying transformers. You want a community to contribute and buy a transformer at Shs 40 million? Let the minister clarify on this matter. We have areas where we already have power connections but the transformers have to be bought by the community. 

I also want to raise the issues of environment. We all complain about charcoal burning, but if you want to reduce on it, then make electricity usable to the families. I saw in South Africa, even very poor families have connection to power and people there use electricity. Why don’t we provide usable electricity to our people so that we save our environment, the trees?

I appeal to you that when doing your work, please be comprehensive; include every part of Uganda, not just scanty counties. That is why people stand up and claim benefits for their areas and then we sound very selfish. Otherwise, If you do a comprehensive study and borrow funds which can cater for the need nationally, almost all the areas. I thank you very much but save us the Members of Parliament from these heavy contributions. I was even asked to contribute for the area around Gulu University. Can you imagine –(Member timed out_)

6.41
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee and in particular the chairperson of the committee for appreciating the challenges that Karamoja faces that even when the Members asked him to summarise, he put it clearly to the Members. 

Mr Speaker, for those of us who come from Karamoja Region, Moroto is our city; and it is a city that has been in darkness. So when we hear of such a project, it is a great joy for us when the members pass the loan. From the submission of the Members, I am so glad that nobody is envying Karamoja for getting that power. Mr Speaker, indeed the project will support industrial development and factories will be set up. Moroto and Amudat have marble; Lorries belonging to Tororo Cement have been carrying loads of marble and they have been destroying our roads, so if we set up factories when power is given, our roads will be saved from that burden.

Besides, jobs will be created during the erection of the poles and in the factories when they are set up. Our disarmed warriors will get the opportunity to work in those factories and also during the erecting of the poles and the temptation to go and raid will stop.

On page 12, the committee recommends Rural Electrification Agency to include areas that need extension. Mr Speaker, there is also need to extend electricity from Moroto Tapat to Amudat – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should draw this to a close and to conclude this debate, I am going to give a chance to the hon. Member for Ngora and then I will start processing these matters. I like the nationalistic spirit with which we have debated this motion because all the Members have supported Karamoja and I am glad that this is happening. We are not being selfish but discussing Uganda.

6.44
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Rt hon. Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and the Members for coming up with this loan. I would like to recommend that this loan be borrowed for Karamoja especially since it is one of the areas in Uganda - I would not say neglected as such – that is least developed.

However, I want to emphasise that the people who try to implement these projects especially rural electrification - It has turned out to be road electrification because one, people are never sensitised. You find poles standing there. When they put poles in Ngora, people were asking me, “Now how do we get this power to our houses?” They just put the poles and disappeared. 

The backbone of the development of any country depends on its capacity to produce and without power, a country cannot proceed. Therefore, if a rural electrification project is implemented in rural areas especially, there is need for clear establishment of the local leadership and sensitisation of the beneficiaries so that they know the modus operandi on how they can access this power.

It is also very important that as a country, we analyse all the other areas besides Karamoja because this is a done deal. I am 100 percent sure. However, it is important that as a country we map out all the other areas that need power so that it is not a matter of lobbying. Rather, it should be a matter of government policy to implement rural electrification in most of the areas.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, Uganda is a signatory to so many instruments including the Rio Convention and – (Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform my colleague that there is a comprehensive rural electrification plan for the entire country. Of course, it cannot be covered within one financial year but there is a plan and as a Committee on Natural Resources, we have actually looked at this plan and it covers the entire country. Thank you.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: I would like to thank hon. Werikhe for that information, which I am aware of. I was emphasising the fact that Uganda is a signatory to so many conventions, including the Rio Convention and I would like to emphasise that whereas we look at rural electrification, we should also look at other renewable energies so that we try to protect the environment. This is because when we bring in the component of other methods apart from these other electrification types, we will be killing two birds with one stone.

I would like to move therefore that this loan be approved –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please let us see –

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is one of the most debated motions and I seek procedural guidance. The motion was moved in sequence and has been discussed in cascades; one after another. The procedural guidance I am seeking before a motion is moved is that given the background that almost 90 percent of us have discussed the principle of the loan will the question be put one by one without necessarily attracting additional debate? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One by one.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what we had agreed on in the beginning and based on that, hon. Members, I have listened carefully to the debate and I have heard no issues raised in (4), (5) and (6). There were a few issues raised in number (7). I will put the questions in that sequence and see if the ministers can respond to the issues raised in (7). I have been taking my own notes here. 

On the motion, which is number 4 on the Order Paper, hon. Members I put the question that this Parliament approves the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow ID 53,390,000 equivalent of US$ 80,620,000 from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) for financing the construction of Opuyo-Moroto Electricity Transmission Line Project. I put the question to that particular motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow, in addition, SDR 8 million, which is the equivalent of US$ 12 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the Uganda Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT) Adaptable Program Loan (APL) phase two project. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On (6) I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US$ 23 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) for financing the Hoima-Nkenda Power Transmission Line and Associated Sub Stations Project. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there were some issues raised on (7) but if those issues can be subsumed, I could put the question to this motion also. I put the question? Honourable members, I put the question- You should explain on this particular Kampala-Entebbe thing.

6.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join you also in thanking the Members for overwhelmingly supporting these projects. Regarding the Kampala-Entebbe line, only one major issue came out very strongly. Formerly, Entebbe was served by two lines at 33 KV and this is the line that was built in the 50s soon after commissioning Kiira. These lines were constructed to serve the then State House and by that time, we did not have factories along this line and now we have so many factories, houses and these two lines are overloaded. People who live in Entebbe will confirm that there is not a single day that they do not go off and therefore now it has been decided to take a high voltage transmission line at 132 KV four times the current voltage level and this will be a transport line.  All these lines we have been discussing today are transport lines - 132 KV lines to transport power to Entebbe from where it will be stepped down and then the other two old lines will remain serving the Roofings and the Uganda Clays and so forth.  That is the only issue that came up. The question was why do you give more power to Entebbe when they already have power?  

On interest rates, my colleagues can handle that and on the triple compensation, this transmission line is following another route. This is a big line on tower - the metallic towers - the pylons. So it is going to follow a separate route from the old little lines which are also used to supply the people on the way. So for interest rates my colleague from the Ministry of Finance can answer that.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finance.

6.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Maybe before I go to interest rates -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please respond specifically to that issue. 

MR KASAIJA: Okay. But there were other issues that were raised but I leave them. Interest rates vary. The type of loans we take are either concessional or commercial depending on the availability of lenders to give us the money. For commercial loans, the interest rate is slightly higher than for concessional rates. Concession is more like a grant. The loan is not strictly commercial but it is more like a grant and therefore the rate of interest is accordingly lower than for commercial loans. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, please we have discussed these matters - on the interest rates, do you want to debate the interest rates?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, there was a specific question raised by myself on this borrowing for the Moroto electricity transmission – the Shs 80 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one was – 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: On that one, the minister did not respond the way I was asking. The interest rate is not indicated –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can we -

MS FRANCA AKELLO: So can they indicate how much money we are going to pay as interest on the loan -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we finish with No.7 and then we can deal with that issue? Can I finish with No.7? Honourable members, that issue is clear. I will put the question then we can respond to that specific issue as a general issue now.

I now put the question for the adoption of the motion for the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow 15 million Euros from the KFW of Germany for financing the Kampala-Entebbe power transmission line project. I put the question to this motion.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes honourable minister, there was an issue which is now general. I congratulate you for this – no, there was a particular issue and then I have the Minister for Public Service who is going to make a statement on the issue which was raised earlier. He is now ready to do that - please honourable minister. There is the issue of interest rates and contingency - honourable minister.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Let me begin with contingency and counter funding, which I had wanted to answer but the Speaker guided that I do not go for things that are not specified at this material time.  
For contingency, it also varies from project to project and from borrowing to borrowing. The engineers who designed these projects would tell us when we are negotiating and they will say that, “On this, we might have to delay because of factor” this and this. For example, if a line is going through a marsh area – just to give you an example, it is like a road - we will provide slightly more money for contingency because there would be certain delays. 

There are projects where studies must be made and when the study is made, it forms part of the loan and so when we are in negotiation, we include that one and regard it as a contingency. So really, it varies from project to project and in some projects, the matter is easy and straight and the principal loan is able to cover the costs.  

Now on the question of- was it interest rates - could I ask her to restate that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please honourable member for Agago District.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is on the interest rate that we are going to pay on the Shs 80 billion which we are going to borrow. It is not stated because when you read on Page 7 on the terms and conditions of the loan, you have stated the loan amount; you have stated the loan period; you have stated the repayment period and you have stated the charge rate which charge rate is also not indicated in figures. It is just kind of defined in words down there -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you reading from the committee report?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because there is the brief to Parliament from the minister which might have those details. I do not know whether it is – there is no interest on that one? And that is why there is no figure to that? 

Honourable members, it is now coming to 7.00 O’clock and there was the issue of the rice project which was also important. I do not know whether we are prepared to handle it now; is it possible to handle it now for 15 to 20 minutes? Can we do it and then we come to the statement from the Prime Minister on the teachers. Will that be okay or should we – because we are going to adjourn today. Let us push further and see if we can handle the rice loan.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, there are matters particularly the loan; there is also a Bill on which we are already running out of time and it was my prayer, Mr Speaker - that is why I was trying to look for you this morning so that we do not adjourn today. Indeed, I was even requesting, if possible we could have a sitting on Friday. So I am begging your indulgence, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will not have anybody in this House on Thursday. Actually I am going to the constituency tomorrow and to have a sitting on Thursday is going to be a tall order. It is a practical situation that we have to deal with and that is why I am seeking your indulgence that we could deal with the last loan on the Order Paper on the rice scheme. It might be of benefit for us and then the other business comes when we come back.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am sorry, Mr Speaker, to indulge myself in discussion with the Minister for Finance but the issue we have at hand is urgent and I seek your indulgence especially on Africa Development Bank loans, on oil roads that is Kigumba, Masindi and Kabwoya.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not on the Order Paper. The last loan request that is here is on food security through increased rice production and is $34 million. So, it is not on the Order Paper.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Maybe can I ask the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy to get on –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we would have used this time to deal with No.8. Can we – yes, hon. Minister of Finance – the request on No.8.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO 	BORROW US$ 34,050,000 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK 	(IDB) FOR FINANCING ENHANCED NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY THROUGH INCREASED RICE PRODUCTION PROJECT

7.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATIZATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to authorize Government to borrow $34 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) for financing enhanced national food security through the increased rice production.

Mr Speaker, this loan is very important and is in support of the sectors that we treasure so much. It is going to support a project that will ensure food security in Uganda through farm activities, increased rice production and productivity.

The project will be implemented under the auspices of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Resources and Fisheries for a five year period. It will be based on a public/private partnership from private developers: Tilda Uganda based at Kibimba in Bugiri and Pearl Rice based in Naigombwa, in Iganga District, those being the location areas for this project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Minister of State for Finance (General Duties), the Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources and the honourable member for Budaka County.

Chairperson of the committee, this matter is with you and if you could help us go through it briefly.

7.04
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand to present a report from the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $ 34 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing enhanced national security through the increased rice production project.

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I won’t read this report line by line. Let me basically just bring out the most salient issues before getting down to the observations and recommendations.

In a nutshell, I want to assure this House that this is a demand-drive project. On the first page, we have the introduction. There is also the methodology where the committee went to the relevant ministries. But mostly it also interacted with Members of the Busoga Parliamentary Group over concerns to do with this project.

Mr Speaker, before I proceed, I request that you allow me lay the documents that we made references to. With me, is the project appraisal document, which is dated 31 July 2012 and I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, with me is also the Draft Financing Agreements between the Government of Uganda and the Islamic Development Bank, which is also dated 2 September 2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, with me is also the set of minutes that were raised especially during the interactions with all the stakeholders that we met. So, I have minutes dated 22 April -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just lay the minutes.

MR MBAGADHI: I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the meeting.

MR MBAGADHI: I also have written responses to the queries that were raised. These came from one of the investors. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that too.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, at page 2, we have the background, which only emphasizes the importance of the agriculture sector and especially its contributions to the Gross Domestic Product and its disappointing levels of performance vis-a-avis the overall growth of the economy.

On page 3, we have the project objectives and on page 4, we have the project description and components. But most importantly, Mr Speaker, in the second paragraph of page 4, we point out the project that is based on the PPP Model. We are looking at having a replica of what we had in Kalangala with the Vegetable Oil Development Project and of course the success story in Kalangala speaks volumes.

So, among the project components, we have 1 on the development of a PPP with Pearl Rice and Tilda; component 2 on page 5, on the increased production and productivity; component 3, on page 6, on the development of producer organisations and component 4, on the compensation of settlers; component 5 on consultancy services and component 6, where we have project management and coordination. 0n page 7, we have the project costs and financing arrangements.

While Government intends to borrow $ 34.05 million, it should be clearly known that the total cost of this project will be $ 95.45 million. But of course Government is expected to co-fund it. We also expect the private investors to also co-fund this project. That is how we come to the total of $95.45 million.

In Table 1 of that page we have the project costs and financing by components. And on page 8, we have the loan terms and conditions, which are of course the usual terms though with varying degrees of amounts and conditions. Page 9, still talks about the loan terms and conditions.

Mr Speaker, on page 10, the committee came up with the implementation arrangements. But in the interest of time, let me rush straight to the observations and recommendations.

The committee observed that there is still inadequate funding to agriculture both private and public. The sector faces an annual funding gap of about Shs 150 billion compared to the development strategy and implementation investment plan 2010/11 to 2014/15. Agriculture clearly needs more funding but it is important to increase efficiency in resource use in this sector as well.

The committee therefore recommends for improved efficiency in resource allocations to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and its agencies as well as to the local governments that are the recipients of the bulky of the resources going into agriculture.

The committee also observed that this project will be implemented by using the PPP model of investment that will ensure opportunities in the agriculture sector, which have remained untapped; to be explored in order to increase rural incomes and improve household and national food security.

However, the implementation of a number of PPPs in the various sectors including agriculture has occurred without a clear policy, legal and institutional framework and this has sometimes been poor coordinated with ad hoc processes and responsibilities leading to mixed results.

The committee therefore recommends that Parliament expedites the process of passing the proposed public/private partnership 2012 that will govern the relationship between Government and the private parties.

The ministry should also hold public awareness events on the requirements, benefits and modalities for public/private partnership and support agro-processing and value addition to the project implementation for success of project intended outcomes.

The committee in three also observed that this project left out other producing areas in Busoga, Teso and Lango that are part of the rice producing belt. This was likely to bring out unbalanced growth in the Busoga sub region. On this, I want to bring to the attention of the House that some our colleagues from other areas of Busoga brought out a concept paper trying to persuade Government that if possible their constituents should also have been captured within this project.

The committee recommends that we should expedite plans to rollout and expand these project interventions to other areas within Busoga region and neighbouring regions like Teso and Lango.

In the medium term, efforts to utilise this loan facility towards investments initiatives outside the non-beneficiary project areas in Busoga sub region towards establishing a third rice process, should be explored in order to boost rice production in these areas as well.

The committee further observed that the country lacks a national policy on irrigation. Currently, less than five percent of irrigable land is under irrigation and another 50,000 acres of land is under informal rice irrigation in Eastern Uganda.

This clearly demonstrates that irrigation potential is not being utilised and the reported yields on the schemes are low. The country is experiencing adverse climatic changes as evidenced by the recent floods in Western, Eastern and Northern regions that have constrained production and productivity of crops. Investments in irrigation would increase and guarantee supply of water for crop production.

The committee recommends that the ministry of Agriculture expedites the formulation of the national irrigation policy and appropriate regulations and guidelines.

The committee further recommends that the ministry should ensure that the dam facilities that will be built are not monopolised by the management of the private investors as this facility will be owned collectively by Government, small scale farmers and the private investors.

The committee further observed the integration of fertiliser use in this project despite the lack of a national fertiliser policy and regulations. Furthermore, the promotion by Government of use fertilisers to different categories of farmers is still lacking. Government can attain this through undertaking deliberate efforts to address fertiliser supply constraints.

The committee in this regard recommends that Government undertakes deliberate measures towards the formulation of national fertiliser policy and its subsequent regulations. The ministry should in the meantime ensure that procurement, agro-dealer networks, access to finance and market information, linkages with fertiliser markets are improved.

In six, the committee further observed the limited specialised knowledge in rice production among researchers and extension staff. There is also general lack of motivation and limited facilitation for district extension staff in rice producing areas.

The limited number of trainers of trainers and extension workers has resulted into each extension worker handling various crops and many farmers. To this effect, the committee recommends that Government undertakes deliberate measures towards strengthening agricultural extension services in rural areas by training agricultural graduates who can be recruited and trained to promote rice.

In addition, there is urgent need for the ministry to establish an agricultural extension policy and subsequently establish the legal framework on extension services and consider an option of fusing advisory services with agricultural research activities.

In seven, the committee observes that most rice farmers practice small scale rain fed farming characterised by rudimentary tools and low input use. This has occurred amidst many challenges that include the high cost of land rent for rice farming. Lack of drying facilities like tarpaulins or drying yards as some farmers dry rice on the ground and reduces the quality of rice.

There are poor quality and expensive seeds, inadequate knowledge of rice farming. The poor or lack of storage facilities is causing loss in rice quality and haphazard sell of rice irrespective of the prevailing market prices and many others.

The committee recommends that the ministry in collaboration with other stakeholders in rice production scales up strategies for training extension officers and farmers in rice production and its post harvest handling, processing and marketing.

The committee observed that rice processors in Uganda continue to face a number of challenges as well. That range from high cost of rice mills with technical performance, high cost of electricity and diesel thus increasing the cost of operation, low quality of rice produced by farmers and low investment in manufacturing or fabrication of rice mills, among others.

The committee therefore recommends that with the adoption of public/private partnership model in rice production, Government should ensure that the potential for supporting investments in local fabrication of spare parts of rice mills is explored.

Then access to low interest credit by rice processors should also be expanded to enable them purchase rice processing machinery through scaling up efforts to increase agricultural lending.

The committee further noted the hostility and suspicion among land owners who hire the land for rice accruing from lack of information and sensitisation about the implementation of this project in their areas.

The landlords and rice farmers who hire land for rice growing were not sure whether if they were evacuated upon being compensated for loss income, they would be guaranteed a return on their land. The likelihood that this project might have left out those farmers who hire land during its conceptualisation is also high especially when it comes to the need for them being compensated as well for loss of income during the implementation of the project.
The committee recommends that Government embarks on vigorous sensitisation of the land owners and settlers who hire the land for rice growing in order to ease the underlying hostility between the land owners and settlers.

Government should ensure that rice farmers who hire land for rice growing are part of the project affected persons that would be compensated for loss income during the implementation of this project.

The committee further recommends that Government should also ensure that future projects of a similar kind or nature and of direct bearing on community welfare are preceded with participatory consultations among critical stakeholders especially the political leadership and local beneficiaries.

The committee also recommends that Government should also ensure that the model that will be used in arriving at the amounts to be compensated to each project affected persons is properly explained to the farmers so that farmers are fairly compensated and not cheated.

The committee further recommends that the ministry and other implementing partners such as Tilda and Pearl ensure that small scale farmers are well protected during and after the implementation oftheproject, and ensure that farmers retain ownership and user rights of the improved land that they previously occupied. 

Mr Speaker, before I deal with the conclusion –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please deal with the conclusion.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, the committee noted the progress made by Government in the modernisation of agricultural sector through increased production and productivity in improving agricultural production and productivity of rice.

The committee therefore supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow USD 3,050,000 from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the enhancement of national food security through increased rice production project. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are going to debate this; two minutes each. I thought hon. Oguttu was interested; no Member of the committee is standing. 

7.22
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First of all, when I read the title that this loan is to enhance national food security through increased production of rice, rice is not a staple food in this country or any tribe in this country. So, I am wondering whether this is the right title.

Then, when I look at the observation made by the Chairperson, indeed we do not have a PPP regulatory framework - we do not have a PPP law. They have also said that there is no policy on irrigation. Aren’t we putting the cart before the horse? So, I am really wondering, based on the recommendations and observations of the committee, should we really pass this loan? You are recommending we pass the loan but you have identified serious issues. How do we go into a PPP without a regulatory framework, which is the law, which is right now before the committee? So, I really want the Chairperson to explain how he says we should pass this loan without these key issues that he has decided to raise. 

And if we do not have the PPP law does this Parliament have an opportunity to look at that PPP agreement between the parties? We do not have. How do we pass something we are not privy to even then without the regulatory framework? 

So, there are quite a number of issues that need to be clarified, Mr Chairman and of course for me this is on food security as it is, but I would rather members, really a loan on rice, maybe something else! 

7.24
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report but I have some few issues on which I need an explanation from the Chairperson. As my colleague said, when you talk of food security, I would have thought that perhaps I would have seen a loan to be taken towards the production of bananas, maize, wheat or millet depending on the regions, considering these ones are staple foods. 

And when you read page 4, the public/private partnership, we do not have the law. What are we basing on? And if we had the law - because I have visited some countries which have PPP- then it would mean that actually the private investor would be willing to take up the production.

Another question, Mr Speaker, this looks to be a project. When you look at the background, which would have convinced me, the emphasis is largely on exports and not the domestic food security. And therefore I would raise the question: what are the returns? For example, at the end of the 19 years shall we be in position, using this project, to pay back the loan? 

Mr Speaker, there are very many issues in this report that really –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I remember in the Seventh Parliament there was the same debate as my colleague is proceeding, about the Kalangala Palm Oil Project and we argued until the loan was passed. But today it is the most successful PPP project we have in this country.

Secondly, when we talk of rice- this is the information to you- this country still imports a lot of rice from Pakistan and India. Therefore, by enhancing rice production in this country you are cutting off that import. In other words, we are saving the country the foreign exchange which we are using to import this rice. So, we should look at it from that angle. That is the information I want to give my colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, the hon. Member for Bukedea raised this issue. I would like to draw your attention to Article 159(2) of the Constitution: “Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.”

Now we are going to borrow $34 million. We seem to be following – yes, to help our people in agriculture and – but there is no law! Should we continue without rules and regulations governing public funds yet the Constitution is very clear on this? It is very unfortunate that we always just move- yes we have sympathies for our people; we must have food but I should have expected the law to come here first. We could pass it even in a minute. So, I need your guidance on this.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, when we talk about application of 159(2) and we talk about, “…except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament,” because your submission I thought – (Interjections) - “Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority, or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.” 

We have so many laws in place passed by this Parliament relating to such matters. We have the Public Finance and Accountability Act and we have so many other laws. But also, “…except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.”

You also need to look at clause (8) of that article. Clause (8) says: “Parliament may by law exempt any categories of loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of this article, subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe.”This clause is specifically providing for the exceptions where Parliament itself must approve. You will find that there are certain legislations that we have passed giving powers to borrow from certain bodies and authorities without necessarily coming to Parliament and when you actually talk about Article 159(2), bear in mind the application of clause (8). But I am saying, without prejudice to my submission, that there already exist laws and regulations to operationalize the provisions of Article 159. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give more information. We had the same problem in the Eighth Parliament about Government signing a Memorandum of Understanding within the law but after bringing on board the Audit Act of 2008 whereby Government has an interest in that agency - the Auditor-General is subject to audit either by a private or a public institution and it must be accountable. 

I happen to be a student of private/public partnerships - Where there is a Memorandum of Understanding by the government; where they provide a liquidity ratio; where the private partner contributes and Government also contributes. You will find that the worry of members after passing that law - that Audit Act - Section 8 says that government - any money given to private enterprises - that is why when AGOA had a problem, we didn’t have that law and we lost the money. But now, as the law is passed by finance – the Accountability Act, the Audit Act - any private company accessing money from government is subject to an audit and must be brought to book. This is the information I want to give. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister of State for Works for the information but to conclude, while the BIDCO is successful, we have to note that the emphasis is food security but the background talks about exports. So, can we get it clearly? For example, the issue of PPP, what is the contribution of Pearl Rice and what is the contribution of Tilda Uganda Limited? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I have the hon. Member from Bufumbira.

7.35
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want the Attorney-General and Government to clarify. Do we need an enabling law to regulate the PPP? If we use the experience of Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort, what dividends have we got? In many incidences when Government has funded private operators, it is Government which has lost. So, what should come first? Under what mechanisms shall the loan be operated? So, much as the loan is good and desirable, how shall it operate without law? How shall we get the relationship between Government and the operators? Much as we support the loan, it is not the right time to pass this loan unless the law is placed. I thank you. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance is in a better position to speak about the PPP law and how far it has gone. My understanding is that the PPP law is intended to facilitate the PPP arrangements but it is not there; it cannot be put in place to supersede the contractual obligations of parties. Parties are free to negotiate and conclude agreements. We have many laws that govern contractual arrangements. 

Sometime back here, we passed the Contracts Act but the PPP law is intended to further facilitate and strengthen particular relationships between government and non-government institutions. But one cannot say that in the absence of the PPP, you cannot practically have a public/private partnership agreement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the question we should be asking is, do we as a country now have PPPs operating? 

MR MBAGHADI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. You have asked a very good question and the committee clearly stated it in their report that we already have PPP arrangements in place most especially with the Ministry of Agriculture. Take, for instance, the project that has been mentioned by hon. Byabagambi of the vegetable oil development projects in Kalangala. Actually, that project is on a PPP model arrangement and it has turned out to be a successful story. Basically, much as the committee has mentioned clearly that the PPP policy is not yet in place, I do not think we should deter Government from carrying on with this loan request just because this PPP policy has not been done. The good thing is that it is in the offing, but since we have already had arrangements where we have PPP projects in place, I think – (Interruption) 

MR SABIITI: The Learned Attorney-General has quoted Article 159(8) and surely within this section, it clearly states: “…subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe.” Maybe we would have come here first - even in this report, how we handle this matter other than that it is constitutional –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Mr Speaker, I have listened carefully and I have also been very keen in as far as this presentation is concerned. Would it be procedurally right to proceed when the substantive Minister of Agriculture is not around to address the issues I intend to raise in as far as this presentation is concerned? 

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The best course would be to give this matter further consideration and be presented again. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, any further consideration of this particular motion is now deferred, according to the Prime Minister’s request. (Applause)

7.42
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Speaker, there are two issues that I have been called upon to elucidate: the first one is about the teachers’ salaries. This matter was debated in this House and passed. The government’s position was that an increase would be granted to them in the next financial year. However, I think yesterday and today there were discussions going on between the government and the teachers’ union.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue was that there are some normal salaries – not the increased ones – that have not been paid.

MR KAJURA: Well, if it is that –(Laughter)– I thought it was a bigger issue. Fortunately, when I left here, I went to the ministry and found my people very busy remitting the funds which had come from the Ministry of Finance last evening. So I agreed with them that the matter was urgent; tomorrow is a public holiday and they must continue remitting these funds until midnight tonight. Thank you. (Laughter)

7.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I do not want to labour on the point of the importance of paying every worker by the employer; the Prime Minister made that very clear. All I want to state is that as far as the Ministry of Finance is concerned, all funds for salary shortfall – you remember there was a shortfall as a result of us not passing the supplementary budget? This was done yesterday. Districts should receive those funds latest by Friday this week. Weren’t we supposed to have a holiday tomorrow, all moneys to all ministries, departments and agencies should have been received by Thursday. 

The finance ministry has released all the money that is supposed to be realised. But as I was explaining, there are managers of the payroll; I cannot stand before this Parliament and say that every employee of the government will receive the pay because I know that there are some shortfalls and difficulties with the management of the payroll. There is a question of – (Interruption)

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and thank you, hon. Minister, for allowing me to seek clarification.

Mr Speaker, sometimes cabinet ministers make us become suspicious. I remember at the end of June the request was – and what appeared here when we wanted to deny the minister’s supplementary budget, the Minister of Public Service made it look like Parliament is a monster; members of Parliament are sadists who do not feel for teachers. And we even asked, “The financial year is ending within a day; why don’t we wait and pass the Budget together so that the teachers are paid?”

The issue then was that the teachers must get their pay; whoever wanted to refuse the budget was looked at a sadist and it was hurriedly passed. Everybody thought that since it was going to pay the teachers it should be passed. But I am now surprised and would like to be clarified. That time it was the manager of the payroll speaking that they wanted to get the money from the finance ministry and pay the teachers. But the point I sometimes get suspicious is where this money went; who did it pay? The money we passed in a hurry at the end of the financial year. Now we are in October and the teachers have since then not been paid. The finance ministry is claiming that they have passed on all the moneys and they are not the payroll managers; please tell Ugandans who is holding the teachers’ money! 

At that time the one who was asking for the money was the payroll manager – the Minister of Public Service. I would think the public service ministry is in charge of paying the workers’ salaries after they are released by the Ministry of Finance. Who is holding this money that was removed from the Ministry of Finance after we passed it in form of a supplementary budget? Until now teachers have not accessed it; do not make us suspicious of government’s operations. Tell us the truth about who is holding the money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, can we have clear information from Government on this issue?

MR KAJURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I have is that the money has now been sent to us by the Ministry of Finance –(Interjection)– Yes, last evening. (Interjection) I think the entire amount. And the remittances are now being effected. So give us a few days and you will find that everybody has received his or her money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, this issue seems to be involving; indeed a supplementary budget was passed to deal with those shortfalls of teachers who were not receiving salaries by virtue of certain problems. There was also an excuse from the Ministry of Education that when they tried to do a head count, some teachers were in transition and so they found them in the middle and their names got struck off the payroll. And that the payroll which was eventually submitted had a number of teachers whose names were not in the payroll deleted. 

Those were the explanations we got then. Now this issue seems to be subsisting three months after the debate and the decision taken; there are still questions about it. We need a very clear explanation to the House on this particular subject. And we may not be able to extract that from the minister sitting in the House right now. We will now give that as an instruction that even if the money has been sent and the teachers have received their salaries, you should come back with an explanation as to why there was a three-month delay and some teachers have not been paid. So please, come back with this explanation so that we know. This House is going to go to recess and by the time we return, it is a debt of the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Education; all together need to give a collective response on this so that we can know that there are no issues, which we may not be seeing but which may be there disturbing people. 
/
Honourable members, thank you very much for sitting up to now on this day. All Members of Parliament intending to travel to Rukungiri for the National Independence Day celebrations are informed that transport from Parliament will depart from the North Wing Parking lot of Parliament on Wednesday, 9 October 2013; that is tomorrow early morning at 4.00 a.m. – that is about a few hours from now. If you intend to use that transport, please be there. Please note that there will be one bus and therefore boarding will be on first come first serve basis. All Members are requested to keep time so that departure can be prompt to allow the bus arrive in Rukungiri in time for the celebrations. This is from the Public Relations Manager, dated today. 

Honourable members, I thank you for what we have been able to achieve today. We have achieved quite a lot and I thank you for the spirit of cooperation that has begun flowing in this House. We want to celebrate this and make it a point that this is how this House should run and manage ourselves in the House so that we can enjoy Parliament. (Applause) 

That is my conclusion. I wish you all happy celebrations of 51 years. Tomorrow, we are taking the first step into the next 50 years; we are heading towards the centenary. Certainly, our method of work has got to change and our focus has got to change. We have to renew our commitment to this country and support the initiative by the people of this country so that we can move forward. So this House is adjourned sine die. 

(The House rose at 8.50 p.m. and adjourned sine die)




