Saturday, 19 October 2013

Parliament met at 10.54.a.m in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting.I thank you for coming at short notice to pay tribute to Mr Chango Macho w’Obanda who passed away on 15 October 2013.

On behalf of Parliament, I would also like to offer condolences to the family of the late Bernard Onyango, former Academic Registrar of Makerere University and Uganda Martyrs University Nkozi.The late Mr Bernard Onyango distinguished himself with virtues of honesty, integrity, simplicity and transparency. When Parliament resumes on 5thNovember, I will allocate time for this House to pay tribute to this great Ugandan. I now invite you to stand up and observe a moment of silence to honour the late Mr Bernard Onyango.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this year has particularly been a difficult one for the people of Uganda. We have lost many distinguished and eminent Ugandans. In the central lobby today lays the body of hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda, who served this country selflessly. He led a simple life - very modest. He was principled and espoused principles of Marxist ideology and socialism. He believed in Pan-Africanism and spoke against imperialism and neo-imperialism.

As we have noted previously, the late hon. Chango Macho appears not to have written his memoirs, documenting his long and outstanding experience in the socio-political and economic life of Uganda and therefore, that part of history maybe missing. However, I want to urge the children of the late to ensure that the biography of this great son of Uganda is written so that it can be published for posterity. It will be the only honour we can leaveof his legacy.

On behalf of Parliament, I join other Ugandans to mourn the loss of this great man and wish him eternal rest. I recognise the family members who are seated at the Treasury Bench beside me. We will continue to pray for them and we pray for journey mercies to accompany them as they go to Lumino for the final send-off. Thank you very much.

(Entrance of the late hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda)

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

Laying of Wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. CHANGO MACHO W’OBANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the Prime Minister comes, I would like to welcome the following people who are in the gallery: Justice Jotham Tumwesigye, Judge of the Supreme Court, who worked for some time with the late Chango Macho; Mr Kajabago Karusoke, who has been working with him; hon. Mike Sebalu, Member of EALA; hon. Anthony Butele, former minister, who worked with him for some time; hon. Yona Kanyomozi, former MP and Member of EALA; hon. Dan Wandera Ogalo, former Member of EALA; Mr Ben Wanyama, member of the Public Service Commission; Hajji Kirunda Kivejinja;and hon. Beatrice Lagada who was sitting here with the members of the family.

We have received a few messages. The Government Chief Whip has written a message.She says the late Chango Macho first served as a Member of the NRC and later represented the people of Samia Bugwe South constituency in the Constituency Assembly, where he was an assertive legislator most remembered for his stance on land matters.He was one of the first Ugandans to study economics and surveying from the University of London in the United Kingdom after an illuminating phase at Nabumali High School in Mbale.

Hon. Chango Macho was an avid writer and a consummate Marxist who wrote numerous pamphlets even at the time he was a student in London.On three different occasions, this brought him face to face with the FBI for interrogation over what they termed as “advancement of communist ideologies”.Hon. Chango Macho together with his associate, Prof. Wadada Nabudere, maintained an intimate Marxist discourse through which they saw Uganda solve the problems of production and distribution.

He was a former UPC youth winger who later founded the Uganda Patriotic Movement led by Mr Yoweri Museveni.Mr Chango Macho served as head of the Centre for Continuing Education, head and founder of Makerere University Centre for Extramural Studies in Mbale, Minister of Lands, Water and Resources, Minister of State for Minerals, National Political Commissar for the NRM and Special Presidential Advisor up to the time of his death.

We also received a message from the honourable Capt. Mike Mukula, chairperson NRM,eastern Region. He says Mr Chango Macho will be remembered for his profound contribution to the nation, dedicated service as a minister and Senior Presidential Advisor on Political Affairs.He has gone a long way in promoting good governance and democracy in our great nation through the NRM Government.As a founding member of UPM in 1980, which was led by Mr Museveni, his efforts and ideology helped shape the NRM Government to what it is today. We have lost another treasure in the person of Mr Chango Macho.

We also have a message from hon. Lydia Wanyoto who studied with his children at Fairway Primary School in Mbale.

11. 15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this House to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda. 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda, former Member of Parliament and Constituent Assembly delegate representing Samia Bugwe South, Busia District, which death occurred on Tuesday, 15 October 2013;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda was 86 years of age and was a Special Presidential Advisor before succumbing to medical complications;

NOTING THAT the late hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda had a tireless quest for knowledge, which saw him pursue further studies in the University of London before going to head the Centre for Continuing Education at Makerere University in the 1970s and establishand headthe Makerere University Centre for Extramural studies in Mbale; 

CONSIDERING THAT the late hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda once served this country in several capacities as Minister of Lands, Water and Natural Resources, Minister of State for Minerals, and as the Deputy National Political Commissar of the Movement political system, and an active political activist as a Uganda People’s Congress youth winger in the early 1960s, and as a founding member of the Uganda Patriotic Movement in 1980;

APPRECIATING THAT the late hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda was a modest, hardworking and diligent legislator with a memorable political career exemplified by his impeccable performance during his membership of the Constituent Assembly;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows: 

1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of the hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda.

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Chango Macho w’Obanda to the country.   

3. 	That his soul rests in eternal peace.”

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. Prime Minister, you can justify.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, it is with great sadness that Government has learnt of the demise of the late Chango Macho w’Obanda, Senior Presidential Advisor on Political Affairs, which happened in the afternoon of Tuesday, 15 October 2013 at his home in Najjera in Kampala. 

The late Chango Macho was born on 27 May 1927 in Hasyule Village in Lumino Sub-county in the district of Busia. He attended school at Nabumali. Before he went to Nabumali, he went to what was then called the Elementary Vernacular School -primary schools were not established by that time in Hasyule village -and he was baptised as Benjamin Chango Macho. He then later attended Nabumali High School in Mbale and thereafter, went to Makerere University and the London School of Economics. Before he went to university, he transferred from Nabumali to St Peter’s College Tororo. I thought I should put this on record as well. He went to St Peter’s College Tororo where he sat for his Cambridge School Certificate in 1947. 

Before he went to university, he joined the Survey Training School at Entebbe where he qualified, as was said in the message that you read, Madam Speaker, as a land surveyor after five years of study. He then embarked on studying privately for the Cambridge Higher School Certificate and he earned sufficient passes to be admitted for a degree of Bachelor of Science, Estates Management, at the College of Estates Management at the University of London. He was sponsored by the Bukedi administration. 

The early life of the late Chango Macho was a very active one.  I want to commend to you a book he has left with us entitled, “My Life, My Struggle.” It contains the details of his early life, his upbringing, his ideological development and his clear views on how society should be managed. 

Apart from learning at school, he learnt from people in real life and politics.In this book, he says that if you want to know the truth about your society, your community and what is happening in it and what the masses think, then you must go to the people, think with them, eat with them and listen to them. For me, this is Chango speaking. For me, it is that wisdom which guided me during my student days in London.

He went on and acquired other ideas outside formal education and universities, especially when he met his dear wife, who was more involved in religious organisations. He was involved in student politics. At the College of Estates Management, he was elected to represent foreign students on the students’ council.While there, he represented the students’ council on the University of London Union. The University of London Union then elected him to represent it on the British National University Students Union, which incidentally was also called NUSU. They dropped the “B” and so it was National University Students Union (NUSU). This was in addition to his active role in the Uganda Students’ Association. 

Through these interactions, he acquired a lot of knowledge and experience in politics, especially on liberation. His ideology, which he describes very clearly in this book, if I may summarise, was Marxism. He believed in the revolutionary socialist movement to create a classless social order structured upon common ownership of means of production.He engaged in organising fellow students who were interested in the struggle and together, they fought for the liberation and independence of Africa basing on that communist ideology, which was central to his thinking and upbringing as a young man. 

In Uganda, socialism was central in the early days of independent Uganda, during the Obote I regime.As a UPC youth winger, Chango Macho was one of those who Milton Obote dismissed from the party in the 1960s.He then teamed up with the late Prof. Nabudere and others. In 1980, Chango Macho was among the founding members of the Uganda Patriotic Movement led by Yoweri Museveni. 

When we overthrew Iddi Amin, Chango Macho ardently believed in the new ideology in our politics. He subscribed to the idea that we should have a third way of managing our politics because our history was a history of sectarian politics based on sectarian tendencies of religion, region, tribe and things of the kind. So, those that subscribed to that idea of a new force devoid of those sectarian tendencies formed the Uganda Patriotic Movement and he was one of them; in fact, he was elected to be on the Central Executive Committee of the UPM. 

As an ardent scholar of Marxism, he believed that it was the only way that could help solve the problems of production and distribution in especially emerging nations like Uganda. Around this time, the late Chango Macho had taken to writing books on Marxism.Because of his great love for Marxism, I understand - although I did not see it in his booklet - he was interrogated. I will ask Mzee KK when I have the opportunity to confirm this, but I understand that he was interrogated by the FBI, the Federal Bureau of Investigation,for being a communist.

He was very clear in his book about the question of ideology. His ideology was that contrary to – I would like to quote him:“Contrary to what educated Africans believe, the thought and action of human beings, whether they are conscious of it or not, is guided by what they believe to be right or wrong, fair or unfair, just or unjust. What guides such consciousness is what is called ideology. Personally, I strongly believe in the socialist ideology, more so, because it reflects traditional pre-colonial African social values, thought and action, hence the strong African feeling of communalism as a basis of peaceful, harmonious, social relationships guided by the beliefs in being one’s brother’s keeper as the guiding social ideal. 

A genuine socialist ideology must, therefore, be human-centred. It has to raise and regard the human being as the most important object of nature for whom other natural objects are there to serve. Accordingly, consciously or unconsciously, my political activism is guided by socialist thought to struggle for what is based for all of us. I am, therefore, never guided by personal greed or personality competition. I have always refused to be intimidated and I have never changed my ideological commitment to the popular cause of our people and the country. That is why I never ran into exile. I decided to be with the people.”

He tried to vie for Parliament in the December 1980 elections on the UPM ticket against the late Wilson Okwenje, who was a UPC candidate in Tororo South. [Hon. Member: “He is still alive”]-Oh Okwenje is still alive? My apologies –(Laughter)– I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I apologise; I had not heard of him or from him for many years. He competed with Wilson Okwenje in that constituency. 

However, it is very well known that he was disqualified on nomination day on the grounds that he did not have evidence that he knew the English language enough for him to deliberate in Parliament whose language was English. That was in spite of the fact that he was a very well educated Ugandan, not only educated in Uganda but also beyond Uganda.In 1980, he had started the extramural studies in Mbale and he was at Makerere dealing with adult education but he was disqualified on the grounds that there was no evidence that he knew enough English to participate meaningfully in the debate of this Parliament. 

When we took power in 1986, Chango Macho became a minister and a member of the National Resistance Council then. He was later elected to the Constituent Assembly, where he represented Samia Bugwe South.It was during this time that he contributed a lot, especially on debates related to land during the Constitution making process.

The late Chango Macho held many other positions as I said earlier.He was Minister of Lands, Water and Natural Resources, Minister of State for Minerals, and in here it says he was the Political Commissar of the NRM, but this is a mistake; he was the Deputy National Political Commissar of the National Resistance Council at that time, until we changed the arrangement with the 1995 Constitution. 

He will be remembered for deeply adoring African culture, which explains why at one time he abandoned his name “Ben”. I hope I am right in saying that; I did not see it in his book,although I have not studied it very well. He did not specifically saythat he abandoned his name, but I had worked with him for very many years until now, so maybe I am right in saying that he abandoned it.Also, many of his contemporaries - Kirunda Kivejinja, Kintu Musoke, Bidandi Ssali and others you may know - preferred to be referred to by their African names. 

The late Chango Macho was selfless and lived a life of simplicity, honesty and dedication to his cause. He is survived by a widow and 12 children. 

Madam Speaker and Honourable members, I take this opportunity to send my heartfelt condolences to the family of the bereaved, the people of Busia and to the people of Uganda at large and to all the comrades that shared the ideology of the late comrade Chango Macho the world over, for the loss of this gallant son of Uganda and of the world. May the Lord rest the soul of the deceased in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister.Thank you for enriching us about his writings, which have been silent, but now the country knows him better. Let us hear from the acting Leader of the Opposition. 

11.38
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Madam Speaker of Parliament, I stand here to convey the message of the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who is away to attend the burial of the late Onyango in Tororo. 

Hon. Chango Macho Boloki w’Obanda was an icon. He was a Marxist through and through. I surely cherished Chango Macho’s style of conviction, unlike some leaders who preach water in the day and drink wine at night. He stood firm on his conviction to his last hours of life. He made some of us proud as Ugandans and even more proud as Pan-Africanists. 

Hon. Chango Macho was a simple but great person. He never feared to speak his mind even if his idea was not liked by those who employed him. He was passionate about the Marxist vision of justice in society. I remember he could debate on and on trying to convince his listeners. He would say, “After all, ideas do not kill; they only present an opportunity for discussion and modification.” 

Hon. Chango Macho died a Senior Presidential Advisor, former Deputy National Political Commissar and former Minister of Lands, Water and Natural Resources. In all those positions, he responsibly undertook all his duties, putting his country above self. He and others in his category represented the first crop of post-independence civil servants and political leaders who genuinely placed the country above self and worked for the betterment of all despite the extreme scarcity of resources at the time and the immense opportunities they had to enrich themselves. He espoused values contrary to the current baton holdersand sadly, predictably, the aspirations of the majority waiting to receive the baton. 

We want to thank God for such distinguished and resilient men and women who never wavered from the truth despite the waves. They give us reason to fight on. These days, many of us are swayed from the truth because we want to survive politically. Chango Macho is one person who had been strong and died supporting the ideologies in which he believed. 

Change Macho was a faithful civil servant and politician, unlike those today who serve to get rich quickly. You will find a young public servant today driving a posh car of about Shs 100 million, living in a house of about Shs 200 million and you wonder how such a person got such money in such a short time of service. 

Madam Speaker, as a country, we are doing poorly today. The virtues of humility, selflessness and honesty are difficult to find with the current crop of public servants. It is sad that we are continually losing many senior citizens who shaped our country in one way or the other. Their voices are constantly drowned by today’s loud-mouthed young public servants whose real interest is self and not the country. As an institution charged with cardinal functions of ensuring good governance for Uganda’s sustainable development, we must stand up to check this dangerous trend because it is a recipe for bad governance and under-development. 

Today, we are here to mourn Chango Macho. May we first pause for a moment and ask ourselves a question: do we reflect what he represented and stood for? Is Uganda at 51 years the country that Chango Macho and his other fallen colleagues dreamt to leave behind for their children, grandchildren and great grandchildren? I strongly believe it is not. What went wrong? Is it too late to correct the current undesirable situation the country faces under the currentbaton holders? 

Those who are waiting to take over the baton are watching us now; what lessons are we passing on to them? That stealing public resources is fine as long as you are meeting your selfish interest at the expense of the country? This is unacceptable but it is now the reality today as official corruption takes over Shs 500 billion annually. We need to reflect on and learn how he and others in his category managed to live humble and pure in a world of very many temptations. 

Chango Macho, although the spark in your eyes is gone and your simple smile has faded, rest assured that some of us will work to achieve your wish to see a better country enjoyed by our children and grandchildren. Chango Macho w’Obanda, you have fought a good fight and now await your crown; your sweat was not in vain. The struggle will continue and we will live always to be inspired by your dedicated and unwavering pure service to Uganda. May your soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the presenter and the seconder have used 45 minutes. The rest of the Members will now use two minutes each.

11.47
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It may be very difficult to talk about the late Chango Macho in only two minutes but I will try; if I find problems, I request for one more second, Madam Speaker.

I support the motion as moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and seconded by the Leader of the Opposition. I knew the late Change Macho from when I was a young boy in 1980. I think at that time I hadnot even started school. This was the time when we had elections and UPC was very strong in our area. We got to know the late Chango Macho when he was campaigning as a member of UPM. We got to know him because the other aspirants were using vehicles but the late Change Macho used his bicycle all through. 

As a young man at home, I saw a gentleman riding to my father’s home and he interacted with my father because he was an old boy of Nabumali just like my fatherwas. I listened very keenly to their discussions and I heard him tell my father, “Donot be stagnant; the world is dynamic. We all belonged to UPC but look, I have gone to UPM.” At that time, the whole of Bukedi and I think the whole of eastern region was full of UPC, so little attention was given to him. It wasnot DP like somebody was suggesting; it was fully UPC. At that time, my father was the chairperson of the constituency called Tororo East and therefore a campaigner of Mr Wilson Okwenje. I heard them exchange very serious ideas.

Later on, I heard that the late Chango Macho w’Obanda was a member of the Constituent Assembly (CA) and I picked keen interest in following up his ideas. When I came to this House later, I wanted to find out about his contributions, particularly in the CA –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute and then we shall have hon. Otafiire.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I went to the Hansard. I knew the late Chango Macho was very passionate about political and civil rights and also about land issues.  Allow me to refer to what I found in the Hansard in respect to civil rights and fundamental freedoms.

The late Chango Macho proposed an amendment during discussions on the Floor of this House to include employment as one of the fundamental freedoms.At that time, most of his colleagues argued that to put employment as one of the fundamental freedoms would be to simply create a welfare state or a Marxist socialist state.However, when I read on and on, I discovered somewhere that he had very bright ideas. (Member timed out.)

11.50
LT GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE (NRM, Ruhindi County, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, all said and done, the late Chango Macho passes on. His demise is the material disappearance of an icon but that does not mean the ideas he stood for have fallen with him. 

The greatest lesson I learnt from this Pan-Africanist is that he was denied competition because he could not speak English by people who were struggling to rule this country, the UPC. That was the style of leadership and style of thinking - that you deny a man with ideas and with capacity to come here and make a contribution in favour of promotion of a culture of individual indulgence. It is absurd!

Sad still, is that this indulgence has not entirely vanished from the present realities and realm. It cuts across. Chango Macho despised the politics of parasitic relationships. Chango Macho struggled for a fair and equal society for everybody according to ability and to   need, in direct contradiction with the current trend of primitive capital accumulation.  (Applause)

Here lies an icon.He valued being an African and I am talking about him as the chairman of the Global Pan-African Movement. He valued being an African but he also valued human nature and he played his internationalist role equally like he played his Pan African and patriotic duty. He was an internationalist; he felt for mankind. That was the great Chango Macho. 

He lived a humble life. At theend of the day, all of us, whether you want it or not, for those of you who are not Hindus, you will take four by two by six; that is all you will go with. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the family had wanted to leave Kampala by midday. I am really interfering with their time. Okay, half a minute to conclude.

LT GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Why on earth do you need to deny other people a chance to live like you live? Hon. Chango Macho, every 50 years or perhaps in a century, a man of your character comes by; it takes so little to touch people’s lives. Fare thee well, whereever you are. I wish you very well.

11.54
MS BARBARA NEKESA OUNDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have unquestionable support for the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to extend my sincere condolences to the family, the people of Busia and Uganda as we pay tribute to the late hon. Chango Macho. 

It is a public secret - everyone knows that the late was a sharp and deep thinker, an avid writer, a revolutionary and Pan-Africanist like you all said. However, we continue to emphasise that he had a compelling compassion for the common man. Many have alluded to this, especially when they continue to tell us how he used to sit and share the liquid we usually call machozi ya simbawith the local people. So, really, he related with everyone irrespective of your stature; he was a man of the people.

Madam Speaker, the late Chango Macho kept my elders on the edge of their seats with his speeches, because they were always punctuated by proverbs in Samia. Ordinarily, I would have said that he thought in Samia, translated these proverbs to English to find solutions to the challenges of our people.

There is a very dark cloud over Busia now and Uganda as we send off a legendary lion of Busia District. He was referred to as the grandfather of wisdom. This leads me to the conclusion that indeed, the three wise men they referred to from the East manifested in Chango Macho, Prof. Nabudere and Anatoli. These are the lights. I am compelled to prove so.Those who enjoyed sitting here with him know that he was a great debator and he would not get angry even if the debate was heated.

Madam Speaker, I really pay tribute to this legendary lion of Busia.In one way or another, he drew the old memories and got support for hon. Nekesa Barbara that I had never imagined. People usually said Chango Macho was back and I thought it was only in terms of support. However, when I asked my father, he said that I was doing what he used to do; his speeches were always punctuated with proverbs. I had not known that. 

He also told me that when time allowed, he would take me to him so that he would sit me down to tell me how to work with people. One thing the late did was to articulate and encourage – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute.

MS OUNDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, I would like to say that the late hon. Chango Macho was a man who emphasised self-reliance and hard work. This was evidenced – the family is here – during the graduation party of one of his sons; he presented a hoe and a panga to him as a gift to really tell them that hard work was the way to go. This has stood the test of time, even up to now.We need to encourage our people to work hard if we are to make Uganda what we want it to be.

On that note, fare thee well the late hon. Chango Macho.May the good Lord grant him eternal peace. Thank you.

11.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to strongly support the motion to honour our late Mzee. I will differ a bit from the rest by going a little personal with the life of Mzee Chango Macho. My family and his have been together for a very long time. I went to school with his daughter, and I can see her here, from primary school and my wife also went to school with one of his other daughters.  That is why I said we have a long family background.

Mzee Chango Macho was a very principled person. If you reflected on his private life, you would realise that. I recall that in the 1970s, when he came to our primary school as a parent – it was a Westernoriented international school - we used not to sing the National Anthem as was the case in other schools. However, that day, he stood and said we had to sing the National Anthem. Very few pupils knew how to sing the National Anthem but he led us through by singing all the stanzas. From that time onwards, singing the National Anthem became a routine at school.

Mzee Chango Macho, as we used to call him, was a simple man. I again recall in the 1970s when the times were bad - I agree with what has been mentioned here - he refused to go to exile; he stayed in Mbale driving his car, a grey Volvo. He kept it meticulously clean. He used to live in senior quarters in a house opposite hon. Jack Wamai’s home. He always dropped his children to school and everything went on well. 

One day, when his car developed a problem, he parked at Caltex petrol station along Republic Street in Mbale and abandoned it there in protest, because he did not want to go and buy spare parts from outside Uganda. He left the car and started walking on foot. We got to know him as the walking man. From that time onwards, he kept walking until the times changed. He would walk very long distances. He would walk as far as Kachumbala outside Mbale Municipality and all the way to Nkoma to sit with the common person and share time with them –(Member timed out.)

12.00
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the people Busia Municipality to send sincere condolences to the family and Uganda at large. The fallen gallant son of Uganda with us today was a person who we all regarded as a father. He is the one who was behind the creation of Busia District. If it was not for him, I think some of us would not be in Parliament today.

The late Chango Macho w’Obanda believed in what he said. If only the Government he worked with did all things according to his ideas, I think we would have a better Uganda. He believed in a corrupt-free country. He was not a corrupt person. He believed in truth and justice. By the way, there was a time he was disqualified from nominations because he had not presented a Senior 4 certificate. He asked the presiding officer, who also knew him, whether they did not know if he had sat for senior four exams, but the officer insisted that he goes and brings his certificate. When he drove to bring it, he could not get back to the nomination centre because a roadblock had been placeduntil 5 O’clock. That is how he missed on the nominations for that year. That was real corruption.I also think that the Electoral Commission or whoever handles electoral processes should be fair. You can see how Uganda missed such good ideas from a man like this. 

The late Chango Macho believed in culture. He was a simple person. He would share whatever he had with the people. If you invited him to a function – I invited him to my son’s graduation one time - the first thing he looked out for was millet bread. We call it obusima ne ngeni – millet bread with fish. The other thing he would look out for was malwa, local brew. Even when you look through his books – Madam Speaker, I showed you the pictures - you realise that he was a person who shared with the people.

Normally, people would hate him for telling them the truth. So, if you were not a truthful person, it would not augur well with him. He gave us ideas. He has been our dictionary and our consultant. Before I contested, I visited him and he gave me all the necessary ideas.

When he was the Minister of Rehabilitation in Uganda, when the NRM had just got into power, the Samia thought they “got into things”. They rushed to him asking for boreholes and this and that, but he told them that was not the way things would be done. He said things were supposed to be distributed equally. He said that since time immemorial, people used to drink water from wells, so he told them not to rush things. He said he would distribute the boreholes equally. He was an incorruptible person. 

I think his ideaswill stay on. The late used to dedicate most his time to writing; I urge the family to put together all those writings and publish books that we can read with our children, so that we can have a better Uganda. (Member timed out.)

12.05
MR DEOGRATIOUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Bukomansimbi County, the Democratic Party and the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus, I want to extend condolences to the bereaved family, colleagues, the honourable members from Busia District, the people of Uganda, fellow congressmen of the late Chango Macho, the NRM people and all Ugandans upon the loss of our beloved gallant son of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, when I learnt about the death of the honourable member, I remembered that this government promised all the elderly people at least Shs 20,000 per month but people are dying without getting this. It is high time that we thought about the Ugandans who have contributed to this country and we start paying this money.

I want to thank God for his life, for what he has done for his country and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

12.06
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join the rest of the Members in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the late Chango Macho. He originates from my constituency and I want to affirm to the people who have spoken that all that has been deliberated about Chango Macho are pure facts.

The person we are paying tribute to is the first son of NRM in Busia District. Nobody knew anything about NRM but Chango Macho walked in full of the ideology of NRM principles. After UPM turned to NRM and took power, people started realising that he had real ideas that were for humanity. He was mistaken to be a rebel because of his radical thinking, but the ideas that he brought out would only be clear after you had enough time with him. 

As young boy, I did not know Chango Macho but I heard my dad speak so much about him. It was when I was in Mbale in HSc that I became very close to the late Wapakhabulo while supporting him for the CA. When I got back home, we engaged in the campaigns for Chango Macho for the CA.

The late Chango Macho has been a foundation for the politics of Busia District. Some of us are what we are today because our foundation in politics is from Chango Macho - politics of no hatred, no intrigue, and of making peace because he was peace maker. He is the one we are paying tribute to today.

I want to assure Ugandans that Chango Macho did not dwell on his background. He originated from a chiefly background because his father, Mzee Boloki, was a chief but Chango Macho lived as a simple boy who could even fetch water. This determined what he would become as he grew and became old. It hardened him, preparing him for the future –(Member timed out.)

12.09
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (Army Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to the hon. Chango Macho as a selfless person based on his simplicity. He was a clean accountable person, who prophesied clean leadership. He was a brave but peace loving member of the society; a man of the people in all respects, who ate, lived, talked and shared everything he had with the society.

If there is a man in our country we could declare a man of the people, it would be the late Chango Macho. Whether you believe in God or not, like he did not, each one of us is created for a specific unique purpose. Here lies a man who was unique, special, different not only because of what he said, which was building, but also because of what he taught and what he even wore. He is one of those who refused to be tied with a rope around his neck all his life. 

He prophesied Pan-Africanism and the life of the socialist belief, which is not only believed but lived - show and prove. For a man to live to 87 years in this generation is somebody we should be proud of. Hon. Kivejinja tells me that it is not by mistake that you live beyond 70. In addition to God’s grace, it is because of discipline - what you eat and how you live - (Member timed out.)

12.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHEIF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank you for according this opportunity to our fallen colleague, Mzee Chango Macho Boloki w’Obanda. That was his full name and it made him happy, and that is how he would introduce himself. 

A lot has been said about him but as fellow leaders, I want us to pick one leaf from his life - what he preached and what he practiced. He was a minister of rehabilitation at a time when we did not have all the laws to do with accountability, but he was accountable for his actions and for whatever he did. For us who are leaders during this time, we have the laws but corruption is still a problem. We should work on the issue of attitude. There were no laws then and people were accountable and corrupt-free. Can we now endeavour to work on the issue of our attitude to corruption? I think that is what is missing in the country. 

On behalf of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus, the people of Bugiri and on behalf of the family of Mr Lumumba, I want to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family, the people of Busia where I am married, and to all Ugandans. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

12.13
MS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to a distinguished Ugandan, a great son of Africa, a modest leader. I bring my condolences, condolences from the people of Bujenje Constituency, Masindi District and Bunyoro at large to the family of the late and Uganda in general.

Mr Chango Macho, because of his attributes and skills, was able to interact with people from all walks of life, across ages and political divides. He had great ideas as has been said. Somebody did mention that great ideas are easier to operationalise but pedestrian ideas are very difficult to make powerful. With Mr Chango Macho’s ideas, you did not have to struggle hard and at every opportunity, he did expound on them without fear or favour.

I did interact with Chango Macho while I was working at the NRM Secretariat. At that time I was very young and every time we met, he referred to me as “My daughter” and he would take time to preach his gospel. I want to call upon us to make sure that the likes of Chango Macho do not go in vain. Can we train others to walk in the footsteps of Chango Macho –(Member timed out)

12.16
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Madam Speaker, if my time is extended by half a minute to pay tribute to this man, I want to thank the Government of Uganda and yourself, Madam Speaker. I know the international engagements, which you had to forego in order to enable the people of Uganda give a befitting send off to this great son. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, you know that the Members of Parliament were on recess. I want to thank these Members of Parliament who know that nobody can make an appointment with death and that when it comes to death, it becomes important for us to forego what we could have planned to come and pay tribute to our own. We do not know when we may be in the same place. After all, it is said that, “Let a slave who sees a friend being buried in a shallow grave know that he will undergo the same fate when his or her time comes.” It is our duty to come and pay respect especially to distinguished human beings who have served this nation without fear and without favour. 

I want to thank the family members for accepting us. I know how fond they have been of their father, their mother, their grandson, their grandfather, but hon. Chango Macho became a Ugandan and an international figure. Whereas we shall go to Lumino to escort him, to give the opportunity to those who may not come and to document his legacy in the Hansard and the annals of this country is very important for the people who will read and write history. 

I will now move to the content of my speech. I call upon Government to create a special fund to enable the people of Uganda, especially the wise ones, to document what is in their minds. Great nations - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute. 

MR DOMBO: When you go to great nations, like America, you will read the history of the great leaders. We have lost Obote, Mayanja Nkangi and all the people who influenced –(Interjections)–

THE SPEAKER: Abu Mayanja.

MR DOMBO: Abu Mayanja. Thank you. Abu Mayanja, Binaisa. All these are very great important people. Let us create a fund to enable the people to document, for the future citizens of this country, what has been done and how it has been done. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

12.17
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen hero and elder. On behalf of the people of Bungokho South, I would like to convey my condolences to the family of the late hon. Chango Macho. 

For us, people who hail from Mbale, we grew up seeing hon. Chango Macho because he spent a good part of his life in Mbale with his colleagues like the late Nabudere. We admired the late Chango Macho as a distinguished leader who was simple, who associated with all categories of people in Mbale and beyond. For us in Mbale, we will remember Chango Macho as a person who was incorruptible. He stood for hard work, honesty and the love of his country. 

I would like to give an example of how he detested corruption and was accountable. One time, as a minister, he came to preside over a function in Mbale and as usual, the water department at that time prepared a luncheon in his honour, as the guest of honour, and of course for other guests. He told them that he would not take that lunch because his per diem and the allowances were to cover all costs, and it was really surprising. He shocked many people. This is to demonstrate the fact that he was an accountable person, a person who did not want to encroach on extra funds from the taxpayer.  (Member timed out.)

12.21
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the mover and the seconders of the motion. I support the motion to pay tribute to the great Ugandan and fellow African who lived a very simple but noble life, to which all of us have a lot of attachment. 

I bring my history too: When we were in Makerere, in the early days of the NRM, just after NRM had taken over power, we had discussion groups and eminent scholars like Chango Macho used to come and hold debates in Makerere. They would enrich our ability to live a life, which I think many of us are struggling to maintain but with a lot of contradictions. He has played his role; he has lived his life. 

I would like to take it on and appeal to the founders - hon. Otafiire was among the group members and hon. Ndugu Rugunda - There were quite a number of people who used to come to Makerere to conduct inspirational debates on how we could build a better Uganda. I think this is an area we need to reflect on and resurrect as a nation. 

As we look at global trends, where there is an economic crisis and there is even an imminent shut down of economies, we need to sit down and look at how we can live within our means as a country. Chango Macho has lived within his means. He has lived a simple life. He has lived a transparent life. He has accounted for his life. He was an intellectual but he did not have egoistic tendencies, which many of us who put on a lot of smart coats have but in the real life we are traitors of the realities of the economies we live in. I pray that together, we can work towards reinventing the wheel, facing the realities, pulling the fundamentals –(Member timed out.)

12.23
CAPT. MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you Madam Speaker. Let me take the opportunity, once again, on behalf of the National Resistance Movement, Eastern and the Pan-African Movement, Uganda, to extend our deep and sincere condolences to the family. The late Chango Macho was a great Pan-Africanist, a great patriot and a great nationalist. This was the true epitome of humility. He was an icon. 

Chango Macho believed in the ideals of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels and believed in total Marxism. Chango Macho did not believe in a class society. He believed in the common being. He was opposed to primitive accumulation of wealth and the way he lived as a man showed it very clearly. When he was a minister, he would take a trip outside the country and if he has not spent the foreign exchange, he would surrender it to the coffers. This was a great man. I do not know how many of our ministers travel now and return money to the coffers. (Laughter) When I was a minister, I did that twice. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, they say wise men come from the East. This was truly a wise man. I would like to urge the people of Samia or Busia District to at least remember him by dedicating one school or district headquarters or a road to remember the ideals and the services of Chango Macho –(Member timed out.)

12.26
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Moyo District, on behalf of EALA, Uganda Chapter, and on my own behalf I would like to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister.

I did not know much about the late Chango Macho but I heard about him for the first time when I was at Kyankwanzi together with one of his daughters. Most of the soldiers talked about him and his daughter was made the leader of one of the teams. Today, I have learned a lot about him and there is no way I cannot pay tribute and take cognisance of the services he rendered to the nation, Uganda. 

We recognise him for the services he rendered as a lecturer and as a minister. There are a few leaders like him who have served and come out very clean. We thank him for that and may the good Lord rest his soul in eternal peace.

12.27
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to a true nationalist and an icon. I want to associate myself with the tribute paid by hon. Elly Tumwine and many of my colleagues. 

The late Chango Macho was a highly self-motivated Ugandan with a consuming quest for knowledge and a desire to pass it on to our young people. He proved himself a real intellectual pillar. He was a true servant leader of high integrity not afraid to speak his mind and ready to defend his ground. He was a simple person and approachable. Many of us, leaders, are unapproachable and we should learn from the late Chango Macho.

Uganda has really lost a true icon and a true role model. May his family take solace in the fact that we all loved Chango Macho and we all respected and treasured him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

12.29
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (LWEMIYAGA COUNTY, SEMBABULE): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to our fallen hero. A few people have named his achievements; I want to state that not only was he a good-hearted patriot, he was also an intellectual and a writer. He was highly scholarly, and that is why it was a turn of events when he was stopped from contesting on grounds that he did not have the basic academic qualifications.

The late wrote the book Africa: Struggle for the Second Liberation. The gist of that book was the challenges of the 21st Century and he had this to say: “Those who think, resist; those who do not, surrender.” I am glad to be one of his most ardent students and I am glad to be associated with his wisdom. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, it is strange that history has its own turns and twists. Not only was the late a minister for rehabilitation but he first became the minister for natural resources and lands. That was a huge ministry at that time. He became the minister for rehabilitation at a time when we were putting money into the ministry without the Public Accounts Committee and the Auditor-General. 

If I may give you an example - by then, he was well established in the system that the current Prime Minister was a mere director in the External Security Organisation and later he became the junior minister for regional cooperation. However, now you can see the two worlds the two are leading – One remained loyal, true to the country up to the end and never accumulated wealth; he was never a maniac for power and wealth. (Laughter) (Member timed out_)

12.31
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ayivu County and the youth of this country, I join the family in paying tribute to our fallen grandfather. Two minutes are not enough, but I will only say we have lost a man of honour and I am happy to see in the distinguished guests’ gallery one of his colleagues, that is, hon. Karusoke. I enjoy reading his articles. 

A lot has been said about hon. Chango Macho but it is also a shame that the opposite of what he preached and what he lived is being practiced by colleagues on the ruling side. This country is bleeding because of corruption and self-centredness. The resources and monies being accumulated by individuals in government would have saved many lives. 

We got the sad news that the late Chango Macho died on his way to the hospital. You can imagine somebody staying in his sick bed and then dying on the way to hospital and yet we have lost ministers and big people outside the country using taxpayers’ money. This is all to teach us a lesson that this country has enough resources to make life comfortable for each one of us. Therefore, when you assume a position of appointment or by virtue of your qualifications, learn to live within your means because this country will not end with you. 

The message is clear in the life of the late. The message is clear in the family that – (Member timed out.)

12.34
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring my condolences to the family of the late Chango Macho.  The late Chango Macho had a lot of influence on me and my ideological orientation. 

He was a very strong willed person, like Members said, and he practiced what he believed. He was a royal; he comes from the Batabona clan, which was ruling the Basamia, and he was a son of a chief. However, he committed classical ideological suicide and he supported and worked for ordinary people and lived like an ordinary person. There are not many people like that.

He was an icon in Samia. When growing up, there was a person called Ombutu; we did not know the name Chango much but we knew him as Ombutu. Ombutu I think was the first Musamia, at least from Lumino Gombolola where I grew up, to go to London, to fly in a plane, to write a book in Lusamia, and we admired all these things. We grew up admiring Ombutu and we wanted to be like him. 

Later, I learnt that he was a man of integrity. When I was in middle school, he always came to teach us what these days we call patriotism. He would come and talk to us, with no budget. When I got a scholarship to go to China, he was very happy. Actually, he encouraged me because that is where the future was, according to him. He loved books. 

I once went to visit him in Luzira where he was staying in a house owned by Ministry of Water. The whole room was filled with books. He was always referring to books and would always read books. Not many of us do that; many people never touch a book again after college. That was not Chango – (Member timed out.) 

12.37
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale to pay our sincere condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the whole country at large for this loss. We have lost a great man. 

Many people keep asking me, “Why are you seated on this side moreover you worked with Government for 25 years?” I am seated on this side because of the ideas of that man who lies there today. I am seated on this side because of people like Nabudere who chose to speak the truth and that is what I will die for. I will always speak the truth and I will continue to speak the truth like Chango Macho. 

While growing up, we admired people like Chango Macho. He lived in Mbale and that is why I requested that I speak because he was from my constituency. He lived in Mbale and we admired him when he talked about Marxism and Leninism. I got a scholarship to go and study in the former Soviet Union because of Chango Macho and Nabudere. You would see Marxism and Leninism at work. I made sure I went to live in Sweden to see socialism at work when Olof Palme was Prime Minister of Sweden. 

The people of Mbale will miss Chango Macho. He was a very simple person. He would walk to a joint and sit with the local people and drink with them. This is the man we are saying farewell to today. How many people are going to leave a legacy like Chango Macho’s? The man was minister of lands when land was at large. This is a man who never struggled to ask for fuel; he would walk. 

When he was at Nakasero as a Presidential Advisor, I went to visit him. Before that land was given to Aya Brothers, he used to stay there. I went to visit him and he was happy to see me, but he was using a Tumpeco to drink his tea. How many of you people today would live like him?

When people talk of patriotism, I have seen patriotism at work –(Member timed out_)

12.40
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. What do we learn from the life of Chango Macho? What is his legacy that we should admire? I think a lot has been said, but the following can be repeated: 

Change Macho was a thinker; he practiced his thinking, was consistent in his thinking and lived his thinking. Some people are saying he was a minister of lands when land was in plenty and he did not partake of that plenty. Hon. Wamai, how many of us will live with plenty and not be plenty? This is something to admire- that this man could not succumb to the attractions that so many of us would fall victim of. Therefore, we recognise his uprightness and his consistency. 

If he did not agree with you, he would not abuse you or accuse you of being an enemy and this is where greatness lies. Which of the great thinkers that you know of was abusive of his listeners? Who do you know that was ostentatious and yet simple? So those are the virtues that he had embedded in him. 

Many people would say that long living is a curse; at 86 years old, we are still saying that this man was a light to people who listened to him. I heard the honourable minister here saying that she learnt from him as a young person. He was a good man and goodness is simple; goodness is wisdom. 

I would like to propose, Madam Speaker, that since this tradition of bringing these people of this calibre here is now established, we think of another tradition where we have a list of Ugandans who can be invited to address this House on certain ideas that they have spearheaded in society. Perhaps, if Chango Macho had spoken to us about his life, we would believe him more than talking about him after his death. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

12.44
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like many of my colleagues who spoke before me, I want to support the motion and I want to thank you for the opportunity to give my condolence message on behalf of the people of Kioga to the family, the people of Busia and to Uganda at large for the demise of hon. Chango Macho. 

You are bound to agree with me that losing somebody close to you is one of the hardest things in life and is incredibly devastating. We are all filled with immense stress and deep remorse during this time of loss, and we share your grief. 

During his tenure, the late Chango Macho was able to strengthen the NRM because of his honesty, fairness and because he was intimidated. It was then that I realised that he was a strong advocate for dialectical materialism, a commitment he undertook without compromise. 

From the various contributions that we have heard on the Floor of this Parliament, it has become apparent that we may bury his mortal body but we shall not bury the wisdom of dialectical materialism that he stood for. We may bury his mortal body, but we will not bury the memories of the good deeds that he accomplished. We may bury his mortal body but we will not bury the sense of commitment and the love that he had for his people. I want to thank him for living positively and may the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal life. 

12.45
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Namayingo District and on my own behalf, allow me say words of condolences to the affected family. We are neighbours because Namayingo is close to Busia. 

When I was growing up, I used to hear about a wise man called Chango Macho Boloki w’Obanda. He was a man worth emulating because he was a great leader. If you wanted to know more about him, when you talked about preserving the culture of the Samia, he was such a man. 

To us young leaders today, I think we also need to borrow a leaf from him so that we can encourage today’s generation to value our culture. Today, when you move on the streets, you see young girls everywhere almost walking naked. That disturbs me a lot because they do not cherish their culture. It is, therefore, up to us, the leaders, to ensure that we teach our children the way to go so that they can preserve our culture. 

Many people have talked about him as a man who was upright. I think that we, today’s leaders, need to take a leaf from him so that in everything we do, we do it in order to serve our people so that we are not selfish. Most leaders are selfish and they think of their stomachs and their families. I think this is not a good thing. 

As leaders today, I encourage us to go out to preach the gospel of serving our people diligently and to encourage our children to emulate and love their culture so that we may bring sanity to our country, Uganda. I thank you very much.

12.47
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I stand here to pay tribute to a gallant son of Uganda. I would like to request Members of Parliament to refer to the liberation and independence of our country. Chango Macho spearheaded the total liberation of Africa and that is why as Members of Parliament, we need to pay tribute to him.

You can admire people in two ways: for the good things they do and also their level of thinking. There are two people I admired and I do admire in this country. One of them is now the late hon. Chango Macho and the other one is still living, and that is, hon. Otafiire.  (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the two, you will see that they are almost the same. First of all, you cannot clearly notice the level of thinking. You would think about and admire how they behave and how they talk. These are people who are straightforward and speak their mind. I think that is what we are lacking in our country. We always say what we do not want to say, but the late would speak his mind. 

These are people who believe in the total liberation of this country. You look at their names - Chango Macho, Otafiire, Amama Mbabazi. (Laughter) They wanted Africa to be for Africa and to liberate our country. That is why most of them went for liberation and the struggle for liberation. Therefore, I would like to pay tribute to the late Chango Macho. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I agreed with his family that I would release them at midday and I have exceeded that time. Let us have hon. Twa-Twa.

12.50
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. On behalf of the people of Bugwere region and the people of Iki-Iki Constituency, which I represent, I would like to extend our condolences to the people of Samia Bugwe, and particularly to the family, for the loss of a gallant son of Uganda and Africa and a grandfather to most of us, who lies here. 

Today, a thick black cloud covers the Bukedi region. You are aware that in the last few days, we have lost two great people: Bernard Onyango, who has been a leader and academician for quite a long time, and now our Mzee, Chango Macho, lying before us. These two are from the same region of Bukedi. What a great loss!  

I knew about the late Chango Macho right from my school days. We used to look up for role models; in him, I see the late MzeeNyerere, I see Kaunda, I see Mao Tse-tung. At that time as young people, we looked up role models whom we admired, and I think one of those on my part was definitely Mzee Chango Macho, who lies before us.  

Later on, I worked in Tororo in the 1980s. The theme, which has been reflected here, was what happened in the 1980s. I saw all that happen live; I saw what happened the day he was denied access to contest and come to Parliament. What a pity! However, I am glad that later on, he managed to make it and actually demonstrated his capability as a political leader at the national level. (Member timed out.)

12.52
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I knew the late Chango Macho when the NRM Government took power but I had heard about him when I was in exile – (Interjections) - (Laughter) - I should not be disturbed, Madam Speaker, and I should be given the opportunity to say what I want to say. 

When this government came into power, he was a very active member and he spoke his mind. At that time, some people thought some of his views were unique and somehow queer but they were expressed with conviction and a lot of people listened to him and wondered whether what he was saying was practical. He was very accessible, he was very lucid and he said what he believed.  

He was a socialist who believed in the principle that people have got to work. I think this is a virtue which is lacking among our Ugandan population, particularly if you go to the countryside today and look at what the men are doing; at 9 O’clock they are out drinking and they are back at 9.00 p.m. All the work that is done is done by women. The men have abandoned their responsibility to the women and it is the women who are now cultivating and going around looking for school fees and supporting the families. 

He was a champion of hard work by all Ugandans, which was a great virtue, rather than believing that Government should provide and people should receive. I think this is a trend that is very dangerous. People want good roads, good hospitals, good education but they do not want to work for it. The GDP can only increase if people are productive. In fact, it should be mandatory for every worker under the age of 60 to be productive. The late was a champion of that and on that line, I agreed with him and encouraged him. He was simple, accessible to all men and women –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late hon. Chango Macho.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have received a message from EALA, Uganda Chapter, expressing their condolences. They say that Mr Chango Macho was a promoter and champion of East African integration and also supported the integration of the African Continent.

I now direct the Clerk to extract the Hansard and give it to the family and also, of course, the resolution that we have made today. Thank you very much.

East African Anthem

Uganda National Anthem

(Exit of the late hon. Chango Macho)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for coming. I also thank the guests in the distinguished strangers’ gallery and the citizens who are in the gallery. We thank you very much for coming to pay tribute to this distinguished Ugandan. The House is adjourned to 5 November 2013.

(The House rose at 1.02 p.m. and adjourned until 5 November 2013.)
