Monday, 22 October 2012

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this special sitting where we pay tribute to the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma who has passed on. It is an honour for this House to receive and have the discussion on the motion that will be presented to the House.

Honourable members, the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas invites all Members of Parliament to a residential workshop on the harmonisation of the draft oil Bills, committee reports and the proposed amendments. The workshop will take place on 25th and 26th of October this year at the Commonwealth Resort Munyonyo. The reporting date and time will be 24 October 2012 at 5.00 p.m. Please attend in person. This is from the chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas. 

(Entrance of the late Okeny Tiberio Atwoma)

National Anthem (Three Verses)

Laying of wreaths.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we receive the motion, let me recognise the presence, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery, of hon. Zachary Olum, former Member of Parliament and also former vice-president of the Democratic Party; hon. Anthony Butele, former MP; hon. John Livingstone Okello-Okello, former MP for Chua and also former vice-president of UPC; hon. Norbert Mao, President-General of the Democratic Party and former MP for Gulu Municipality; hon. Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere, former president-general of the Democratic Party and former MP; Mr Robert Kitariko, distinguished citizen and former secretary-general of the Democratic Party. (Applause)

I will recognise the rest when I get to know the details. We also have hon. Bernard Mulengani, Member of the East African Legislative Assembly. Just walking in is the hon. Lydia Wanyoto, former Member of the East African Legislative Assembly.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE OKENY TIBERIO ATWOMA

2.53
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Okeny Tiberio Atwoma.

“WHEREAS Parliament has with great regret learnt of the death of Mr Okeny Tiberio Atwoma, which occurred on 12 October 2012 at Lacor hospital in Gulu District; 

AND WHEREAS the late Okeny Tiberio Atwoma was born in 1925 in Lukwor Village in Pajule Sub County, Pader District of the Acholi sub region, and attained his education at Lacor Minor Seminary, and upon completion of his studies worked as a labour officer in the colonial government before joining politics at the start of the struggle for independence;

AWARE that during the struggle for independence, the late Okeny Tiberio Atwoma was elected chairman of the Acholi Council in 1959, a position he held until 1964 and later joined the Democratic Party and diligently served as national organiser, party presidential advisor, and later from 1980 to 1984 as the party Vice-President General; 

NOTING THAT the late Tiberio Atwoma was in 1994 elected to the Constituent Assembly as a delegate where he represented the people of Chua County, Kitgum District, leading to the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and remained an active politician and later on a founder member of the National Liberal Party;

RECOGNISING THAT the late Tiberio Atwoma was a peacemaker who in the late 1990s was actively involved in non-governmental attempts for the re-establishment of cordial relations between the Government of Uganda and the LRA who were then active in Northern Uganda;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda, dully convened and sitting in Kampala on this 22nd day of October 2012, as follows:

1. 	That It collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda, members of the National Liberal Party and all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda;

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished service the late Okeny Tiberio Atwoma rendered and the contributions he made to the country in different capacities.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The honourable member for Gulu District has seconded the motion. Let the mover of the motion first speak to the motion then you reply.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma was born on 22 May 1925 to Prospero Komakech and Bibiana Akullu. He was educated, from 1932 to 1939, at St Marys Kitgum Boys Catholic Primary School. In 1940, he joined Gulu Seminary where he stayed until 1943 when he joined Nyapea Primary Teacher Training College in 1944. As you recollect, this was the time of the World War so he stayed at Nyapea for only six months before  he was conscripted by the British into the Army. 

He attended the Junior Army School in Kabete in Kenya in 1944, and in 1945 he served as a military instructor where he was promoted to the rank of sergeant major. He resigned from the military service during the same year when he had problems with a colleague who was not happy with his promotion and therefore tried to cause harm to him. He narrowly survived after a long illness. 

From 1945 to 1947, he served as Administrative Secretary in the Karamoja Native Administration. In 1948, he was appointed labour officer and posted to Gulu where he served as the first labour officer for Northern Uganda, that time called Northern Province of Uganda. From 1948 to 1958, he worked in the Labour Department serving in different regions for those 10 years. 

In 1958, he resigned from the Labour Department in order to join politics and to fight for the rights of the African people, Ugandans in this case. He contested in the Legislative Council elections in the same year, 1958, and he performed well. Although he did not win, he was No. 2. After the election, he was appointed a special assistant to the Financial and General Purposes Committee of the then Acholi District Council. The Acholi District Council appointed him to head the district committee entrusted with the task of collecting views for the Wild Committee, which produced an interim Constitution that led the country to form self-government in 1961. 

It was the Acholi District Council that honoured him with the nickname Otwombye Atwoma. Atwoma is derived from Otwombye, which literally means bulldozer. He was given this name for his extraordinary courage in fighting difficulties and dangerous situations. 

In 1959, he joined the Democratic Party where he subsequently served as national organiser, party presidential advisor and vice-president. In the same year, he was elected chairman of Acholi District. It was his council that introduced and initiated the position of the traditional head of the Acholi, then named Laloyo Maber. In 1961, he represented the Acholi at the Lancaster House Constitutional Conference for the independence of Uganda in the United Kingdom.

In 1971, after the seizure of power by the military under Idi Amin, he went into exile. While in exile, he joined the struggle for the liberation of Uganda and he was made the chairman of the Save Uganda Movement. He worked together with people like Akena P’Ojok and Binyakol Sebastian and others. In 1979, after the overthrow of Idi Amin, he returned to Uganda and he took part in the general election of 1980 where he lost in his effort to become the Member of Parliament representing Chua County. 

In 1984, he contested for the Democratic Party presidency in the delegates’ conference but did not win. Dismayed by what he considered to be sectarian feelings in the party, he formed the National Liberation Party as an alternative option to carry forward the spirit of truth and justice, which he cherished in politics of Uganda. Unfortunately, the party was overtaken by events such as military takeovers and the insecurity that engulfed the whole country and really remained crippled in its infancy because of the situation that existed in Uganda. 

In 1986, at the beginning of the insurgency in Northern Uganda against the NRM Government, he led a goodwill mission of five volunteers into the dangerous bush in an attempt to persuade those who had taken up arms against the authority to use dialogue rather than war to address their grievances. In 1991-1992, he was accused of treason and detained and released when it became apparent that there was no case against him. 

In 1994, he was elected as delegate to the Constituent Assembly where he effectively represented Chua County in the making of the 1995 Uganda Constitution. In 1996, he rejoined the Democratic Party in order to forge a joint force, according to him, to defend the human rights issues enshrined in the Constitution that we had promulgated a year earlier. 

From 1986 to 2009, he wrote numerous articles in newspapers, he addressed Government, he wrote to various international organisations on human rights issues and until his death, he was always a champion of human rights. Unfortunately, in 2010 he was diagnosed with cancer of the prostate and indeed this has been the cause of his demise. 

From this long history, it is obvious and apparent that the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma fought for independence and has been fighting for human rights all his life. I can confirm, as someone that worked with him in the promulgation of the Constitution in 1994 and 1995, that he contributed tremendously to the process of democratisation and nation building that has seen Uganda achieve this status today.

Therefore, we salute his efforts and beg colleagues to support this motion to pay tribute to him for the great contribution he has made to the building of this nation, Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.10
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, first, my condolences go to the bereaved family. I rise to second the motion. As we have all heard from the highlights from the Prime Minister, the late hon. Tiberio Okeny served our motherland, Uganda, in different official capacities. He deserves to be remembered forever by all of us currently living. 

The late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma hated outright exploitation of African labourers by the expatriates during the pre-independence era. This was the root cause of his active participation in politics. It is evident that the late Atwoma served the people of Uganda with devotion regardless of all the hardships he experienced. He even sacrificed his life to stay in exile while struggling for the rights of indigenous Ugandans. This was during the dictatorial rule of President Amin. 

The late Tiberio, who is lying before us, deserves to be remembered for his patriotic mission. During the period of insurgency in Northern Uganda, he volunteered to lead negotiations between the LRA rebels and Government. At this moment, we pray for the soul of the late hon. Okeny Tiberio Atwoma to rest in eternal peace.
 
People from Acholi sub-region are known for being frank and are never thieves. So right now, my appeal to the people of the North is that we should emulate the exemplary leadership of the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma. While in Mulago Hospital, he never stooped low even to go to beg. He went to sell his phone to be able to get food in Mulago. Now, very many of us actually give up very quickly and we run and actually lose our integrity. He maintained his integrity. So, my appeal to people from Acholi sub-region and to Ugandans at large is that if we get to read details of the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma and we try to emulate him, corruption will be actually an issue of the past. 

We need to be patriotic. When we talk of patriotism classes, I do not know if that can be taught. We must have the heart for our country. He had a very big heart for Uganda regardless of the region. Even during the time that recruitment in the Army was actually being dominated by people from the North, he just said, “No, it is wrong. Let recruitment be nationally done; it should have a national perspective.” That was Tiberio Okeny Atwoma. 

He did not fear problems but very many of us fear to confront challenges. I will tell you that very many of our youth and very many of us big people are actually now using internet to fraudulently get what is not due to them, and it is not specific to any region but it is to all. A lot of people just try to fraudulently get what is never due to them. So, let us all try to emulate him.

One thing which we, Ugandans, are failing to do is to document. While we have a documentary which has been read by the Prime Minister, I think those are not enough details. These are people who were living encyclopaedias. They lived during the time when Uganda was a British Protectorate and they have lived during the time when we are independent. So, if we documented their experiences, their feelings, maybe we and our children would also get to know a lot. 

We celebrated the Golden Jubilee but I think the history of the 50 years was not so known by especially those who were born recently, even those who were in Parliament here who were born in the 70s and 80s. So, it is important for us to tap from the few people who are still alive, the few people who are in the league of the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma. We need to initiate projects which can document their experiences and their stories and we keep them. Maybe it will also help us to move better.   

To the bereaved family, I want to convey our condolences and please, take heart. He actually did his best. He never feared to even sacrifice his life. So, all of us should try to educate and train our children to be gallant sons and daughters of Uganda and to work very hard for Uganda, not for ourselves, to be selfless. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate. The motion is that Parliament resolves to pay tribute to the late hon. Tiberio Okeny Atwoma Otwombye for the distinguished service he rendered and the contribution he made to his country, Uganda, in different capacities, and that it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda, members of the National Liberal Party and to all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda. 

Honourable members, before I open the debate, I have a condolence message from the East African Legislative Assembly. For the record, I should read it:
“The family of the late hon. Okeny Tiberio Atwoma 

Condolence Message

I have learnt with profound shock of the demise of hon. Tiberio Okeny Atwoma which occurred on 12 October 2012 at Lacor Hospital in Gulu. On behalf of my colleagues, the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Chapter, I convey our deepest sympathies to the bereaved family and the Government of Uganda for this loss. 

The late Okeny will be remembered for, among others, his contribution in the Constituent Assembly that promulgated the 1995 Constitution and for his efforts to establish cordial relations between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels in the 1990s. 

No doubt this sad event is very disturbing for the family and for the many other people who knew and cared for him. Our prayer is that the Almighty God guides and gives strength to the bereaved family as you go through this difficult moment. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

Yours, 
Hon. Bernard Mulengani,
Chairperson, East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Chapter”

It is co-signed by hon. Margaret Zziwa, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly; hon. Dora Byamuka, Member; hon. Dan Kidega, Member; hon. Michael Sebalu, Member; hon. Nusura Tiperu, Member; hon. Suzan Nakawuki, Member; hon. Fred Mukasa Mbidde, Member; and hon. Chris Opoka Okumu, Member. 

Honourable members, the Parliamentary Commission has scheduled a sensitisation for honourable members on medical insurance services tomorrow Tuesday, 23 October 2012 at 10 a.m. in the Members’ Lounge, third floor. This is to enable you obtain the necessary information as you consider a provider of your preference for the FY 2012/2013.

In the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Elgon Junior Primary School represented by hon. Sasaga Wanzira, Member of Parliament, Budadiri East. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House.

In the VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have Ambassador Joseph Ocwet; Mr and Mrs Terry, investors from Great Britain; Mr Lai, investor from China. They have been brought in by hon. Krispus Ayena, Member of Parliament for Oyam North. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. (Applause) 

Honourable members, the debate is open. We will start with five minutes each and then we see how we go. 

3.22
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County North, Masaka): Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay special tribute to the late Tiberio Atwoma Okeny. As you have heard, he was a leader in the Democratic Party and not only a leader but vice-president of the party from 1980 up to 1984.

We have heard from the mover of the motion, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the different shades of the late Tiberio. The late Tiberio at one time wanted to be a priest. Father Lokodo will bear witness. In Latin we have a saying that, “Multi sunt vocati, pauci vero electi.”  Translated it means, many are called but a few are chosen. When we come here, we all stand up but the Speaker chooses a few. Indeed, he was not chosen. 

He joined the Army, rose to the rank of a sergeant major and then he joined the civil service. In 1958, he contested for elections in Acholi as an independent. This is a lesson to some independent Members of Parliament here. Indeed, he lost and when he lost in 1959, that is when he joined the Democratic Party and he was among the few who accompanied the late Benedicto Kiwanuka, then chief minister, to London to negotiate for our independence constitution. 

Indeed, he performed; when he was the chairman of Acholi District Council, he believed in larger units. That is why even in the CA, he was an ardent supporter of federalism. One time he was asked why he supported federalism. In fact, some people were misleading others and up to now some people believe that when you talk about federalism, you are talking about Buganda issues. 
He said that for the Acholi, federalism is within their blood; you do not even have to ask for federal because they are already a federate. That was his belief.

He believed in peace. He believed in democratic principles, rule of law and democracy. Unlike what the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister has said, in 1980 he contested with Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere, who is up there in the gallery, and he was elected the Vice-President of the Democratic Party. There was no segregation or tribalism as the Prime Minister has said. 

For those of you who may not know the history of the Democratic Party, the greatest pillars of DP are from the Acholi sub region. I can give you an example. The late Obonyo was from Acholi; he was one Member of Parliament who never crossed the Floor to go to the Government benches or even to join UPC, until UPC banned political parties in 1969. The late Andrew Adimola, whom we buried recently, was the Vice-President of the Democratic Party and indeed we were here in Parliament to pay special tribute to him. He was an ardent supporter and leader of the Democratic Party. The late Alex Latim was the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament here from 1964 to 1969; he was from Acholi. So, there was no segregation or tribalism as has been insinuated by the Prime Minister. 

In the CA, when he was here, he advocated for land rights. He was a member of the national caucus for democracy. Within their caucus, one of the issues they brought up was about the land belonging to the people. Hon. Mbabazi knows very well that as NRM, you had other issues regarding land but the late Tiberio advocated for land to belong to the people. I do not know whether today land really belongs to the people in principle. Many of our people are being chased away from their land; in fact, I do not think he has died a happy man seeing people being chased away from their land.

The late Tiberio Atwoma Okeny advocated for peace. You all know he participated, together with the late Bishop Kihangire, in signing the agreement with Uganda People’s Democratic Army (UPDA) which was fighting with the Government then. In 1991, he was incarcerated by this Government for 18 months in Luzira for advocating for the common man. It was after 18 months that he was released. 

The late Tiberio Atwoma Okeny believed in democratic principles. In 1984, after the delegates’ conference, he formed the National Liberal Party. It is just like hon. Mbabazi who was once in FRONASA; he left that and went into UPM; he left UPM – I do not know whether he joined UPC at one time – (Laughter) – and now he is in NRM. That is freedom of movement and freedom of association. 

I want to correct this; in 1996, the late Tiberio Atwoma Okeny re-joined the Democratic Party. I knew him since 1980. He used to have Volkswagen and he went all over Uganda with a – (Member timed out)

3.32
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would also like to thank the mover of the motion. I would like to thank your office, Mr Speaker, for having invited us to pay special tribute to a fallen hero. I would also like to thank the honourable members for having turned up for this special sitting.

First of all, I want to thank Government of Uganda, under the NRM party, for according us this opportunity. It is because of peace that we can pay tribute to fallen colleagues. Unless a country is stable, you cannot have this.

Secondly, I want to thank the late for his participation in the writing and promulgating the 1995 Constitution, which had the presidential term limits – (Laughter) – I want to congratulate him and I know, after the Seventh Parliament moved to remove the Presidential term limits from the Constitution of Uganda, the late Tiberio Okeny must not have died a happy man. The only gift that we can give the late is to re-instate the presidential term limits in the Constitution of Uganda. (Applause) 

I want also to thank the Democratic Party. Their colleague fell out with their party and formed his own party but there are several colleagues from DP coming to pay tribute to him in a special way; that is a sign. I want to thank the Democratic Party, particularly the President-General

I would also like to thank God for having given us this gift and pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. 

3.35
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay special tribute and express my sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Tiberio Okeny Atwoma and the people of Acholi upon the demise of this gallant son of the soil. 

Mr Speaker, in 1994, when I was a child, I had the privilege to participate as one of the three children who represented Northern Uganda in the Parliament mock debate. This was organised to include issues that the children wanted to be included in the 1995 Constitution.

We interacted with Members of Parliament then, and I recall hon. Tiberio Okeny Atwoma was one of them. At the end of our debate, we had an opportunity to move around. Of course, Northern Uganda led in that debate and that is the reason why Article 34 talks about the rights of the children. So, I participated in the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution by proxy. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I remember when we ended the debate at the International Conference Centre, our leaders then, especially those from Lango, were so happy about our performance. I remember hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the late hon. Okulo Epak and Ben Wacha took us around to greet the leaders, especially those from the North. I greeted him and he interacted with us and told us, “Young people, the future is yours. We are here in the process of promulgating the Constitution. I thank you for your contribution as children.” 

I strongly believe that he liked children. When time was given for Members of Parliament to participate in our debate, he was one of the contributors. I think he partly contributed to the longest part of our Constitution that talks about the fundamental rights and freedoms, including Article 34. 

Mr Speaker, the man lying before us here, Tiberio Okeny Atwoma, was well informed politically. I can refer to him as a political encyclopaedia. He was very informed. Socially, this man was a social advocate; he advocated for the little man in the society. Culturally, I must say he liked the Acholi culture. I remember a group performed at the International Conference Centre and he was one of the first leaders from Acholi to join that group in the Bwola dance, however old he was then. 

The Bible says there is a time for everything; a time to be born, a time to live and a time to die. He was born, he lived, his time for his death has come and he has died. However, I think the fundamental question that remains for us who are living is: what legacy will you and I leave for our children and for our grandchildren? Will good words be spoken of you when you die, like Mzee Tiberio Okeny Atwoma? This is a fundamental question as we pay tribute to him. Thank you, Mr Speaker. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.38
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that was moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma. Where I pronounce wrongly, you will pardon me because I may have issues with pronunciation. 

When I was coming here - you know it is a special session - they asked me, “What are you going for?” I said, “We are going to pay tribute to a former Member of Parliament”. They asked me why. I said, “Because he was a CA Delegate”. Fundamentally, those who were here in 1994 to 1995 did a wonderful job that they should live to be remembered for. They asked me, “What are you going to say?” They did a wonderful job; even if I do not know him, I know what he did. 

I want to confess that I do not know the gentleman before us here. (Laughter) Even when you have died, you are a gentleman, because he left a legacy. What I know is what he did, and I want to thank you, hon. Prime Minister, for the message and the background you gave us. 

There are three things I have learnt. First, that he was a human rights bulldozer. He defended human rights whatever the case, and up to now he has left that with him. The Bible says in Galatians 6 that God cannot be mocked; man will reap what he sows. You will reap what you sow and if you think you will invest in flesh, you will reap destruction. If you invest in the spirit, you will reap life. 

I want to thank the late Atwoma for the investment in human rights. I was so dismayed when someone said that the Acholi sub region is known for having people who do not steal. I was wondering, which region is known for people with thieves. (Laughter) 

I feel the time is now to define our positions and where we belong. Ezekiel 18:1-3 says “The fathers eat the sour grapes, but the children’s teeth are set on edge...” Some of us will pay heavily for the crimes that were committed by our forefathers, even when we were not directly involved. It is a lesson for those living and those who will die.

Finally, the level of political maturity exhibited by the late Atwoma should be the lesson we should learn as leaders today. I am happy that I can see the former President-General of DP here. But today when you divert from the simple ideology of a party, it becomes an issue that will haunt you for the rest of your life. (Applause) You will be hunted; you will be haunted; you will be persecuted. We need to learn from our forefathers on how they played politics. Mr Speaker, even if I died today or the day after Parliament, you bury me. (Laughter) Thank you so much. May the late Atwoma rest in eternal peace.

3.44
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion laid on the Table by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to a gallant son, Tiberio Okeny Atwoma, MP Emeritus.

Whenever we hear of the good deeds of men indelibly marked in the colours of our great nation Uganda, men and women of such character, it sends a chill in us the leaders of today. Every speaker, from the person who brought forth the motion in Parliament, speaks of the indelible deeds of the great son lying on the Floor of Parliament today.

We have great lessons to learn from our leaders. He was an integrated leader, a leader before we got independence, and we are the leaders here today. We have such great lessons to learn from such leaders. The indelible deeds he has left for his children are remarkable. The indelible deeds he has left for us, leaders of the country, are very trying in the moment where we are right now.

Today when we came in the morning to receive his body, one of our leaders, a former Member of Parliament, Zachary Olum, said that we might need a senate for the elders in our Parliament. When you travel in and around East Africa and the world over, you will find that there is a senate for the elders. It is a cultural norm based on our tribal backgrounds that we, the young generation, build a brick with clear-cut views from our elders. 

I, like the hon. Kyamadidi has clearly put it, may not know who he was but I will definitely count on his qualitative character. 
A good leader will not be defined for what you see but for his morality. There is a saying that moral scrutiny deserves of the best leaders. We have had that from him. For his good morals, he was regarded a qualitative leader. That is the lesson we should take on today. However, we should not forget what I heard from an elderly leader who said say we need a senate for the elders. 

I stand to pay tribute to the fallen son of Uganda and may his should rest in eternal peace.

3.46
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen comrade. I would like to also convey condolences to the family and members of the Democratic Party, having been reassured by that party’s secretary-general that the late had rejoined the party. Let me take this opportunity to also thank the government, particularly the President and the Speaker, for according hon. Tiberio Okeny this befitting  sitting of Parliament for his great contribution in the democratisation process of this country.

The honourable Leader of the Opposition said that the late was a clean politician in terms of corruption, but I think he was clean as an individual. He was not clean on behalf of where he came from; I do not want if anybody from my tribe is found to be unclean for me to be seen as unclean. Therefore, the question of being corrupt or being clean should be treated as an individual issue. It should not be tribalised or seen from an ethnic lens. 
I want to thank him for practicing clean leadership and exhibiting high levels of ethics and integrity while he was still in public life.

Mr Speaker, like hon. Vincent Mujuni Kyamadidi said, maybe most of us, the young politicians, may not have worked with him but surely his works are clearly known. These are politicians who were active since independence days. We acknowledge his contributions in the fight for independence. We also acknowledge his contributions in building peace in Northern Uganda. We know, for instance, that he was among the first politicians in Northern Uganda to advise Government to employ political means to settle the conflict in the North rather than using the military approach. Maybe if Government had heeded to his advice, the kind of loss and damage we witnessed for over 20 years in the North may have been avoided.

We also know of his robust debate during the CA and particularly, we know that he stood very firm to defend the customary land tenure system that prevails in most parts of Northern Uganda. I would like to thank him for that contribution, although I personally think that this system of land tenure should be reformed for it to be much more economically viable. So, we thank him for those tremendous achievements and the contributions he made in the politics and development of this country.

Lastly, the issues that surrounded his departure from DP to form his own political party are a serious commentary on the way we manage and run political parties in this country. As leaders of today and as leaders managing political parties, I think we have a lot to learn. He formed his own party because he was not satisfied with the internal democracy within the party. I think he thought he had been unfairly treated and so he formed his own political party, though he later on rejoined the DP.

Those of us who are part of political parties today, we have alot to learn especially in promoting internal democracy within the political parties. We should not look at individuals with respect to where they come from but whether they are ideologically clear in terms of what the party stands for. As leaders today, we have alot to learn as we modernise the management of political parties in this country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.50
MR KRISPUS AYENA-ODONG (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise not only to pay very special but glowing tribute to the late hon. Tiberio Okeny Atwoma Otwombye. For those who may not know the meaning of the term “Otwombye”, somebody has already made some allusion to it. Otwombye refers to a level of courage where a man will not fear even to go through an anthill - he goes and knocks the anthill with his head. Otwombye therefore refers to knocking your head against the anthill, even against all odds. That is the man lying here, Okeny Tiberio Otwombye.

Mr Speaker, my spirit leaps with revolutionary joy when I hear the Rt Hon. Prime Minister make a great speech eulogising a person who may not necessarily belong to his political party. This reminds me of the fact that Uganda may one time rise and shine again. The Pearl of Africa shall rise and shine again. It is for the informed to know that a country like Uganda did not start today and is not going to end today or tomorrow. Greater leaders may have come before, but there might be even greater ones yet to come. So, for us to cocoon ourselves within the thinking that in our times we produced the greatest leaders is one of the things I would call utterly primitive.

Mr Speaker, I was galled one time when the people of Africa went to South Africa to change the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) to the African Union. At that time there was only one founder father and leader of the Organisation of African Unity living, and that was the late Dr Apollo Milton Obote. But when the time for recognising those who formed the Organisation of African Unity came, unfortunately this devoted son of Uganda was ignored. Instead, Dr Kenneth Kaunda was recognised as the only founding leader of the OAU. 

Those of us who were living then know that this was a serious defect in our memories. This is because in 1963, when the OAU was formed, Zambia was not yet independent. So, at that time, Dr Apollo Milton Obote was the only living founder father of the OAU. I think we should know that Uganda did not start today; it started long time ago and so we should recognise the efforts of everybody.

At the same time, I was not very pleased when I went to Kololo and there was no great literature mentioned about the founding fathers of this nation. Even the man who received the instruments of power at Independence was not prominently mentioned! I think our children deserve better. Our posterity should be given the right history of this country. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the man lying here was, true to his name, a very courageous man. He was a man of peace but also a man of courage, a man who would say “no” when he means “no”. Even at the risk of losing an election, he would belong to a party whose principles he believed in.  Some of us stood for three times and we failed. I think I am an accomplished loser and I know what it means to lose - (Laughter) - But still remain steadfast if you know where you are going. 

There is a pet statement that I normally make. The man lying there is true to what I normally say, that if you do not know where you are going, you had better know where you are coming from so that when you lose your way, you go back home. (Laughter) That is precisely what this man believed in. (Member timed out)  

3.56
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I share the sentiments of many and pay tribute to the late hon. Tiberio Okeny Atwoma.

In the last two years, we have painfully buried gallant sons and daughters of this country who really fought for the democratic process of Uganda as a country. I would like to kindly urge members who come from regions where there are still those who strongly and passionately spoke well and contributed towards the democratisation process of this country to take off some time to visit them and hear what they have to say about Uganda, the Pearl of Africa. Some of us keep on talking about the good old days; take time off and listen to them. These gallant sons and daughters we are burying these days are people who diligently served this country above self. They fought for this country and nurtured it, and whatever contributions they made were for the good of this country.
 
I stand here today to join others in supporting the motion by saying may the soul of the late Tiberio Okeny rest in eternal peace. I had a chance to look at the Hansards of the CA debates and read some excerpts of what the late Okeny had to say about land issues. I would like to tell the country and all of us here present that he spoke so passionately about communities holding land under customary tenure. Deep in your hearts, you know that he really spoke on behalf of the people who did not have the opportunity to hold that platform, and he tried to protect what belongs to the people of Uganda. (Applause)

The late Okeny fondly referred to the rights and the power of the people of Uganda. He patriotically represented the community where he came from. As we continue with this politics where some few of us have the opportunity to hold the stage on behalf of others today, let us ask ourselves what the role of politicians is in the unresolved land conflicts of this country. What is the role of the rich? What is the role of the soldiers? What is the role of those holding positions of responsibility? 

It is very unfortunate that the Acholi gentleman lying before us here, who passionately spoke about customary land tenure, dies at a time when there are so many land questions in Acholi as a region. We have been hearing of the Madhvani issue and the land in Amuru plus the issue of land grabbing going on by the rich who are trying to manipulate the processes to deny the children, the widows, the poor and the weak the opportunity to occupy their land. 

Let us take time off and remember Tiberio by trying to see to it that we come in and do what we can to solve issues of land conflicts in the country. Hon. Mukitale brought before us the question of the Balaalo in Buliisa. There is the question of the Balaalo moving all over the country; they are in West Nile, in Acholi, in Lango, in Teso and all over the country.  If in the debates of the CA they tried to find better land solutions for this country, why do we still, 20 years or so later, grapple with unresolved land conflicts in the country? 

I think that as we pay tribute to these gallant sons and daughters, let us not only talk about the great things they did but also try to find solutions to those passionate issues they tried to stand for, the passionate issues they wholeheartedly debated for and tried to find solutions to. We are not going to continue with unresolved land questions especially those that are before us - (Member timed out)  

4.01
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to our fallen son and also give my condolences to the family of the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma. 

For sure, the late Okeny was a peacemaker and any peace loving Ugandan deserves to be remembered. I know very well that in the whole of Acholi sub-region, we have ways of remembering people who have done great work. The late Tiberio lying before us will be remembered by the youth through songs. Some of the warnings he gave the Acholi have been composed into songs that are being sang. 

I remember very well a song where they sing, “He warned the Acholi against fighting.” He indeed warned the Acholi that if they continued fighting, they should prepare for the results. For sure, the Acholi have lived to see the impact of the war. Each time that song is played, his name is mentioned. So, even the youth and all the generations to come will never forget this gallant son.
 
Mr Speaker, we need to build great historical sites in remembrance of gallant sons and daughters of this land who have contributed a lot to build this country. I did not interact with him because by the time I came into leadership he had already retired into private life and could not actively participate in politics. However, according to colleagues and friends, and the songs that are being sung in the Acholi sub-region, he was indeed a great man. 

How will the country remember him? We need to at least build some historical sites where great men and women of the land can either have their statutes erected or some literature written about them. Since we have the Independence Grounds in Kololo, can’t we have some place where they write about great men and women who contributed a lot to this country, where the children and tourists can go and read about them? 

The gentleman lying before us was a foresighted leader who will be remembered because during the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, he fought tooth and nail with other colleagues for the rights of the poor. He foresaw that if land was not in the hands of the public, the poor would be left out. He knew very well the area from which he was coming from. In the Acholi sub-region, we have a predominantly customary land tenure system. He fought to ensure that he convinced his colleagues and they addressed it in the Constitution and now land belongs to the people because of the gentleman lying here. We shall live to remember him for that. 

As our colleagues have said, when he foresaw that he did not probably have a future in DP, he stepped aside and went to the National Liberal Party, which we would like to thank him for. He went in a peaceful way without spoiling what he had left behind. So, I caution fellow leaders that if you feel dissatisfied where you are, quietly leave without disturbing others. (Laughter)  

Mr Speaker, I want to thank you so much for giving me the opportunity. I end by saying, may God rest his soul in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.05
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the government and the Speaker for according us this special sitting. Let me also thank the Prime Minister for moving this very important motion.

I bring you condolences from Bunyoro Kingdom. Buliisa was an immediate neighbour. Until the colonial distortions during the land grab of the park, the people of Buliisa and Wichidi were sharing the river, fishing for angara and even for the pedos of Rao in Paraa, Pakuba and all these areas.

I particularly mourn him, and vividly remember during CA when the late Tiberio Okeny defended customary land. As I was actually defending my people, I was being energised by his contributions then. I want to implore this Parliament that if we are going to mourn Tiberio Okeny, can we protect the people concerning customary land. 

The district land boards you introduced are unconstitutionally giving away square miles of land as if it is public land and yet that land belongs to the people. This Parliament shall be pretending to mourn him if we do not defend the people from people like those you hear about in Kampala who are moving with titles and deed plans selling land which should belong to the people of Buliisa. You know, heroism is about finishing. I am very worried that a lot of leaders today may not finish as heroes. They may end up villains. You need to work very hard if you are going to end up as heroes.

I have listened to the young generation, those slightly younger than me, like hon. Obua. When you listen to the generation of these old men and more so these days when we have been coming here for a lot of these seniors who made their contribution, the question is: is the young generation to take on the mantle ready to take this country to another level?

You hear our leaders who belonged to DP and UPC accusing others who were born yesterday in the NRM system of also being rebels. How is that possible when you have been oscillating - today you are DP, yesterday you were UPM, the other day you worked with Amin, and you do not want the young generation of the Woman MP Kabale and of Kyamadidi to make an ideological choice! (Applause) Unless you are saying that your parties do not have ideological depth; then there should be a problem.

Something hurts me. Every time somebody is here before us, you hear Government and the Opposition agreeing but in the political situation of today, the politicians have relegated their responsibility of dialogue to Kayihura to talk with Besigye and with the Mayor. Is that proper? Are we waiting for a coffin for us to talk to them? What prior responsibility do we have as political leaders? Can we find time to dialogue? Can we engage? If we cannot, then do not come here and praise somebody when he is dead. We cannot be a Parliament that praises the dead. Let us mourn Tiberio by looking for Besigye and all these people. They are Ugandans. I believe in diversity. We must co-exist and we must work with them.

I want to condemn in the strongest terms - This old man really wanted peace. If we militarise the political question, we will end up with a problem. We are a multi-party Parliament and we must be the vanguard of co-existence, of inclusion and participation. (Member timed out)

4.11
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity, and I stand to support the motion. I want to join my colleagues in expressing my heartfelt condolences to the family of the late hon. Okeny Tiberio Atwoma, the people of Kitgum and the Government of Uganda for the loss.

In 1994, I tried to join the CA but failed, maybe simply because I contested with a lawyer and the lawyer was fit for the job. All the same, I followed the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly and this is why I recognised the contribution of the late hon. Okeny Tiberio Atwoma to the process.

As a representative of the people of Chua Constituency in the Constituent Assembly, he made sure that the customary land tenure system was protected in the Constitution as my colleagues have already said. As we are all aware, land tenure refers to the manner in which land is owned, occupied, used and disposed of within a community. Definitely, a properly defined and managed land tenure system is essential to ensure balance and sustainable development. This is what the NRM Government is basing on to make sure that the people of Uganda develop, and indeed we are doing so. 

As we are all aware, before 1975 there were four types of land tenure systems in Uganda: customary, mailo, freehold and leasehold. Following the Land Reform Decree of 1975, all land was declared as belonging to government with people being allowed to settle wherever they wished as long as they could manage the land effectively. However, with the contribution of the late hon. Okeny, the tenure systems were restored by the 1995 Constitution. Customary land tenure is the most dominant in Uganda and all of us should agree and appreciate that we are able to own land. As a woman, I can own land and I have land. Once we have land, we can actually develop.

I want to appreciate the contribution of the late Okeny Tiberio Atwoma which has enabled women to own land. If it was not for that system, we would not have land; it would belong to men only. So thank you very much, hon. Okeny; may you rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House will rise at 5.00 p.m. Looking at the number of Members who would like to contribute and the list I have compiled from those who stood, can I propose that we reduce the time to three minutes so that we can accommodate everybody. Most of the issues have been raised so now pick out the new issues.

4.16
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of the motion to pay tribute to our fallen hero. Personally, I knew the late Okeny Tiberio because he worked with my father and so they would visit each other. When he was working in Acholi District Council my father was the assistant administrative secretary. That was in 1962 or thereabouts, before I was born.

I knew him as a very good politician. If you asked me, “what did you want to remember about Okeny Tiberio?” I would say he was a very good politician, truthful, straightforward and he fought for people’s freedom. A case in point is the story he would tell us that when he was working in Acholi District Council it was predominantly UPC. By then there were very few people who were in DP. During elections in 1962, officials from UPC would go and waylay the DP voters when they were going to vote in Anaka. So, he would come and report those officials of the UPC who would waylay the DP voters so that they do not go and vote. So, when I hear colleagues talk about his fight for freedom, I realise that he continued his fight for freedom not only for his party but for all Ugandans.

This brings me to one point - How would we want to be remembered? Mr Speaker and honourable members, one day we will be here; how would you want to be remembered? We remember Okeny Tiberio as fighting for people’s rights, fighting for the land of the people and promulgating the Constitution. How would you want to be remembered? Do you want to be remembered as someone who fought for freedom? Do you want to be remembered as someone who was greedy? Do you want to be remembered as someone who was grabbing property? How would we want to be remembered? As we go to bed, honourable members, think about this.    

To the family of Okeny Tiberio, I want to tell you that he has fought the good fight and he has finished the race. This is not a time to mourn; it is a time for celebration because he lived his life. (Member timed out)

4.19
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. When the CA was doing its work here, I was a young politician. I came and I met this wonderful man in the corridors here; my uncle was working in the accounts section. So when I saw the picture of this Acholi man, honestly I found that I had seen this man. (Laughter) 

One of the reasons why I have come from where I was to pay tribute to this wonderful man is the issue of fighting land grabbers. (Applause) I want to thank this man in a coffin now, who cannot speak for himself, but I know hon. Nantaba who is here now with us - she has been here; she has just gone. We have a problem of people grabbing land from those who cannot make titles. May the soul of this man touch the hearts of those ones who have grabbed land and those ones who are intending to grab land to stop immediately! (Applause) I can tell you that the problem of rich men evicting those poorest people from their pieces of land has gone beyond measurable parameters.

Another thing I want to talk about is the health sector in this country. When I was fighting here in Parliament giving my uncle, the Prime Minister, a headache over the money for the health sector, in my heart I was looking at about 20 years from now when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi, and Rt Hon. Moses Ali will be about 100 and above. (Laughter) I was watching them and I said, “Where will the death of these men and myself occur?” It can happen in Kanungu. It can happen in Adjumani. It can happen in Lacor. It can happen anywhere. That is why I said that we must prepare places where all our people who have served this country can go for treatment. (Applause)

What kills old men in Uganda now and the world at large is cancers and heart attacks and other things. These are conditions which will grab you when you have retired and possibly you have left town. I am begging my Government, which I cherish, to put more emphasis on the health sector so that we can have fully functional hospitals with diagnostics everywhere so that in case you retire, you have where to go. That is one of the reasons some people do not want to retire. They do not want to go to the villages because things sometimes are not working very well. So for me, I still urge my Government to do the best as far as the health sector is concerned. 

This man was a brave person. Recently, when I was fighting for the health sector here, my best man sent me this message, and I want to read it for these people. He said, “Your dream will never be realised if fear overrides your faith.” He believed in those poor people in Kitgum and Uganda, those ones who are behind, those ones who cannot manage to make land titles. That is why he fought hard for those people. I am very glad, Mr Speaker, you have accorded this wonderful person here - (Member timed out)

4.22
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand in support of the motion. This is what the white man says, “Good wine needs no bush.” Here you can see a DP member right in front of us and everybody is praising him. What I want to tell you is that we just have political transhumance and migrants here but one time people will come back to DP because of its principles. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Prime Minister for this motion. I want to thank you for these words you read as you were moving the motion: “Aware that during the struggle for independence, the late Okeny Tiberio was elected chairman of the Acholi Council…” This is very useful. This business of celebrating independence where you bring jet fighters to start hovering around and polluting the environment - These would have been the best people to be seen at Kololo! You bring them and you display them. 

I went to France one time and they have a monument and around that monument there is a fire which burns daily. This monument was built in respect to a soldier who died and that soldier was not known - the Unknown Soldier. That man fought for France and they never knew his name, but he is the only one you see there; the others who they knew, their names were written.

Today we are here; we must also remember to fulfill our pledges as political leaders. It is on record that the NRM Manifesto talks about paying the elderly Shs 20,000 every month. How much had the late got before he died? People are demanding for this money. Please, let us look at these people.

Mr Speaker, it is high time we formed the council of elders in Uganda. These would be the people giving advice. When you read about his political career, they say it if from 1994 to 1995; since then, he has been living a quite life at home, giving advice and consultation services as an elder in Acholi sub-region. When you go to South Africa, Bishop Desmond Tutu, Nelson Mandela all form the council of elders. This business of presidential advisers, these are just backward things! We need councils of elders; do not talk parties, do not talk religion. We hear nowadays we have our Cardinal Wamala and we have bishops; these would be giving very good advice to our leaders who are governing us. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will also recall that this House recently passed the Older Persons Bill. I am sure the council you are referring to was captured under this law.

4.26
MS CD LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by thanking Government for according the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma a state burial. Indeed he deserves it. I had the opportunity to get to know the late Mzee Tiberio Okeny Atwoma closely. His home in Oriang village is just a few kilometres from Opete where I was born and grew up. I first heard about him from songs; that was around 1980 when he contested for the parliamentary seat for Chua County with the late hon. Tony Olanya-Olenge. During that time, UPC members and supporters composed very many songs to criticise and de-campaign him, and his name was everywhere.
 
Later, when I completed my studies and I started working, I was involved in the implementation of a project that was funded by UNDP. One of his sons, who is seated right behind you, Mr Speaker, Deo, had a CBO that benefitted from that project. My boss then was also a nephew to the wife who is also seated right behind you there. So, I had the opportunity of visiting his home and interacting with him, and I have two to three things that are key that we should note about the life of the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma.

He was a man of clean politics. He was also a very influential man and a very hardworking man. He was a man of clean politics. If I remember very well, my mother told me that during the elections of 1980, which he lost that time, you could hardly see a DP person crossing the compound of a UPC and a UPC crossing the compound of a DP. But when he lost, he walked to the home of the late Tony Olanya-Olenge where the UPC supporters and members were celebrating and he greeted his opponent, the late hon. Tony Olanya-Olenge, who had won. He told him, “My brother, you have won, go and work hard”. (Member timed out)

4.30
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to pay tribute to the late Tiberio. I want to send my condolences to the bereaved family. Many leaders in Northern Uganda were alleged to fuel the war in Northern Uganda but in all the lists of whoever was mentioned, the late’s name was not mentioned anywhere. That shows us that he was really a peacemaker and he was interested in the people. He was therefore doing things that would help people but not doing things that would help him alone as a leader. I know many of us as leaders normally want to use a situation that can benefit us but not the people we are representing, which was not the case with late Tiberio. Therefore, I am happy and I know the late is also happy because he has died when there is already peace in Northern Uganda, because that was his objective.

The late is one of those who contributed to the making of our Constitution, which is one of the best in the whole world. Wherever you go, people talk about this Constitution of ours. What is left for those of us who are still alive to do is to see how to guide and protect this Constitution and not go around changing things left and right. I know that when they were there, they had the principles that they thought would protect this country. I know that for all the laws that we are making, the principles are already in the Constitution. Therefore, it is us here to see to it that whatever laws that we make fall within in the Constitution and the laws that will protect the people of Uganda.

The late died at the age of around 87. That shows that he has really contributed. Those of us who are Muslims, we have a belief that the earthly world is a hostile world. That is why we do not fear death because we believe the place to rest is somewhere. Therefore, I know at the age of 87, the late has prepared himself to go and rest, to drink the honey and to drink the milk which is not in this hostile world. (Member timed out)

4.33
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that this Parliament pays tribute to the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma who is also known to his peers as bulldozer. I would also like to thank the government for giving this honour to the late.

The late Tiberio Okeny was a very strong willed person who could express his opinions to his colleagues and to his opponents without fear or favour. He was a straightforward person; his “no” was a “no” and his “yes” was a “yes”. 

The late Atwoma believed in human rights and democratic rule and he spent most of his time pursuing these ideals and aspirations.
I recall that the late worked together with the late hon. Latim Alex, late Jino Obonyo, late Gaspar Oda, late hon. Martin Okello and late Opoti to see that the rule of law and democracy took root in Uganda.

The late believed in peace as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has already said. In 1986, when the NRM took over power in Uganda and the UNLA went to South Sudan and wanted to stage a come-back, Tiberio led a goodwill mission and persuaded his people not to go to war but to negotiate – (Member timed out)

4.36
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I wish to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

I would like to say that I got to first hear about the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma in 1991 before I saw him physically. He was an advocate of truth and fairness. Because of speaking about fairness towards the people of Acholi, together with 18 leaders from the North he was arrested around 1991. Some of those arrested are right here - the hon. Zachary Olum; the only lady, Irene Apio-Julu, who is said to have lost her pregnancy as a result of the torture she went through; the late hon. Andrew Adimola; hon. Omara Atubo who was a Minister of State for Defence then; and the late Dr Ojok Mulozi, among others. Sometimes I wonder why hon. Okello-Okello escaped that arrest. I am saying this because each time the President opens his mouth to address the nation he has to talk about Okello-Okello. I would like to advise; leave Okello-Okello alone.

This brings me to the point where I think that as a country we need to think about a peace and reconciliation commission. A lot of things have gone on in this country, many of them very bad. You find people from the east feel they were injured by people from the west. People from the north may feel they were injured by people from the centre. People from the centre may feel they are injured by people from the south. So, we need to talk to ourselves so that we bury the hatchet forever.

I contested for the CA elections and unfortunately narrowly missed coming to the CA - (Member timed out)

4.39
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Leader of Government Business. First, my condolences go to the bereaved family.  

A lot has been said and I am left with a few to add to what has been said. From the records which have so far been adduced here as far as the illness of our late senior colleague is concerned, I think at this point it is important for us to reflect on the healthcare system we have as a country. For the greater North, there could not be any other health centre or hospital better than Lacor where our senior colleague died. Right from Arua, if there is any serious case of illness or sickness, it is referred to Lacor despite all the regional referral hospitals across the region beginning with Arua Regional Referral Hospital. If there is a cancer case, the best place that it can be treated or managed is Lacor Hospital. It is not private but it is a missionary hospital. For that matter, I thought it was important that we give credit to the health workers, especially those in Lacor Hospital, for managing our senior colleague when he was in deep pain. 

The second point I want to re-echo concerns our senior colleagues. The gentleman before us has earned, to his name and in the history of this country, the title of a nationalist. He has been fighting for the independence of this country right from the day he was born, through to his life as a soldier, having been conscripted into the army by the British, as a fighter for freedom and as one of those who participated in the making of the 1995 Constitution. I think, Mr Speaker, we need to think in the direction of setting up - (Member timed out)

4.42
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate so much the stakeholders who struggled for the body of Mzee Okeny to be brought to lie in state. Allow me to thank the family members for the care they provided to the Mzee until his last time. 

When we talk about Mzee Tiberio Okeny, we normally remember his great contribution especially during the CA. We were still very young. Today, we are paying tribute to him –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When you say, “we were still very young”, are you referring to yourself or the whole House? (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: I think the majority of us were still very young during that time. I will live to remember what Tiberio Okeny and his colleagues did during the CA, especially putting in place the presidential term limits. They were really foresighted CA delegates. They were looking forward to see that after every two terms, Ugandans would have a very smooth change. It is very unfortunate, Mr Speaker, that the same presidential term limits which they put in place in this country were removed as Mzee Okeny was still alive to witness. I am very sure that today as we are paying this tribute to  Mzee, he died a very unhappy man politically. Most of the good dreams which they had for this nation are already gone.

Secondly, we used to visit Mzee at his home in Kitgum. He used to brag about government properties like the hotels, the co-operatives, Lira Spinning Mill. It is really very unfortunate that all the government properties were destroyed when Okeny was seeing. What a great shame! As Ugandans, we need to make our former leaders proud of us. Do we need to bury our former leaders when most of the good things they put in place have been destroyed? We need to set the record for this country. 

As young people, we need to see to it that the things that we set up today in Parliament continue and are not destroyed. We need to pray for our nation. Mzee Okeny must be going very unhappy about the people of Uganda. (Member timed out)

4.45
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest of Ugandans in paying tribute to yet another nationalist, the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma. I want to say clearly on the Floor of this House that I am non-partisan and that is not by mistake. When I was growing up in Opete, which is very near the home of the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma, the level of political maturity which the late Tiberio displayed was admirable. Under the same roof, they had two parties - some of his children where for UPC, he was for DP and some of his family members were for DP - but not at any one moment would you see them disagreeing on party lines. So, when I looked at his maturity in politics, I said, “why should I be partisan?” 

As I continued growing up, my grandmother, whom I grew up with, was a very staunch DP member who used to work together with the late Okeny Atwoma. One time she told me, “My granddaughter, in future if you want to practice politics, the person you can go to for good counsel is Okeny Atwoma”, the one laying before us here. The other person was the one we paid tribute to recently, the late Adimola. Those are the two people my grandmother referred me to in case I wanted to join active politics. But I had never gone to him for that good counsel because I have never felt like practicing active politics.

Mr Speaker, this is 2012 and we are seeing these gallant nationalists go. They have done their part. There is a challenge for those of us who have remained to see Uganda moving forward for the next 50 years. When we look at the political differences and political affiliations we have in Uganda now, how are we going to move Uganda forward for the next 50 years? Are we going to tear Uganda apart according to the different political affiliations that we subscribe to, or are we going to put those political affiliations aside when it comes to national issues and development of our country as Ugandans? That is the way Okeny Atwoma did – (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have come to the conclusion of the general debate. I will now ask the Member for Kitgum District and then the Member for Chua County to close the debate and then the mover of the motion will have a few seconds to make some remarks. 

4.49
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all, I want to thank the Government of Uganda for according Mzee Atwoma a befitting send off. I would like also to thank the Prime Minister for moving the motion in his favour as well as honourable colleagues for supporting this motion. I stand to support the motion.

The issues about Mzee Okeny Tiberio have all been told. However, I must also go on record that I am a proud Acholi woman who is a product of inspiration from Mzee Okeny Tiberio. It is not an accident that we stand out. We have roots and history to trace. Please, trace my roots to Mzee Okeny Tiberio. We are blood-related. Before he went into politics, he came for blessings from his uncle who is my grandfather, Mzee Lubo Oloya. So I am happy that the seeds are still germinating.

Mr Speaker, when I look at the good deeds of Mzee - his position on land has been told and other attributes, but I want also to go on record to say that the autonomy of the local government which is now in place is also creditable to Mzee Atwoma.  Above all, the issue of peace in this country is very pertinent. Mzee Tiberio Atwoma fought for peace and advocated for dialogue. I want to implore Government right now that as a country, the future is uncertain; it is as though we are all waiting to grab each other’s necks. Please, let us go into dialogue. Let the children who were abducted by the LRA not be hunted down and killed in the jungles of Congo and Central African Republic. Let us go into dialogue and save blood, especially for those children who never went into rebellion on their own. 

Mr Speaker, I want to note, as my colleague the doctor has noted, about the health sector. It is critical that we address this as a country – (Member timed out)

4.52
MR HENRY OKELLO ORYEM (NRM, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, permit me to support the motion presented by the Prime Minister. These are sad times for the Acholi people and these are sad times for Uganda. We just recently buried Mzee Andrew Adimola and here lies before us Mzee Tiberio Okeny Atwoma. 

Yet, even though it is hard times, Mr Speaker, it is time for celebration. Mzee Atwoma stood not only for freedom but he was a revolutionary, a peacemaker and a true democrat. He has died at a ripe age of 87. So, it is not time to mourn for a person at 87 but I think it is time for celebration. According to the UN statistics, the average lifespan for a Ugandan is 45 years. So, while the rest of us are living on spare time, Mzee Atwoma had more time. 

He was not only a giant in life, but he is also a giant in death. I came across the name Atwoma many times when I was growing up because of is close relationship to my late father. They met during the Second World War in Abyssinia, current day Ethiopia, and in their struggles in Burma. 

I never really knew who he was, I never understood what he stood for until 1986 when he went to reach out to the UNLA, who had gone to Sudan and were planning to return into Uganda. Atwoma went to negotiate with the then leader of UNLA who was called Odong Latek. After discouraging them from coming to Uganda, not to continue fighting in Northern Uganda, the UNLA captured him and instead planned to kill him and his delegation. My uncle, Erisanweri Opira, who was there at that particular time in a place called Pajok, went to his rescue and negotiated with Odong Latek and saved the life of Mzee Tiberio and later took him up to Juba and he was flown back to Kampala. 

I came across him again when I became a Member of Parliament in 2001. I visited his home and sought his blessings to become a Member of Parliament and he gave me his blessings. He told me, “You are a son of Tito and I can see you look like Tito. If you are going to conduct yourself like Tito, I am going to give you my votes, but on the condition that when you become a leader, you have to leave a legacy”. (Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, your time is up. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have two minutes.

4.56
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise to thank my colleagues for supporting this motion and for clearly coming out to recognise the contribution the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma made to the building of this nation. 

I just want to reaffirm that at the stage where Uganda’s politics is, I agree with those who did say that this indeed represents political maturity. It shows that the leadership of Uganda today recognises the contribution of any Ugandan irrespective of his or her political opinions or affiliations. We shall pay tribute to those who enjoy challenges in order to make things better for the ordinary Ugandan. We think the late Tiberio Okeny very squarely fits in that definition.

I agree with hon. Joseph Ssewungu - not in the manner he presented the points because obviously he presented them in ignorance of both the law and history - that we need a council. We need a council where we can tap the resources we have in those that have served this nation, those that have accumulated not only wisdom but talent even if they have reached retirement age. Indeed, as those of you who were there or those of you who read, like hon. Otto may read because he was not there, I did move the motion in the Constituent Assembly for the establishment of a council of state. Unfortunately, we were defeated but I hope – (Member timed out) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, it has come to my attention that this has only been possible because of the intervention of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces 4th Division. The deceased passed on on the 12th and today is the 22nd, meaning the body has been cared for for 10 days. We want to thank the UPDF for keeping the body in the condition that up to today we can still view it, and up to the time for burial. On behalf of Parliament, we want to thank the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces 4th Division for giving us this.

Honourable members, the motion is that Parliament resolves to pay tribute to the late hon. Tiberio Okeny Atwoma Otwombye for the distinguished service he rendered and contributions he made to his country, Uganda, in different capacities; and to collectively convey its deep condolences to the bereaved family, the Government of Uganda, members of the National Liberal Party and to all Ugandans upon the demise of a distinguished son of Uganda. I now put the question for your approval.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

National Anthem (three verses)

(Exit of the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for coming to this special sitting in honour of the late Tiberio Okeny Atwoma Otwombye. This House is adjourned.

(The House rose 5.06 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 October 2012 at 
2.00 p.m.)
