PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA10650STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONThursday, 19 October 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, we shall handle matters of national importance after the Prime Minister’s Time. So, let us straightaway go to the next item on the Order Paper.  STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ON UNANSWERED QUESTIONS ABOUT ABDUCTIONS AND DISAPPEARANCES OF NATIONAL UNITY PLATFORM (NUP) SUPPORTERS THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Point of procedure, Hon. Ssewungu?2.13MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): A while ago, this Parliament-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, honourable that we set a very clear standard; we start with the rule.MR SSEWUNGU: The rule is very clear, Mr Speaker.  I have it here and it is in relation to the matters of Parliament. That is rule 70. I am going to cite the rule, but the procedural matter is a serious one. (Laughter)  Parliament passed a resolution on the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Works and Transport Rehabilitation Development Grant implementation. Parliament directed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to disburse Shs 1 billion to every district. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 9TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting, and like yesterday, we have very bad news. We have lost Hon. Henry Kyemba, one of the most senior citizens the country had. He served in several regimes from being the first Principal Private Secretary (PPS) of Dr Milton Obote, Minister of Health under Idi Amin, and Minister of the Presidency under President Yoweri Museveni. He was a former Governor of the Rotary Club, where I met him several times, an author, a father and a distinguished statesman. I join the rest of the country, His Excellency the President, honourable colleagues, the Kyabazinga and the people of Busoga, and the family to mourn him. I request that we observe a minute of silence.(The House rose and observed a moment of silence.)10651THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023However, the finance ministry only disbursed Shs 200 million. I want to read this verbatim: “The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Government should ensure full disbursement…” - the emphasis is on ‘full disbursement’ - “…of Shs 1 billion to the beneficiary local governments in addition to the prior budgetary allocation for road maintenance to districts.” The procedural matter I am raising, Mr Speaker, is: why did the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development release only Shs 250 million, yet Parliament directed them to release Shs 1 billion for every district?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The finance minister is here.2.15THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Mr Speaker, Shs 1 billion divided by four is Shs 250 million. We are consistent such that by quarter four, we shall be at Shs 1 billion plus what the districts were receiving previously. So, I want to allay the fears of my friend.MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, the reason this money was directed by Parliament was because of the numerous complaints from Members of Parliament about their districts and poor roads. This Shs 1 billion was supposed to be sent as a lumpsum - (Interjection)-  yes, it was supposed to be a full disbursement. Members should read the directive that was sent to all the districts and the minute that was extracted from our Hansard;  it was full disbursement in addition to other budgetary allocations.If any Member is arguing against that, then go and revisit your reading mentality. It is Shs 1 billion, Mr Speaker, full disbursement at once, outside the other budget allocation. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssewungu, Parliament cannot instruct the release of all money it has appropriated in one quarter. No, it is full disbursement in a financial year. Otherwise, it would be a difficult one. MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I cannot put it any better than you have. I wish to inform the Member and the House that we execute the budget in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act and other relevant laws, and these laws are very clear. The Public Finance Management Act requires us to release money appropriated by Parliament on a quarterly basis, and that is what we are doing. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. What is very important, honourable colleagues is to have the full amount at the end of the financial year. Leader of the Opposition, your statement has already been called.2.19THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker.These are very curious moments for us in this country. When these moments arise, as the Presiding Officer, take them in stride for the distinguished statesmen and women, from masqueraders, social climbers and the like. This is because –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, I thought you were going to present the statement - that is the item we have. MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker,  I can make a preamble to calm the nerves of the House, and it is the reason we are the House of Parliament. For me, a presentation of this nature is not cram work. I should make the House feel that we are leaders and not here as robots to do crammed stuff. Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have mentioned before in this House that our country ranks among the worst performers as far as respecting, protecting and promoting human rights is concerned. On paper, this ranking may not ring a bell to the extent that we can make statements one after another without unsettling the tranquility of the perpetrators of injustice. 10652STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONOn the other hand, any step taken to expose and detail the scorecard leading to that ranking has always proved to discomfort the perpetrators and faced a lot of resistance from the upper echelons of the state.  Nonetheless, we shall not relent from exposing the systemic human rights abuses and plead for the full intervention of Parliament in enlisting this problem and finding a durable solution.  Mr Speaker, we should recall that we as legislators take oath of allegiance to the Constitution. We derive our authority from the relevant provisions and the spirit of the Constitution. It is to the provisions of the Constitution that we owe allegiance. To put this in context, the Constitution guarantees and mandates institutions of Government to respect, protect and promote human rights, Parliament ought to be the fort in the defense of the rights and freedoms of the people. On 17 October 2023, I listened to and read the statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs, relating to the arrival and illegal arrest of Hon. Kyagulanyi and hundreds of the NUP supporters, their prayer session and the dispatching of peaceful demonstrations in Mbale Constituency. I submit that the minister’s statement was superficial, shallow, tainted with material falsehoods and misconstruction of the law and an attempt to justify repression and a cramp down of political dissent in this country. Mr Speaker, I do not find the minister’s statement tenable, since it has fallen short of addressing the wanton abuse of human rights, the growing state of impunity, the general breakdown of the rule of law, and the shrinking civic space. For that, I invite this august House to consider that statement as rejected.  Mr Speaker, the minister’s statement has further depicted the Government’s reluctance to address and remedy human rights violations. I must state here that the minister’s statement remains rejected, and I invite this honourable House to consider it as such.  It should be recalled that as a result of the infamous November 2020 shootings, many people lost their lives whereas scores were maimed.  Mr Speaker, Government committed to have the matter investigated and audited. However, all that has been achieved was the categorisation of the victims in clusters of 20 persons who were shot and killed by stray bullets, whereas 34 others were shot and killed for allegedly participating in riots. Mr Speaker, the state categorised these citizens as rioters and victims and that was all. The details of the report remain a top secret only to the state, despite the commitment by the President to make the investigation public. It will be exactly three years next month since the angel of death was parachuted onto our streets by the very people charged with the duty to protect us. Our memories are yet to lose the well-documented evil work of Police Patrol 999/17 on the streets of Kampala for two solid days and the legacy of its occupants. Ugandans demand to know whether the occupants of that police vehicle were aliens without a trace or their evil acts a living testimony to the jungle in which we are entrapped.  Mr Senteza Frank, the bodyguard of Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu was intentionally knocked down by a military police vehicle H4DF 2382 at the Busega Roundabout. There was no follow-up with the family by any State agency, three years after his killing or at least an excuse of an investigation report confirming that the murder was premeditated.  Mr Speaker, Rita Nabukenya was knocked dead off a walkway by a police vehicle registration number UP 4841. No report was made, no follow-up with the family; instead, the family was warned not to waste time trying to follow up.  Were these Government vehicles auto-piloted that no driver or commander is available to face charges of premeditated murder of these innocent Ugandans? Is the House of Parliament [Mr Mpuuga]10653THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023too timid and cowardly to demand from the relevant authorities to make a proper account of both the happenings on the fateful days, as well as demanding justice for the victims’ families?  Mr Speaker, we have a good recollection of the many innocent Ugandans who were murdered whereas others were grievously injured while on the campaign trail of Hon. Kyagulanyi Robert Sentamu during the 2021 elections. Mr Speaker, for the record of Parliament, I repeat the names those who were murdered in cold blood; 1. Mr Senteza Frank Kalibbala. 2. Michael Kalinda  aka Ziggy Wine  3. Rita Nabukenya  4. Daniel Kyeyune  5. Ibrahim Mutaasa6. Willy Kayondo of Kubbiri Roundabout  7. Sophie Kusasira of Kalerwe B Market  8. Baker Kato Lubwama shot from Namulanda  9. Martin Owekikye10. Elijah Tusubira 11. Elijah Mukibi of Luweero12. Umaru Ssemakula of Entebbe13. Katwere Kimuli of Seeta14. Musisi Allan Kitete of Mukono15. Peter Mwanje of Nansana16. William Mugerwa of Wankulukuku17. Baatio Sofi of Obongi18.  Norbert Alionji of Obongi19. Fungaroo Moro of Obongi20. Saraf Shaaba of Obongi  21. Akim Abile of Obongi – deliberately drowned by the UPDF on 15 January 2021  22. Nuhu Bukere was abducted from Mukono Municipality, murdered and dumped in Kalangala.  The relatives of the deceased are still reeling in bereavement, with no hope of ever receiving justice for the death of their loved ones. We question whether the people’s Parliament is complacent in these wanton murders and, therefore, unable to demand accountability and justice. Mr Speaker, the fate of missing UgandansOn more than one occasion, I have tabled to this honourable House a list of Ugandans missing over the last two to four years. These people were picked from their workplaces and homes by State security agencies. The detailed accounts of their arrest and eventual disappearance have been provided by families and friends to whoever cared to listen; only the State can account for their whereabouts.Mr Speaker, is Parliament so frightened, complacent or disinterested in demanding that the Government prioritises human rights guarantees before anything else for the sake of building a durable rights record and entrenching the rule of law? Did the Parliament buy into the flimsiest and derogatory reasoning of the Government and its agencies? That the addresses and next of kin of the missing persons are not known?Mr Speaker, for the benefit of those who might for one reason or another missed out on the record of missing persons for whom the Government has ignored accountability and justice, the following Ugandans matter; 1. Moses Mbabazi 2. Dennis Zzimula 3. Shafik Wangolo 4. Martin Lukwago 5. Peter Kirya 6. John Ddamulira 7. Michael Semuddu 8. Muhammad Kanatta 9. John Bosco Kibalama; who was last seen by the Prime Minister. 10. Vincent Nalumoso 11. Yuda Ssempijja 12. Musisi Mbowa  13. Mustafa Luwemba 14. Hassan Mubiru 15. Isma Ssessazi 16. Godfrey Kisembo 17. George Kasumba 18. Joseph Baguma.10654STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONMr Speaker, those are missing Ugandans and the record has been ascertained by the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Parliament must as of necessity and duty be interested.The victimisation and targeted murder of Muslims:It has become fashionable in Uganda today that for any attack or murder committed, the State targets Muslims whom they then indiscriminately kill and imprison without trial. For instance, following the twin bombings of Kampala on 16 November 2021, one Musa Mudasir alias Moze was shot dead in Bwaise, Kawempe Division. On the same day, another suspect, Muhammad Kiryowo alias Musa Kiryowo was also shot dead in cold blood. The following day on 17 November 2021, Sheikh Muhammad Abbas Kilevu was also shot dead while in handcuffs by security agencies. This has been the case in many other high-profile cases. Mr Speaker, by law, any arresting officer is allowed reasonable or necessary force in effecting the arrest. The force employed should be proportional to the circumstances. The use of firearms during arrests amounts to excessive force if the suspect is unarmed. Even if some of the suspects were purportedly evading arrest, the firearm should only be used to incapacitate the suspect and deter evasion, but not to kill. Mr Speaker, reports indicate that most of the victims who have been killed were already handcuffed and in essence posed no threat warranting the use of a firearm.I would like to throw a quick challenge to this honourable House to make random checks across any police cell or Government prison; the shocking discovery will be that you have more Muslims in detention without trial.  Mr Speaker, does Parliament consider every Muslim guilty of terrorism at birth?Why is the Parliament not keenly following and investigating the witch-hunt of Muslims, using the fact of information available in very many Government prisons and other illegal detention centres?What happened to the men in uniform who carried out these cold-blood murders in broad daylight? Are they bound by the laws of the land?Detention without trialMr Speaker, those of us who have not sat in any History class, at least have read some literature on Uganda’s political history. Detention of people without trial was a common phenomenon in the immediate post-colonial regimes, to deter citizens from agitation for freedoms and to contain and keep political opponents at bay. The 1995 Constitution despite its current mutilated State has maintained and sustained the 48 hours rule under custody before one is produced before a competent Court or released. The essence of this is to ensure a speedy and fair trial and the avoidance of keeping innocent persons in detention without just cause. Over the last three years, the arrest and detention of several Ugandans without trial represents one of the worst abuses of human rights. In the worst-case scenario, where the State desired to hold on to detainees without probable cause, trumped-up charges have been raised against them. These charges cannot be sustained in any Court, for they lack premises. Many such victims, including civilians, have ended up in military courts, in total violation of the Constitution. Mr Speaker, in 202l, over 500 NUP supporters were arrested in different parts of the country on various flimsy charges. Most of them were released after one year without trial, some had to pay a ransom to gain their freedom from various military and civilian detention centres. [Mr Mpuuga]10655THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023In the group of 2021, over 50 are still languishing in Kitalya and Luzira prisons without trial. Twenty Eight of these have been produced in the Army court-martial, but their trial has never taken shape more than three years after arrest, including a one Olivia Lutaaya, a mother of three little children who was arrested immediately after giving birth on 8 May 2021.Mr Speaker, the questions of the day:  i. Is the people’s Parliament dosing on duty, complacent or timid to demand the military to account for their actions and conduct in the court-martial where hundreds of Ugandans are casually produced as a show without consequence?ii. Is the UPDF subordinate to the laws of the land or the country was long captured by a subtle military junta without an official proclamation of the rule by decree?Torture in Detention Facilities: Mr Speaker, the growing culture by the State security apparatus to torture suspects while in detention, the case of Samuel Masereka, the Registrar of the NUP in Kasese District and the famous case of Kakwenza Rukirabashaija are classic examples of people who have ever been abducted by security personnel and subjected to despicable torturous treatment. Other similar incidents occurred in the recent past. For instance, when Hon. Kyagulanyi was arrested from Arua and tortured while in detention, Hon. Francis Zaake has on several occasions faced it rough to the extent of almost losing his sight, and many other incidents. We cannot say that these are isolated incidents. Mr Speaker, I sense danger in muzzling dissenting voices and delimiting space for holding accountable those in power. If this happened to them today and no statement or remedial action has been taken by the Government, how shall we all be spared if our turn comes? In the recent past, Mr Speaker, this august House has condemned such violations, but the same old habits have continued to manifest mainly through enforced disappearances, arbitrary illegal arrests and detention, torture in detention, detention without trial, unlawful detentions, extrajudicial killings, property grabbing, political persecution, assaulting journalists and other professionals in the course of duty, among others.Human Rights Violations in Fishing CommunitiesMr Speaker, in 2017, the President of Uganda directed that the UPDF be deployed at major lakes in Uganda, following the reported depletion of fish stocks due to over and illegal fishing. Following that deployment, the fishing communities have on numerous occasions, cried out on gross violation of their rights by the men and women in uniform. Reports of rape, defilement, destruction of properties, murders, unjustified arrests and illegal closure of many landing sites have been reported. Part of the response to these cries by Parliament was the enactment of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Act, 20l3. The continued presence of the UPDF and their selective actions against citizens must arouse the curiosity of any serious House of Parliament. Entire communities have been displaced, rendered homeless and jobless. Many persons have been killed, maimed and dishonoured. Do the victims of these illegal actions have any representatives in Parliament?In the circumstances and absurd as described above, we have the following demands for the Government to meet without excuse: 1. Full accountability for the November 2020 murders in Kampala and beyond, including the actions taken on Police Patrol 999/17 and others listed above, whose occupants were well captured by different media houses and vigilant citizens, shooting live 10656STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONammunition towards unarmed citizens and intentional killing of Opposition supporters in questionable accidents; 2. Accountability for all arrested Muslim clerics and ordinary Muslims throughout the country; This is a case of a minority faith having majority prisoners;3. Accountability for all the reported l8 disappeared Ugandans as confirmed by the Uganda Human Rights Commission;4. Accountability for all political prisoners rotting in numerous jails without trial; 5. Release of all political prisoners in the General Court Martial;6. Demand that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs appears before Parliament to detail the House on detention without trial; and7. Accountability for killings by the military in various fishing communities.I so pray, Mr Speaker. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Honourable colleagues, I have seen an aspect of Parliament being asked a lot of questions and the Leader of the Opposition will join me in answering them because he is a senior leader in Parliament. (Laughter)When I checked our records of Parliament, we have given time to issues of human rights.  - I have heard some Members saying “No, they do not consider issues of human rights”. On 18 August 2022, the House considered and debated the report of our own Committee on Human Rights on the status of human rights and human rights violations in the country. It was a 150-page report and Parliament gave it time. We debated it, gave it attention and adopted the resolutions.On 8 February 2022, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was given space on the Order Paper to present a statement here on reports of alleged human rights violations by the State security operatives. The issues of torture were extensively handled and this is on the Hansard . On 7 July 2023, again, Hon. Flavia Nabagabe – yes, I am a Mukiga and I do not know much Luganda. So, I might sound like a Mukiga, but this was the Woman Member of Parliament for Kassanda District - she, raised the issue of human rights and torture, which came up in the international delegation. In fact, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was the one who gave good guidance and we discussed this issue.On 18 July 2023, the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, gave his response to the State-of-the-Nation Address and took a human rights approach. We had an extensive debate on this. On 3 August 2022, the Leader of the Opposition was again given an opportunity to respond to the State-of-the-Nation Address and issues of human rights were again raised and debated. On 28 September 2022, the Leader of the Opposition raised matters of forced disappearances and torture of civilians by security operatives, which was responded to. I think some of the matters are issues, which we are trying to work out outside and the minister will update us on it. When you look at some of these occasions - in this time alone, I do not think that it would be right to indict Parliament that we have not given space to issues of human rights. We have given them space; the Hansard  is there and the record is very clear. Honourable colleagues, the issue is that Parliament has where it stops. I do not know whether I can order Parliament because I have over 500 Members of Parliament. I think I should order each one of you to arrest one of these Generals and soldiers. I will assign you [Mr Mpuuga]10657THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023to bring them here so that Parliament will be seen to bite. As Parliament and from my own understanding, we can only work through our committees. Our Committee on Human Rights, as provided for under Rule 185 of our Rules of Procedure, has been consistently giving us reports. If there is any other report that is pending and ready, I will welcome it. These committees consist of both the Opposition and the NRM. Honourable colleagues, if there are other issues to do with human rights and you prepare a motion, I will give you space on the Order Paper.As a leadership, human rights issues are very dear to us and we will give them serious attention. If there is anyone who has them, please, bring them and we shall give them attention. However, we must know that Parliament has where it stops. The unfortunate bit is that things to which we did not play any role in are brought for us here to execute. Therefore, we depend on information from our colleagues. What is very critical is that as a Parliament, when we adopt resolutions, the ministers should bring action taken reports on them. Clerk, please, check whether there are pending action-taken reports on issues of human rights, so that we also bring them out and see how to handle them. 2.49MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the matter of arrest of Muslims –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Procedure -MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This particular statement - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Niwagaba, we agreed that for procedures to be fluent, we begin with the rule. MR NIWAGABA: I am rising in respect of Rule 92 of the Rules of Procedure. The statement by the Leader of the Opposition is in response to the statement by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, which was made on Tuesday. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, rule 92-      MR NIWAGABA: I am giving - which was made on Tuesday, but the House had not debated the minister’s statement in accordance with rule 52 or 53. Unlike rule 66, which is clear that once you adjourn under rule 65, the following day, business begins where it stopped. Rule 92 is not very clear about what happens to the business that was being conducted when the House is adjourned or suspended because of a disorder. I invite you to invoke your powers under rule 8 to allow the debate to proceed in accordance with rule 92. My other biggest worry is that, if we debate statements without specific resolutions, what shall we gain and what shall we do as the House? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that in view of the two statements, which are revealing in nature from the Leader of the Opposition and the Minister of State for Internal Affairs that maybe, the two be subjected to one of the committees of this House to come up with a report and specific recommendations for the House to pronounce itself? I beg to be guided. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we usually get problems because we mix up the old rules and the new ones. For example, I do not have that power under rule 8; it is under rule 7. So, I want that to be clarified. I am considering the Leader of the Opposition’s statement under rule 53 as a statement on its own. We dealt with the statement that came 10658STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONfrom the minister the way it went and I am not reopening it. The good thing is that the one of the LOP is more or less a response to that statement on top of other issues, which he has brought out. Therefore, substantively when you debate it, you end up capturing all the issues. Let us first allow a debate the way I had opened it, then along the way, I will see how best to guide because we shall also - for example, LOP has made prayers in his statement. Otherwise, we cannot make resolutions on statements. If we wanted a resolution, we would do it in form of a motion so that we can have very clear resolutions adopted by the House. For now, I would like to open up for a few Members’ submissions and then the minister will come in, then we see how best I can guide on the next step - is it a point of procedure on the same, Hon. Kivumbi? MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, we have been at this point. The demands are specific to the Government and the responsible ministers. For us to have a meaningful debate, it would be proper that the Government first responds. When the Government responds, then a debate can ensue, because these demands are not for an individual Member of Parliament to speak to. We have put these demands specifically to the Government to respond. Our prayer and plea for your indulgence is that the Government is present here, represented by the Prime Minister, the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the whole front bench. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we first get a response from the Government officially to our key demand? No Member of Parliament is going to apologise or answer all those requests. This statement ends with a list of demands that only the Government can commit to. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I know the minister has to answer, but Hon. Kivumbi, if you heard the statement properly, there are questions, which were put to Parliament and they were clearly depicting Parliament as having failed - Hon. Kivumbi feels that I answered enough. Parliament as a body can only demand for accountability from Government. We cannot be an implementing arm of Government. Honourable minister, did you want- Honourable members, all these statements are discretion of the presiding officer to allow or not to decline debate. So, Hon. Nsereko do you have a procedural matter? MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You had clearly called me to give my views and open up debate and the discretion for who should debate on any report in the House depends on you. However, the answers, whether sufficient or not, lie on the Members to adjudicate. And if there is any contentious matter, it can be moved either by persuasion of sides or by vote. Therefore, the procedural matter I would like to raise is as to whether you have now overruled yourself as regards the point of stating that I should be here to speak? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not overruled myself. I only have an impatient Member who is not allowing me to first consult further and then I come to him. I am still doing consultations. We are going to have a quick debate on this, but I just want to first hear from the minister if he has anything to say.  2.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi)  Mr Speaker, I have keenly followed what the Leader of the Opposition said in his statement. He raised many issues, some [The Deputy Speaker]10659THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023specific to my statement, others new, many old and already responded to, like you rightly said – they were handled earlier on a number of occasions on the Floor of this House. I would like to say that almost all are unverified, so, I find it difficult to respond to unverified concerns raised by the LoP without prejudice to what he said. However, that said -(Interruption) MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You know that you are one of the best officers this country has produced and I have a lot of regard for you. However, when you say that the statement has unverified information, would you be kind enough to tell us what is unverified in this statement and what sort of verification you want?GEN. MUHOOZI: I think we are now going into the substantive content of the paper; where you want me to respond to each line. If I can speak to your request, I saw the LOP trying to galvanise effort for his paper to include even the claim that Muslims are targeted, which I found objectionable. He also talked about issues that are sub judice, which I also found objectionable.I would say this, Mr Speaker – you will guide me on the course of action. As I said, many of these have been responded to. The response could have been unsatisfactory, according to the LOP, but that does not close the avenue for accountability. We have courts in this country. We also have the Uganda Human Rights Commission and many other avenues through which these issues can be addressed to their satisfaction. That said, I would like to commit on the Floor of this Parliament that the Government believes in the rule of law and constitutionalism. We would also like to say that we shall guarantee civic space to the Opposition and all Ugandans to exercise their rights and freedoms, but that right is also not duty-free. It should be exercised with responsibility and with respect to the rights of others. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the Leader of the Opposition has raised issues, but honourable members also have issues and submissions that they want to make on the same. Hon. Nsereko? 3.02MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, for his statement. I will categorically pick on this one. It is soul-touching from the community I come from, which is the Muslim community. On 5 June 2023, the home of Sheikh Yunus Kamoga – you all witnessed on TV – was raided. Children were beaten, women were beaten and others were incarcerated. The police came up with a report three days later that it had apprehended 13 of those who were in the operation. However, up to now, we do not know the punishment or how far those investigations have reached. The issue of the late Sheikh Kilevu was never addressed to the family after the twin bombings. What a marginalised community like ours demands – because it has been marginalised for so long –(Interjections)-  this is a reality. Since 1900, when territories were being parceled out in Buganda, we got only one. So, this is not recent. This is the pain that we are carrying – whether it is promotion at duty or the political reality across all divides that we see today. From the Frontbench of the Cabinet to the Judiciary, it is real. We have to box ourselves in the room and not carry this only as a weapon of reflection of human rights, but proper marginalisation of a community. There is pain that goes through our people and it is real. (Applause)Whether it is this side, the other side or any other side, when you look at the reflection of the cabinets of every Government, the Muslims – whether in the Opposition or in 10660STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONthe Government – do not have very many seats to boast of. Out of –(Interjections)-  it is true. I was the Chairperson of the committee on Equal Opportunities here. Whether it is in the Judiciary – regardless of the fact that we have over 5,000 lawyers, we do not even have five High Court judges. So, let us talk about it holistically. No single Muslim child should be raised up to have fear of law enforcement, arising out of the fact that there is collective punishment and indiscriminate arrest. The report I am talking about, of the lynching of people in a school, is real. Therefore, there is actual fear in the community. I know we can address this in the civic space. As regards other matters of human rights, of the incarceration of people, we should be talking about the Constitution and stating clearly that if someone is not tried after the mandatory date, they should be released. The Constitution is very clear on that. So, what we want, in specific, is a response and actions from the minister. As Parliament, we should resolve that we encourage or enjoin the Government to come back with proper accountability for every citizen that is either in its custody or that is in courts of law.  The nerves of the people will be calmed down. Do not take it as an attack, but take it from the side of the victims. I am speaking on behalf of the community that I belong to. Whenever you go to them, the clerics say: “We are not sure of tomorrow because we are picked up, at times, indiscriminately.” Honourable minister, you need to calm down the nerves of the people in the Muslim community with answers that are real. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 3.06MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the statement by the Leader of the Opposition and the issue of the debate is a failure in policy – or, is it by policy that these things are being done? Is it the criminalisation of a group? Have Members of Parliament failed? Can the failures of individual officers be attributed to Members of Parliament? Can they be attributed to all members of the Government? So, whoever has a responsibility, has an accountability to make. I would have liked that the Speaker guides, if it pleases him, that since we cannot cross-examine the Leader of the Opposition, the report be submitted to the relevant committee, where even the members of the families of those who have their people in prison will be accorded an opportunity to appear. The minister responsible should also appear and we see the Government agencies that have failed to do their work and, in the end, tarnish the name of the Government. Mr Speaker, the people who fight Government are not necessarily those in the Opposition or ADF. They are those people who are employed in Government, but are dissatisfied and fight the Government from within. So, I would think that anybody who tortures a citizen is an enemy of the Government. So, how shall we do accountability when we are not specific? We should be specific and scale down this to individual officers or departments that have failed. Otherwise, when we listen to the LOP, this Chamber that we are in cannot listen to evidence and cannot cross-examine. So, if it pleases you, Mr Speaker, refer this business to the relevant committee. 3.08MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy with the report that was submitted. As the LOP was speaking, I was shaking because of the pain of those families. I am only disappointed by two things. One, the report seems to describe human rights only as political rights or the rights of fishermen without regard for others. There are people in Karamoja who are listening and feeling bad that the report by the Leader [Mr Nsereko]10661THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023of the Opposition does not include other parts of the country. Maybe, he will bring another motion for other parts of the country where we have people in cells.If we are talking about human rights, it should not be restricted only to political rights. Is defending human rights only for the central region? I agree with my honourable colleague, Hon. Kwizera that this report be taken to the committee so that the rest of Ugandans can also submit and be heard, especially those that are no the Opposition. 3.10MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Internal Affairs is not listening - I pray he gets my attention. I am lucky I taught in the Army for 10 years and the General before us here, knows very well that military police are meant to discipline infantry.I would like to know: when did the military police start coming on the streets to beat people? I pray that the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs go back to the previous norms. Military police have never come out – but now, everyone is worried. Articles 51 and 52 of the Constitution give powers to the Uganda Human Rights Commission. The Uganda Human Rights Commission is mandated to constitute commissions of inquiry, where they invite people to interface with them. However, what is happening to this commission that is headed by Madam Wangadya has become a face value commission. Mr Speaker, the issue of violation of human rights is not an individual matter. Members of Parliament participate in primaries and they know what happens between our side and theirs - everyone suffers. Disrespecting people’s rights is not fair to Parliament. So, I insist that we use the Committee on Human Rights. Should it be an accountability committee or a sessional committee? This committee must be under the Opposition so it can scrutinise what is done. Whenever we talk about beating people and the use of guns, it is the Government. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I guided on points of information. When you are going to give information, use the same microphone so I can keep track of the time so that it is within your three minutes. If the minutes are over, that is it.MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI:  The information I would like to give my honourable colleague is that we demanded all these from the Government. It is only proper and prudent from our side to demand the minister responsible to respond to these things and not to comment on other issues. MR SSEWUNGU:  Thank you very much, honourable member. As I conclude, I still insist that the Minister of Internal Affairs should take back military policy to its home. These days, I even see them manning traffic –(Member timed out.)3.13MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also listened to the Leader of the Opposition, although today he sounded different. The matter of human rights is very central to our lives. In fact, when people were undressing civilians on Kampala Road because they were merely dressed in yellow, that too was callous. (Applause)  And the Leader of the Opposition did not raise it. That was not done by the Government. When murders happen, it affects all of us, but the Leader of the Opposition today did not talk about it. He was selective and this is unusual of him. (Applause)10662STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONWhen it comes to matters of human rights -I have been in this Parliament on the green benches. I have heard Parliament give critical debate and attention to matters of human rights. When the NUP was asked to go to the human rights and submit names, reports came out that those names were fake. Are we playing in the gallery? Or are we only addressing matters that affect us? So, when you talk about human rights, all of us are affected. I would like to say, Mr Speaker, that the Government of the National Resistance Movement respects human rights. The Constitution and all matters are in order. If there is a missing person, there is a procedure to apply to Court by writ of habeas corpus to get that person. I submit. 3.16MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to both presentations. As we seek accountability, let us respect the Government in power. Ugandans elected the President and all leaders including Members of Parliament. If we do not respect ourselves as leaders, do not expect others to do so. Therefore, let us respect the Government in power. The assumption that suspects and victims belong to only the Opposition is wrong. I have people in my own subregion who do not belong to the Opposition, but they have been arrested as suspects. We should not tolerate illegalities. Uganda has several laws and as Members of Parliament, we participate in legislation. If we do not respect the laws, who else will? Therefore, as Parliament, we should not condone abuse of the laws we legislate.I experienced a bad incident in my region. People were murdered - others were hacked. Many people from the Opposition in my area kept quiet about the people who died, but they raised issues about the suspects. This means we are not fair. (Interjections)  There is a life that is lost, there is a suspect and therefore, if we are talking about human rights, we should broaden our understanding. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  When an honourable colleague is speaking, and you do not agree with their opinion - it is their opinion. They can never be out of order when submitting their views. When your chance comes, we shall also listen to your views.3.09MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.I have just one plea that I want to make to the Government and this is based on an interaction I have had with some policemen. I want to implore the Government to check with your security personnel; whether they are doing some of these things with their hearts or in annoyance. Many times, we hear of “orders from above”. One of them told me that, “Emmanuel, I want you to know that many times, we even realise that what we are being asked to do is wrong, but we still go and do it and we are hurting inside.” That is what I implore the Government to look at; that you have people you are ordering to do certain things, but in their hearts, they are not happy.I do not know how far they will continue to be unhappy without reacting. I am not asking for them to turn against the Government, but I am asking you to look seriously into that. I am bringing this because I heard my colleague, Hon. Kwizera, who brought out a very important point that somebody who has done something wrong should not be covered up. You never know, perhaps some of these people are doing it to sabotage you. Take note of that and I urge you to check this because you never know how far they go with what is happening in their hearts. Thank you, Mr Speaker.[Mr Kajwenjye]10663THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Fr. Onen-3.21FR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened to the report of the Leader of the Opposition and he revealed his unhidden nature. Violence is not only happening in central Uganda and, therefore, it should be assessed in that way. There are reports of gun violence happening in the greater parts of northern Uganda. Karamojong cattle rustlers are abducting and killing people, but I have not heard this in his report. The Apaa issue; the people of Acholi are being murdered, being abducted, but I have not heard this in his report. Mr Speaker, I am happy that now, we are talking as leaders and I am happy that I am in the House. For the past two days, I even had a feeling of resigning from being a Member of Parliament because of the way we have been behaving here. However, I am happy now that we are talking as national leaders and we need to wear the national lenses when we are talking. We do not need to talk because “my brother is suffering”.Mr Speaker, in the 1980s, some people ferried Matooke and milk to feed the lion in the bush. The lion was brought home with the hope that it would protect and give them promotions and give them positions. They even composed songs, Anya nya Cinandola  to taunt the people of northern Uganda.Now, we are talking of Muslim clerics being arrested. Many religious leaders in Northern Uganda were arrested. Very many priests were arrested and brought to Luzira Prison, about nine priests. I am a priest and I know and I feel - now you are only talking about what is taking place around here. We need to appreciate that national reconciliation has to take place, it has to be promoted and  the confrontational approach to any issue must stop. (Applause)This is my position, Mr Speaker. I am aware that the transitional justice policy was brought to your table and up to now, it has not yet been discussed. I pray that transitional justice is approached by all of us and we look at reparations policy so that this kind of happenings do not happen in the future. Those who were mistreated must also be compensated by the Government. Otherwise, Mr Leader of the Opposition, you have not said anything. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this is an issue where we are not going to have resolutions. The Leader of the Opposition has put very clear questions to the minister. Honourable minister, I give you 30 days to respond to the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition.Where you feel that you need clarification, write to the Leader of the Opposition formally because sometimes we do not know what kind of clarification you are seeking. Write to him where you feel that the statement is not detailed enough, you ask for these details, and then you respond and we come here in 30 days to handle the issue.Leader of the Opposition? MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate honourable colleagues who have made an input in this statement by way of their submissions.I appreciate the concerns of Hon. Nakut and I want to invite you to read the list on page 5, and you will see that Obongi is not in Masaka. (Applause)  So, we try as much as possible to scan the country, but remember that the perpetrators also undertake cover-ups of their tracks. That is why in my statement, not necessarily by way of indicting, I am inviting members of Parliament to be alive to the troubles in this country.I can understand where my brother Hon. Kajwengye is coming from. That is why he will speak in whispers about injustice, but not bring them here and he is expecting me to do 10664STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONhis job. I invite you honourable comrade to rise to the occasion. (Applause) I will defend your right to defend your position day and night. I will defend your right to be what you want to be and I will be the last person to accept anyone to mistreat you for your beliefs. So, I invite you to be alive; do not speak in whispers. If the violators are your neighbours, come and speak about it here. Do not speak in whispers. Hon. Jessica, I will look out for the dictionary meaning of the word “respect” so that I can understand how the Government is respected in the face of injustice. I can promise you that I will look for it. I thank Rev. Fr Onen. You see, this is about our country. There are reasons why you were initially a priest and now in Parliament -(Interruption)-  and because priests receive deeper training, deeper training must be followed by deeper knowledge. We can really speak over those issues with a clear understanding of where we are coming from. Mr Speaker, I wanted to respond to those honourable members with utmost respect, to understand where these matters are. We need to understand why the “minority”, court and court would speak and demand for justice. I agree there should be reconciliation, but reconciliation starts with justice. Do not simply say “let us reconcile” while you get away with injustice. Mr Speaker, you have invited the minister and offered him 30 days. Honestly, 30 days is to allow them to go and cover up more. We are talking about people in detention for four years without trial. The Minister of Internal Affairs is hiding behind sub judice, as if the Constitution was deleted. The minister is a lawyer like me and he is aware of what happens when there is no trial after 365 days and he is telling us sub judice. I have supplied information as to the military vehicles that knocked down people deliberately. Does he want me to go and look for them, and in these 30 days look for his officers? The minister casually said, “We have talked about some of these issues.” We are demanding for 18 disappeared persons. What did you say about the 18 missing persons so that we can give you 30 days to come back and speak about them? The Prime Minister says she knows where Kibalama is. Does she need 30 days? Mr Speaker, I thank you for your patience because these are the reasons we are here, whether or not we have 30 Bills to pass. Just as an example, I spoke about it in my statement, that in order to respond to the cries of fishermen in the fishing communities, we enacted a law that offered them protection. However, even with the law in place, they are still being hunted like aliens  -(Applause)-  and the minister wants 30 days? Mr Speaker, we have reported here, severally, that fishing is being undertaken by Government officials including ministers. It is on the Hansard  that one of the ministers bears boats with the name Wacha Waseme . They were initially blue in colour and they are now black. They are the same people. Mr Speaker, with due respect and with your indulgence, they do not need 30 days, but next week to report on the action taken on this.  (Applause)At the beginning of this term, Mr Speaker, I had to listen and support over 10 families of the missing persons, to pay school fees for their children, yet the minister wants 30 days. I asked to escort the Prime Minister to see Kibalama, and she needs 30 days? I want to put it to her that the blood of Kibalama if he is dead, is on her hands.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, respect the House. When you enter the House, first sit and then we proceed. MR MPUUGA: Let me conclude. Mr Speaker, that is the demeanour of the Leader of [Mr Mpuuga]10665THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023Government Business. If she had a gun in this room, she would shoot all of us. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I will give the Prime Minister a chance to respond. MR MPUUGA: The Prime Minister will respond after producing Kibalama to this country. Mr Speaker, with due respect –(Interruption)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, in the year 2022, you chaired a meeting. The meeting was attended by the Leader of the Opposition and I. We brought the report. The second meeting was chaired by the Speaker, herself. We agreed for me to present a report on this Floor and we uploaded the report. Mr Speaker, at the time of the presentation, my brother here said that they were not ready. Therefore, since that time, the report is with Parliament. (Interjections)  Is my brother in order to insinuate that I have Kibalama? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Honourable colleagues, listen. Ms NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, you are aware that the Electoral Commission released the roadmap. Our brothers in the Opposition think they can use Parliament - (Interjections) -  to shout for public sympathy. Mr Speaker, is it in order for our brothers and sisters in the Opposition to use the platform of Parliament to become - by the way, you have become something different. We are here for the common good of everybody in the country. Mr Speaker, is the issue of human rights only in the Buganda sub-region? (Interjections)  Mr Speaker, I request you to prevail over our brothers on the Opposite side. Is it in order for my brother – (Interjections) –  please, allow me to present. Is it in order for my brother to keep insinuating that I have the blood of Kibalama on my hands when in actual sense I am not a security person? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I have consulted a few leaders outside Parliament, and I have also read through the Hansard , on how some of these cases used to be handled. The best way is for the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition to start talking outside the Parliament. I checked how the late Prof. Nsibambi did it with Prof. Latigo - I am told times have changed. When you talk, you cannot fail to get an answer and respect each other. We are going to end up having disrespect. I request both sides to respect each other. I have a duty of presiding over this House. Prime Minister and honourable colleagues, let us have respect for each other. We have been peaceful –(Laughter)-  the Prime Minister has been disturbed by the allegation that she has to produce Kibalama going on the record. Leader of the Opposition, you said the Prime Minister has Kibalama; justify your statement. MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With the indulgence of the Speaker, I played a video in this Parliament, on record, of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister speaking to the media that Mr Kibalama is in their hands, that he is a criminal, that he was arrested. That was on record here. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is not going to impeach our confidence in demanding for Mr Kibalama. If Mr Kibalama is on her farm and paying a ransom, let her produce Mr Kibalama. She said it.  (Applause)  Mr Speaker, that is the reason, humbly with respect, we decline the 30 days for them to come and report on these issues one by one. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister should not come to intimidate the House. There are demands that must be responded to with decorum and in sequence, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Government Chief Whip had stood up earlier.10666STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION3.40THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua): Mr Speaker, I rise to seek your guidance in two respects;One, in order to make what you have directed much easier - and this has been our request all along - Mr Speaker. On Page 4 and 5 of the statement by the Leader of the Opposition, you see that we have always requested for better particulars of the person allegedly abducted. On these pages 4 and 5, we are only stating names. Honourable colleagues, we all have residences. In the meetings you chaired, or in the meetings chaired by Madam Speaker herself, as Government, we have always asked. State Obua Dennis Hamson, a resident of Amindit Village, Awori Parish, Abako Subcounty, Ajuri County, Alebtong District, was reportedly abducted on Kampala Road. This is what we need and we still pray for that as you guide. Number two, Mr Speaker, I have looked at the list by the Leader of the Opposition. Just like the Minister of Internal Affairs stated before, there are those that were investigated before and there are those that are still under investigation, including a committee of Parliament. There is an investigation before the Committee on Human Rights and there are cases that are in court. I want to mention the names investigated before and put it on record because I want to ask for how long shall we come here to demand for the same names? Mr Speaker, on 10 October 2023, the Uganda Human Rights Commission released a report on the alleged cases of missing NUP supporters and this was issued by the chairperson and signed by the chairperson of the commission. This is an area where a number of names are appearing on the list already investigated by a constitutional commission mandated to do that: 1. Mr Moses Mbabazi, appears on the list already investigated2. Kirya Peter, already on the list, investigated3. John Damulira 4. Semuddu Michael5. Kanatta Muhammad6. Kibalama John Bosco7. Musisi Mbowa8. Mubiru Hassan9. Isma. The report is here and Mr Speaker, this is the report of a constitutional commission. I beg to lay it on the Table. I beg to seek your guidance in those two respects.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, the Minister requested time - the minister has confirmed he never asked for time, but there are questions we should answer. Honourable minister, if information is available, you can answer on Tuesday or, if you feel the answer you have given now is satisfactory, you say this answer is satisfactory. We do not have these people so it goes on the record and we know it is sorted. 3.45THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi):  Mr Speaker, like I said before and like it has been amplified by the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip, these are issues we have responded to. Otherwise, you want us to regurgitate what we have already brought out, but we do not have anything new to submit on the matter.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank, most sincerely, comrade Hamson Obua for the document he has laid and I want to agree with him that the Human Rights Commission, which is the constitutional commission, confirmed 18 missing persons and their list does not differ from what we have and have submitted on the Floor of Parliament, including Kibalama who is in the hands of the Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, if there is a Government -(Interruption)10667THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, it is on record that Kibalama, according to their report, was arrested in 2019. In 2019, I was a humble Commissioner in this House.Secondly, Mr Speaker, I am not an arresting officer. I have never arrested anybody in my life and so, is the Leader of the Opposition in order to insist despite the report –(Interjection)-  Mr Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition as I said earlier has always been with us and we are always in touch. By the way, I am very close to the Leader of the Opposition, that is if you did not know. We have been having reports, myself and him, from the police, now Human Rights Commission, he is aware. By the way, he might even be aware of where Kibalama is more than me. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to continue insisting that I, the Leader of Government Business, have Kibalama, and yet in actual sense, he knows I am not an arresting officer? Is he in the order? ( Laughter )THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I think we are going to lose focus of the major issue. I remember when we had that meeting because - Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you should make it easier. The Government side is saying you have only given them a name: Joseph Baguma, George Kasumba and Isma Ssesaazi; where do I start from? For example, if I gave you a name now from Uganda and I say, “I need you to produce Tayebwa William. Tell me where he is?” Where would you start from? Now, Leader of the Opposition, is there a way we can have more details so that the minister is able to follow up?MR MPUUGA:  Mr Speaker, I am glad that the Prime Minister confirms that Kibalama was arrested in 2019. Of course, as an advocate, that is a very good starting point.  (Applause) The Leader of the Government Business is a supervisor of all these agencies and she can trace the people who arrested Kibalama in 2019. If he was burnt in an acid tank, we can take the tank. At least, he was arrested and there is only one agency that can arrest. Therefore, you still have a duty to trace from your arresting agencies, where Kibalama is. I would like to assure you that his blood is on your hands. I have a document on my file, which I submitted on the Floor of Parliament in 2021, including addresses and telephone contacts for every next of kin. I even supplied telephone contacts of the next of kin from whom some state agencies were asking for ransoms to release their family members. Clearly, with the statement saying, on this one, they were demanding for ransom. It is on the record of Parliament.Mr Speaker, before we go into the others that have no record, at least those in the Human Rights Commission record have addresses. In fact, on the day this statement was released, the chairperson purported to say that they were missing some record. The following day, family members delivered National Identification Cards of these missing persons. Hon. Abdallah Kiwanuka, my shadow minister of internal affairs, even offered to deliver the Minister of Security to the home of a one Kanatta Mohammed, who was picked by security in uniform in Walusimbi, Mukono District, 2021.I can recall one by one, so, it is flimsy and it is hiding away from the responsibility of a Government with DISOs, GISOs and PISOs. I even heard that there are now FISOs for families. I know how governments collapse unless we are seeing traits of a collapsing regime that cannot make a trace even with the information of missing citizens. If the minister does not need time to come back here and he has information, we are waiting for it. What we 10668STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONwill not accept is the flimsy excuse of “they supplied information”. Let him regurgitate what he informed this House on a case-by-case basis. (Applause)GEN. MUHOOZI: Mr Speaker, I will say it for the umpteenth time. I think that the Leader of the Opposition has laboured to extract a confession by durance using the House, but I will still repeat that I have no information further than what we already submitted on the matters. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Leader of the Opposition, you said that you have some information in your file. Kindly, lay it on the Table so that I pass it over to the minister right away. It might be in our Hansard,  but for purposes of flowing well in the session – now, it would require me to tell the Clerk to extract that information and I give it to him. If you have it here, would you mind laying it on the Table?MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, that is a personal file. Unfortunately, Parliament does not pay me to supply the Government with personal information. However, I can avail a duplicate copy of this file after agreeing on when the minister will respond. If the minister is willing to respond in the immediacy, then I can consider it because after this session, I will be able to supply a file and then, the minister can tell us how much time he needs.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip?MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, with your permission, allow me to pick the name that featured prominently in the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and I read the findings of the Uganda Human Rights Commission on John Bosco Kibalama.The commission made several attempts to trace and record the statement of Rita Naturinda, a wife to the victim, but she has not been cooperative with the commission team and intentionally refused to give any information to the team. Specifically, during the July to August 2023 investigations, the team reached out to Naturinda through an unknown telephone number and she claimed that her husband was still missing. She informed the team that she was in Kakiri. The team then proceeded to Kakiri, but she could not answer her calls despite several phone calls, which were aimed at seeking clear direction to her residence.However, when the team used a different phone number, she picked up the call and requested them to give her a few minutes to avail herself. The team waited in vain and when they called her again, she refused to answer the call. I beg to provide this information. 3.56MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of human rights transcends even our political divides. If you go to the jurisdictions where we pick Chapter 4 of the Constitution, they are in the habit of suspending everything to ensure that human rights are protected. However, for us to give integrity to this House since the matter is on the Floor, we must have an avenue where it must be put to rest. Instead of having a hullabaloo from left and right, why can’t we have an independent committee to hear from both sides and then we have a final position on the matter? This will give integrity to the House, but it will also settle the challenges the various families have; if truly their own are missing, they are in pain. If it is being used as a political tool by both NRM and the Opposition, then it shall also be put in the limelight. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Leader of the Opposition, you had wanted to –3.58[Mr Mpuuga]10669THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are a people’s Parliament and it facilitates us by far when people get to know what we do in Parliament. For external channels, it is understandable because you do not control them, like Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. However, for our YouTube channel to be off for all the days we have spoken on human rights issues, keeps people in the dark.May I request, Mr Speaker, that we be facilitated with the Youtube parliamentary channel for people to know who is for human rights and who is not? People are kept in the dark about the contributions of their members of Parliament here in the House. I pray.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I have the media in their gallery. If they want to stream on YouTube, let them do it. I did not know that YouTube was not on. And we have The Hansard . What is very important here is the Hansard ; everything done here is being recorded. Anyone who speaks what the media feels that they should cover, they will cover it. I would like us to conclude on this.Otherwise, first, according to rule 53(2), we have already exceeded an hour; we are limited to one hour. Secondly, it is now Prime Minister’s Time. I gave my ruling earlier on and I stand by it though I said that within 30 days. Therefore, I am going to engage both sides. Please, LOP, I request that you avail this information to the minister tomorrow and then we shall require the minister to make a statement in response, with very clear details. Thank you.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for being patient. That is why I said, in my preamble to the statement, that these moments bring out Statesmen and decipher them from demagogues and social climbers. - (Laughter)-On another day, if the rules permitted, I would have cross-examined the Government Chief Whip over the statement he read here, but if the rules do not permit it, I will not.Mr Speaker, I concede to bringing a fresh list to you and on the day the Government commits to respond to these issues in a sequence, I will return to the House. Thank you.(Whereupon the some Members of the Opposition exited the Chamber.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister’s Time.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.04 THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, instead of Members squeezing themselves, I request the Speaker to allow our colleagues to come and -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a free sitting. By the way, honourable members, tolerance is very critical for any Parliament. We should not be having winners and losers in the House, and so, we should try to tolerate each other.The language that we use will especially help us to tolerate each other. We can use a language, which can stroke a fire; I request that we try to tolerate each other. We are all Members and we can all fit in this Parliament and our ideas can be heard. Let us go to Prime Minister’s Time. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, you will realise that the political tempers are becoming high across the political divide, and so people want to be seen to be doing something.  (Applause)  So, however much you tolerate them, they have a mission. Their mission is to collapse the Government, but we cannot allow that. So, let us continue.Mr Speaker, this is as in response to Hon. Hellen Kahunde, Woman MP, Kiryandongo District. On 17 October, Cabinet approved a policy – 10670STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have a procedural matter from the Hon. Cecilia Ogwal.MS NABBANJA: I respect that one. MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing me to seek your guidance on procedure. You have just talked to the House very emotionally that we must tolerate and accommodate each other as much as we can. However, my young sister, who happens to be the Prime Minister of this country, has made two statements within a very short time - I sat here to listen. The first one is that, “You people, spread out”, as if to say, “It is good they have walked out”. Again, you said, “These people are finding something to do, so that their voters can see that they are also doing something.” Even if it is true, that is why I am standing here- I should have walked out with them. I am here because I would like to say this; if we say that we must accommodate each other, then we must be accommodative. The words from our mouths are the ones that inflame the situation. When you find a situation where a wife and husband are fighting, you do not say, “Listen to this stupid man”. You have to use words that can cool down the situation. Therefore, is It procedurally right to allow those you are giving the honour to take the microphone to use words that can inflame the situation? I thought this is the time we should try to cool down our temper, be accommodative and be reconciliatory. That is the kind of language I would expect, especially from our leaders. Therefore, I urge the Prime Minister maybe to try and calm down and speak to us with a language of accommodation. That is one of the ways we can cool down the temper at our level. However low or high, let us play our role. I seek your guidance.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, yesterday, I called a few senior legislators, who have been here for some time and the major aim was for them to guide on how best we can build consensus because as a presiding officer, I do not enjoy presiding over a one-sided House at all; I do not. If either side enjoys that it on your side, I do not because I am a referee. I cannot be a referee for one side.This why we are trying our level best to ensure the two sides talk and accommodate each other. Now, with a point of concern, I have seen how some Members of the Frontbench behave which, to some extent, is disrespectful of the presiding officer. However, I will call the Prime Minister, sit down and share with them. Being accommodative, sometimes, is taken as a sign of weakness. When I see a behaviour, I decide to ignore it, but do not think that I do not take note. Of course, I also have a limit and one day, I will reach the limit, only that every day, I pray that I do not reach that limit. Therefore, I request the Frontbench, please, when the Chair is speaking, listen. Then, I will give you a chance to speak. Otherwise, if I reach a level where I determine that to be disrespectful – I am concerned and I am nearly reaching that level. I did not want to say this in the open, but I have to say it. Please, let us respect each other. And above all, let us respect honourable colleagues across the board, especially in terms of listening so that we can have a side. (Applause) That is why this House was built for two sides. Whether it is one Member here and a thousand there, that one voice should be respected, and that one voice should also respect the majority voice. However, you have to be cautious when you are dealing with the minority - the psychology of the minority is totally different from that of the majority. The psychology of the minority usually feels that “I am suffocated because I am a minority”. Someone gave us the analogy of what the rabbit told – Hon. Bahati, I think you were there - a lion that, “You are going to PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10671THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023eat me, but you will not eat me with salt and onions. You will eat me with dust.” Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know if you have heard this. The rabbit told the lion that: “You are going to eat me, but you will not eat me with salt and onions; you will eat me with dust – when I am dirty.”What does that help? Do we want to win out of a dusty war in the House? The issues being discussed never happened here. These are issues, which have failed to be solved outside. They have been brought here because this place offers a platform where one can raise any issue and we use words to  argue; let us not dismiss each other. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I will be grateful if you invited the Leader of the Opposition for a cup of coffee and you start engaging. That is discretionary, of course, on your side. You said you are closer than we know - (Laughter) – but I urge you to take advantage of that. I am sorry I have taken that long labouring on that line, but I will be comfortable in this House if both sides are here. However, since I did not receive any prior warning, we have to continue with business of the House as we build consensus. Let us not tire, but try to reach out to our honourable colleagues, build consensus so they can come back to the House. Honourable colleagues, let us continue with the Prime Minister Time; she only lent us a few minutes. If she was difficult, she wouldn’t have. Otherwise, she should not be interrupted during her time.Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. MS NABBANJA: Sometimes, we shall be keeping quiet, but remember that even Jesus, at one time, turned tables. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, there are a number of questions, but I will start with the one of Hon. Hellen Kahunde, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo. In October 2017, according to her, Cabinet approved a policy proposal to work with National Social Security Fund (NSSF), as the financier, to construct a one-stop Government campus to accommodate all ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) currently accommodated in rented office space, which was then estimated at an annual increase of 12 per cent. Her question was: what is the status of the construction of a one-stop office space for all Government MDAs at Bwebajja? Mr Speaker, my response is, it is true that in 2017, the Cabinet, under Minute 247 (CT 2012), approved a policy proposal to construct a one-stop Government campus at Bwebajja, with NSSF as the financier. Mr Speaker, at the centre of this policy, decision was the need for the Government to provide a permanent home for all MDAs, which are accommodated in privately-owned office spaces. At the time, Cabinet noted that rent expenditure was rising exponentially at a rate of 12 per cent per annum and was, thus, likely to become unsustainable over a longer time. Consequently, on 7 June 2018, the Government of Uganda, under the wise leadership of H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, represented by the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on one hand, signed a project development agreement with National Social Security Fund to develop a one-stop Government office campus at Bwebajja, along Kampala-Entebbe Road in Wakiso District. The major provision in this agreement was that the fund would use its own resources and hand it over to the Government as a turn-key project wherein the Government would fund payables as rent by MDAs housed in the rented office space, to repay NSSF in a period of 15 years after occupancy and, thereafter, the facility would revert to the Government. 10672STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONSince 2018, a number of milestones to actualise the proposed Government development at Bwebajja by both NSSF’s design consultant and the Government Contract Management Consultant (CMC) have been registered. These include: the Project Development Agreement, which places an obligation on NSSF to procure a design consultant to preliminary develop conceptual designs to form the blueprint for the Government campus, which is subject to review and approval by the Government of Uganda. To-date, NSSF procured, M/S Dar Al-Handasah Shair and Partners, in association with Creations Consult Africa Ltd. So far, the consultant has developed the inception report, which was approved by the project implementation team in its meeting held on 25 July 2023. The CMC further reviewed and raised comments on the Comprehensive Project Management Plan (CPMP) and the Built-Up Area (BUA) schedule from the design consultant, and is yet to review other project documents. It is important to note that the construction works of the campus will commence in 2025, and will last for four years. After the construction, the Government will occupy the campus.The design consultant has provided, in their submission to the Office of the President, an order of cost estimate for each design option and clarified that the mentioned construction budget of the project in the Terms of Reference (TORs) requires revision to meet the latest escalation in construction market prices so as to be able to achieve the Government aspirations for the targeted design level of the project. Mr Speaker, in light of the above, NSSF and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are re-examining the cost variables of the financial model. The details of this can be availed by the Ministry of Finance Planning, and Economic Development. The second question was from the Hon. Patrick Nsamba Oshabe. He raised a matter concerning the discontinuation of the construction of the power line from Kassanda-Kabulubutu-Wakayiba with a T-off to Bbinikira and Nakatete villages in Kassanda North County. His questions are:(i) Can the Prime Minister inform the House of the cause of the discontinuation of the construction of the power line?(ii) When does the ministry intend to resume and complete works on the power line to enable the people of Kassanda North County to have access to power supply? My response, Mr Speaker, is that the Government of Uganda, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development contracted Muttico Technical Services Limited for the construction of the engineering, procurement, construction of medium voltage networks, installation of distribution of transformers and association low voltage networks in the various regions of the country for eight lots. Lot 1 includes Mubende, Mityana, Kabarole and Kyegegwa District. The contract was signed on 6 June 2019. The scope of work includes areas of Kabulubutu, Kikandwa Wakayiba with a T-off to Bbinikira, Nakatete in Kassanda North County. To-date, the progress on the project is summarised as follows: in Kabulubutu, pole erection is complete, conductor stringing is also complete, but transformer installation is pending. In Kikandwa, pole erection is complete, conductor stringing is complete, but transformer installation is pending. In Wakayiba, Nakatete, Bbinikira Trading Centre all have poles erected. The conductor stringing is done too and the only pending civil works is the installation of the transformer. [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10673THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker, the works are 80 per cent complete in Kassanda North County though majorly pending transformer installation that were scheduled to be commissioned by 15 June 2023. However, there were delays caused by the following, and I would like Members to note of them:1. Rampant vandalism of the completed works – People stole wires; 2. Wayleave issues along Bbinikira T-off;3. Disruption of the supply chain conductors, cables and related accessories and transformers due to escalated prices; and4. Cash flow challenges of the contractor. Therefore, the ministry has undertaken the following measures to ensure completion of the civil works: 1. Multi-sector vandalism committee was set up to curb vandalism, which has enabled robust coordination with security agencies; and2. Procurement of the contractor to complete the works is under way. Mr Speaker, it is planned that the works will be completed by June 2024. The Government, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, is committed to expediting the completion of the electrification project for the social economic transformation of the people of Kassanda. The third question was raised by Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakino, Member of Parliament, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo District.He gave a long preamble, which I am going to read. It reads, “ Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I, and the Ma’di Okollo District Local Government had several back-and-forth engagements with the Minister of Water and Environment to provide urgent water solutions to the water-stressed areas in upper Ma’di County, to no avail. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the villages listed below, the occupants leave their beds between 2.00-4.00 a.m. to go and search for dirty water in the water collection caves where they compete for water with dangerous reptiles like snakes and pythons. Annually, we lose between five to 10 young women, mothers, and school going children in Upper Ma’di County to snake bites in search of dirty water. In June 2023, a 13-year-old son to Alioni Vincent, a one Abiyo of Eyii Primary School, was bitten by a snake while he went to collect water to wash his uniform and died instantly. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that in some regions, some people are advocating for water for animals and Government is investing heavily to provide water for irrigation and livestock, which is very good for the economic development of this country, but at the very painful expense of denying clean water sources to the human beings in Upper Ma’di and other parts of the country that are still crying and striving to survive on dirty water. The National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXI, states that ‘the State shall take all practical measures to promote a good water management system at all levels.’ Objective XII(ii) on balanced and equitable development states that ‘the State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.’ In light of the water crisis in Upper Ma’di County, this remains a leap in constitutional provision”. His question is: what are the Government plans in providing the supply of water to water-stressed areas in Okollo Subcounty, Upper Ma’di County, Madi-Okollo District. Mr Speaker, my response is that, the Ministry of Water and Environment, through the Integrated Water Management and Development Project (IWMDP) has planned to implement Nyagak Water Supply and Sanitation System with financing from the World Bank, as you are aware. 10674STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONThe procurement process for the contractor is in advanced stages, the contract is expected to be signed by December 2023 and works shall commence in January 2024. Mr Speaker, Nyagak Water Supply and Sanitation System (WSS) is designed to serve five sub-counties in Madi-Okollo District including Okollo, Anyiribu, Offaka, Ogoko, Pawor as well as lnde Town Council. Those are 2l parishes in the above sub-counties and 57 villages. The system is targeting a current population of 42,900 people in the five sub-counties as of 2022 and a projected population of 80,655 people by 2042 - you know we are still around.Particularly in Okollo Subcounty, the Nyagak Water Supply and Sanitation System will serve four parishes of Ajibu, Okollo, Onyomu, Baito, and l6 villages in these four parishes. In the parish of Onyomu kati, the following villages will be served by the water supply system: Pamvara, Baiyia, Madeli, Ajuimuni, Adribu, Endebu, Ajibu and Onyomu kati; and in the parish of Ajibu the two villages of Ayio and Cinya, which have been without water sources, will also be served. Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Water and Environment, under the Directorate of Water Development, has undertaken and continues to plan various activities across the country with the objective to increase access to safe and clean water supply in the rural and urban areas while ensuring availability of at least one source per village to promote improved sanitation with the aim of providing a water source in every village, as directed by His Excellency, the President.To-date, the rural water coverage in the country is at 68 per cent and the number of villages with at least one safe water source, is at 70 per cent. In particular, the safe water coverage in Madi-Okollo District is at 67 per cent and 71 per cent of the villages in Madi-Okollo, have at least one safe water source.The Ministry of Water and Environment allocated a total of Shs 3 billion to Madi-Okollo District for Water and Sanitation Services, for the period 2019/2020 to 2023/2024. From this allocation, Shs 2.95 billion was for water supply and Shs 69 million for sanitation and hygiene promotion using the District Water and Sanitation Development Conditional Grant to the local governments. Next question, Mr Speaker came from the Hon. Kalule Flavia Nabagabe, District Woman Representative, Kassanda District. She stated as follows: “Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Kassanda Health Centre IV is sicker than the patients that are there. We do not have any ambulance and have a general ward that suffocates both men, women and children, with very tiny cubicles. We do not have enough blood and have low-staffing levels.” Her Prayers are:i. Provide a bigger solar system for the health centre because currently midwives are using torches to deliver babies;  ii. Can we also be provided with funds to build a general ward that separates men, women and children? and iii. Can the Government provide an ambulance to Kassanda Health Centre lV? Mr Speaker, my response is as that;The Government of Uganda received funding from the World Bank (Credit with a grant) to extend the grid and distribution lines and also power social infrastructure. Part of the funds were allocated to electrify health facilities (social infrastructure).Kassanda Health Centre lV is one of the beneficiary facilities to receive robust solar systems to power the facility. This will include:1. 12.96 kWp Centralised PV System for the medical buildings;  2. Compound Lighting; and  3. Powering staff houses. [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10675THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has updated its specifications and only allows robust solar systems that can work up to a minimum of l5 years.A few facilities that have so for benefited and the systems have been installed and commissioned, are as follows;   1. Kiboga - Bukomero Health Centre IV;2. Kazo - Kazo Health Centre IV;3. Buhweju - Nsika Health Centre IV;4. Kamwenge - Rukunyu Government Hospital;5. Kakumiro - Kakumiro Health Centre IV;6. Omoro - Lalogi Health Centre IV;7. Kapelebyong - Kapelebyong Health Centre IV;8. Bukedea - Bukedea Health Centre IV;9. Sironko - Budadiri Health Centre IV;10. Manafwa - Bugobero Health Centre IV; and11. Oyam - Anyeke Health Centre IV .Mr Speaker, these health centres have their power reliability at 100 per cent for the last two years and that is the direction that the Ministry of Health has taken to reduce the recurrent expenditure to the minimum. My response to the second prayer is that the standard for the general wards provides for separate sections for male, female and children. Once funds are realised, the required infrastructure shall be put in place at Kassanda Health Centre IV . My response to the third prayer is that on 20 September 2021, the Emergency Medical Services Policy was approved by the Cabinet of Uganda, and it spells out the allocation of ambulances to defined catchment areas. The new policy is to allocate one Type B ambulances per 100,000 population equivalent to one constituency in Uganda. The allocated ambulance serves the population in that constituency. The policy disbanded the prior arrangement of the issue of allocating ambulances to health facilities in order to serve a wider population better.Mr Speaker, the ambulance vehicle is situated at the most accessible and secure health facility in the constituency, preferably on the highway. In the year 2020/2021, Kassanda District was allocated an ambulance registration UG6859M for Bukuya Constituency. For now, though situated in one of the constituencies, the ambulance is provided with fuel to respond to emergencies across Kassanda North and Kassanda South constituencies, in Kassanda District.In the Financial Year 2024/2025, we plan to procure additional 180 Type B and Type C ambulances to fill the gaps. The Government is committed to fill the gaps in ambulance vehicles at the constituency level for the Financial Year 2025/2026.The fifth question came from Hon. Chelangat Alinga Solomon, Member of Parliament, T’oo County, Bukwo District. He stated thus: “ Bukwo District is predominantly an agricultural district. People mainly grow maize for both commercial and subsistence purposes. However, the President has been discouraging people from maize farming unless on a large scale because it is not economically viable. Therefore, our people were advised to shift to short term crops, which are more profitable.The Government of Uganda thought of giving our people some incentives through the Agriculture Cluster Development Program (ACDP), under the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have issues of concern that have discouraged our people from taking the good advice from the President.i. Government through ACDP , procured a contractor, Bold Energy, in April 2021 to supply farm inputs, like maize seed and fertiliser. The contractor did their part, but the Government has never met its obligation of paying the contractor. This has put the contractor in a very fragile 10676STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONsituation because he seems to have gone for loans to do the supplies.ii. The Government thought of constructing some roads in Bukwo District such as the 11.6 km in the Financial Year 2021/2022, to allow farmers to access markets for their produce. This contract has stalled because the contractor has not been paid. Our farmers are making big losses because most of these short-term crops are perishable and need to reach the market as soon  as they are harvested.”His question is: what plan does the Government have to ensure that they meet their obligation of paying contractors their money so that our people get the intended service since the project is coming to an end?Mr Speaker, my response is that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), through the ACDP accredited agro-input dealers to supply subsidized agricultural inputs such as seeds/planting materials, fertilizers, agro-chemicals, post-harvest materials and tractor-hire services.MS Bold Energy is one of the companies that were accredited. It signed a Memorandum of Understanding with MAAIF to supply post-harvest materials only. However, during the first and second planting seasons of 2021, a number of companies were found to have been involved in suspicious transactions (supplying inputs not accredited for, redeeming inputs not supplied to farmers among others), and the ministry took a decision to suspend payments pending verification.The ministry carried out both physical verification of the farmers within the district and system verification of all the dealers’ transactions on 8 September 2023. The MAAIF communicated to MS Bold Energy the results from the verification exercise and the verified amount to be paid to the dealer.On 15 September 2023, the company concurred with MAAIF and requested it to pay only the amount that had been verified. Payment for the verified and agreed amount has since been effected to MS Bold Energy. So, I request the honourable member to get in touch with this company if he still has interest.On the matter concerning the rehabilitation of farm access roads in Bukwo District, I want to say that Bukwo District Local Government prioritised rehabilitative works on 11 kilometres of farm access roads in Senedet and Kortek subcounties. Works were jointly inspected, measured and certified at the end of March 2023 to generate Interim Payment Certificate (IPC) No.1. In July 2023, MS Crescent General Company Ltd (the contractor) received advance payment and IPC1. The contractor has recently notified MAAIF and Bukwo District Local Government of substantial completion of the works.A joint inspection and verification of the works is scheduled for in this month. It is upon this joint technical inspection that the works will be declared complete or not with a snag list developed for omissions and defects that the contractor will rectify during the defects liability period. The contractor will be paid as soon as the works completion report is approved by the MAAIF and Bukwo District Local Government joint inspection team.The sixth question was from Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakino, the Member of Parliament, Upper Madi County. Mr Speaker, his question reads: “ Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you may already be aware, the Government under the ACDP allocated funds for the Rehabilitation of road chokes in Madi-Okollo District. However, up to now, we see no progress on the ground. Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister update the House on the Government’ s plan to rehabilitate the road chokes in Madi-Okollo?”Mr Speaker, my response is that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, under the Agriculture Cluster Development [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10677THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023Project, allocated funds for the Rehabilitation of road chokes in Madi-Okollo District and the procurement process commenced in 2021 .However, at the time of contract award, the best bid price was above the estimated cost and thus the accounting officer could not proceed with the contract signing as per Section 7, part II of the PPDA Contracts Regulations, 2014.Mr Speaker, a market survey was undertaken in September 2021, which confirmed that, indeed, the quoted price was higher than the prevailing market price by 13 per cent. Therefore, this procurement qualified for a re-tender and given that the scope of the works had changed and required a re-assessment.Another process was initiated in August 2022 and an award of contract was made to the best evaluated bidder in March 2023. Unfortunately, after signing the contract, the best evaluated bidder declined to commence works.The ministry explored the option of awarding the second best-evaluated bidder and approval was obtained on 14 September 2023. The draft contract has been submitted to the Solicitor-General for clearance. Mr Speaker, I wish to assure this august House that this choke will be completed since the Government has requested the World Bank to extend the ACDP implementation time by six months, from 30 October 2023. The seventh question came from the Hon. Catherine Lamwaka, Woman Representative Omoro District. Mr Speaker, the honourable member says that on 23 and 26 June, unknown people broke into Palrenga Health Centre II in – Tochi County, and Tegot Health Centre II in- Omoro County in Omoro District, respectively, and took the following medical items; (i) The Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) kits, (Malaria Test Strips), 135 boxes, - meant for 2,400 adult patients from Palenga Health Centre II; and.(ii) 43 boxes of Coartem drugs meant for 1,290 adult patients.Over the last two weeks, similar cases happened in Kitgum District, where two health centre IIs were broken into. Padre Health Centre II was broken into and a microscope and anti-malarial drugs were taken. In Amuru District, two health centre IIs were also broken into and unspecified drugs were stolen. In the last four weeks, in Kaladima Health Centre II in Amuru District; solar panels, drugs, computers and TV screens were stolen. In addition, at Otwee Health Centre II in Amuru District; a TV screen, and a computer were vandalised in an attempted of theft.In the same period, at Atiak Health Centre IV , and in the same district, the fence of the health facility was destroyed in an attempt to break in.In the month of April, there were break-ins at the following facilities in Omoro District: (i) Abwoch Health Centre II in Ongako Subcounty and Koro Abili Health Centre II in Koro Subcounty, on 24 April 2023;(ii) Patuda Health Centre II in Abuga Subcounty on 3 April 2023;  (iii) Lela-Obaro Health Centre II in Bobi Subcounty on 4 April this year, where 57 boxes of Coartem - adult dose and 37 boxes of children, 86 boxes of RDT for malaria test, 250 doses of I.V Artesunate (60mg) and two solar batteries, among other items. This matter of theft of drugs in the month of April was raised in this House, for the attention of the Minister of Internal Affairs, and the Minister of Health. It is worrying that the cases are becoming more instead. Secondly, after the supply of drugs in February, there was a delay up to June, when the National 10678STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONMedical Store supplied drugs for three cycles at the same time. It was then that these thefts came into play. Her prayers are that;(i) There is an urgent need for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to present a statement on this well-coordinated, organised crime and the action taken so far; and. (ii) That the Minister of Internal Affairs should assess the security deployments by police and sister forces on the ground and re-organise with the focus to include the nature of the crime in their security mapping, especially planning for the security of health facilities, by respective district security committees;.  (iii) That the Minister of Internal Affairs should urgently consider the establishment of police posts in some strategic locations like Palenga Town Council, which does not have a police post nearby, yet it is a fast-growing urban centre; (iv) That the Ministry of Health and respective local governments should review the recruitment of local Askaris , that is, local health facility watchmen, and their deployments. The watchmen of these health facilities, in most cases, have been suspected of either conniving with or being accomplices of these criminals.Mr Speaker, my response is that in Omoro District, on 23 June this year at Palenga Health Centre II, thieves broke into the health facility and stole 86 boxes of Coartem, 43 boxes of Malaria RDT and one box of gloves, all valued at Shs 6,627,000. The security guard was arrested for neglect of duty and to help in investigations. The case file (CRB368/2023) is with Resident State Attorney as investigations continue. On 25 June 2023, at Tegot Health Centre II in Opit Central Ward, Opit Town Council, at an unknown time, thieves broke into the store of the facility and stole drugs; Coartem, Malaria RDT and testing kits for HIV all valued at Shs 9,461,350. Three suspects were arrested. The case file number is (CRB378/2023) and it was taken to the Resident State Attorney for further management. Mr Speaker, on 1 July 2023, at around 1800 hours, a one Mackay Bua, male adult aged 40 years, was intercepted riding a motorcycle belonging to his father, a GISO in Alebtong District. He was also found with an assortment of drugs worth Shs 9,400,000 and charged vide SD REF 17/01/07/2023 at Koro Police Station. It was later revealed that he got the drugs from Janet Abonyo, a nurse attached to Koro Lapinat Health Centre III. Abonyo confessed that she had stolen the drugs from the store and was accordingly charged with stealing drugs vide (CRB394/2023). Mackay Bua was charged with being in possession of stolen drugs. The two suspects appeared in Court in Gulu and are now on remand.In Amuru District, on 14 May 2023, a one Thomas Kinyera, the in-charge of security at Kaladima Health Centre III, reported a store break-in and theft of drugs, a TV screen, a computer and two microscopes, all valued at Shs 10 million. This facility has three security guards, that is, Thomas Kinyera, Ceaser Okee and Richard Otim, who are on the Government payroll. On 13 May, Ceaser Okee who was meant to be on duty, was absent. No medical staff...On 13th May, Ceaser Okee, who was meant to be on duty was absent. No medical staff was present on duty at night nor on standby to respond to emergencies. It was also observed that the security guards are deployed alone, according to the deployment rota. The case file CRB 239/2023 was sent to RSA for further management. [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10679THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023Mr Speaker, on 19 June 2023, a one Morris Barry Okello a security guard at Otwee Health Centre III reported an office break-in and theft of a computer monitor valued at Shs 10 million. Mr Morris Okello locked offices on 18 June 2023 at around 1500hrs, went home and later returned at around 1900hrs for night duty. He left the office premises at around 0300hrs to rest at his home. However, upon returning in the morning at around 0540hrs, he realised that the offices had been broken into and a computer monitor had been stolen. Investigations are on-going.On 9 February this year, a one Angello Oola, a retired teacher and Chairman Atiak Health Centre IV , reported malicious damage to the fence of the health centre and the theft of 15 iron sheets valued at Shs 750,000, by Charles Okoy and Sunday Kidega. The case was registered vide reference No. SD 11/09/02/2023 and CRB 026/2023. The stolen exhibits were recovered and handed over to the health centre management and the two suspects, both the security guards of Atiak Health Centre IV , were arrested. Investigations are still on-going. Mr Speaker, in Gulu District, information was received that some Government drugs had been seen in the drug shops belonging to Vincent Omona. It is alleged that the suspected stolen drugs were from Omel Apem Health Centre III. On searching the residence of Monica Akello by the community members, in the presence of GISO in Omel Subcounty, boxes of drugs labelled “Government of Uganda, not for sale” were recovered. The drug shop was operated by a one Monica Akello, former girlfriend to Vincent Omona and currently, a girlfriend to a one Denis Oketayot who was a porter of the said health facility. The matter was reported to Paicho Police Station and the case file CRB 009/2023 was later transferred to Gulu CPS after which the suspects appeared in court. On 2 July 2023, in Nwoya District, the store at Langol Health Centre II, Koch Goma Subcounty, was broken into and drugs that included 120 boxes of Coartem, 120 boxes of malaria testing kits and one solar battery, were stolen. The incident was reported by a one Okello Wonyima, Ag. DHO Nwoya District and the case file is CRB 381/2023. When the canine section was introduced at the scene, it led to the home of a one Okello Moses. All houses within the homestead were searched. However, no stolen property was recovered. Suspects were arrested, including the in-charge of the facility and the security guard. Honourable colleagues, this was a long question, I request you to be patient because I am about to conclude. On 8 May 2023 at the same health facility; Lagol Health Centre II, at around 2000hrs, as Kabu Kenneth Guffu, the in-charge of the facility, went to the store to pick drugs to serve the patients, he realised that the door to the store was open. At first, he thought that the store could have been mistakenly left open by a one Kibwota Alfred Okot, who doubles as a security guard as well as a store man. On close scrutiny, however, he realised that the store had been broken into and the drugs plus other medical supplies had been stolen. These included 2,475 packets of Artesunate tablets, 70 boxes of rectal Artesunate for children, 40 pieces of IV Artesunate, two cartons of mosquito nets and 50 boxes of examination gloves, among others. The padlock was destroyed and two security guards did not work on that particular day, hence they were arrested and investigations are on-going, and the case file is CRB 380/2023. Mr Speaker, on 1 April, at around midnight, the store of COO-room at the health centre II was broken into by unknown assailants and drugs stolen. It was reported by Faith Akello Lagwang, the case file No. is CRB 201/2023, an enrolled midwife working at the same facility. The stolen items include 30 boxes of ACT, one box of D&T SOLI, 200 pieces of Sayana press, three pieces of aprons, 20 boxes of RDT, four boxes of thermometers, 100 pieces of mosquito nets, one tin of Panadol and 90 boxes of RDT. 10680STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONWhen the police dog was introduced at the scene, it stopped a short distance away from the scene. Investigations are still on-going. The story continues and I know that Members have accessed this on the intranet. So, I would like to submit that the following actions were taken in response to the break-ins of the health facilities and theft of Government stores: (i) Suspects have been apprehended and prosecuted in courts of law. Cases that are still open are still undergoing investigations; (ii) Intelligence has been beefed up and there are rapid response contingencies to deal with theft from health centres; (iii) The district security committees, headed by RDC, LC V , DPC and other stakeholders, have embarked on the massive sensitisation about the vigilance on Government health facilities and Government drugs and in cases where they are found in private clinics, for citizens to report immediately; and(iv) The health facilities are urged to beef up security by employing trained security guards from recognised security companies. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the detailed answers. Honourable colleagues, this is what I told you; that when you do it this way, you get detailed answers that do not leave behind anything. Therefore, I would like to thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Only that on some of these things – you know a girlfriend is not recognised by our laws. (Laughter)  I do not know how you recognise a girlfriend in our laws; that this is a girlfriend. You might find someone having a husband, but she is a girlfriend to someone else, or in future, a relationship fails - you are on the record of the Hansard . Anyhow, I want to thank you very much.Honourable colleagues, most of the business we have today is to be reported upon by the Opposition though it is Government Business, when you go into strict interpretation of the law.Government needs accountability committee reports to be adopted so that it can prepare a Treasury Memorandum, which some of our partners usually demand, before releasing funds and all that. So, we have passed the deadline. Section 53 of the Public Fund and Management Act (PFMA) is very clear; it is six months and we are behind schedule and there has been a lot of pressure. Therefore, the whole of this week had been dedicated to reports from accountability committees. Last night, we left here after 8 p.m., but we finished the whole of COSASE; we sorted it.Today, I want us to finish Public Accounts Committee reports so that on Tuesday, we finish Local Government Accounts Committee. That way, we will know that everything to do with accountability committee reports has been done.Then, Government can present Treasury Memoranda, which again are interrogated by the committees, but when we have enabled the Government to work very well with its partners, who are demanding these reports. However, above all, the Auditor-General raises very critical items, whereupon the Prime Minister cannot take any action until Parliament adopts these reports. So, I am going to allow only 10 more questions. In fact, I will allow a question for one minute, as we have been doing it for oral, from each sub region, so that we spread. We might be having urgent issues from each sub region.Point of procedure, Hon. Komakech and, please, start with the rule.MR KOMAKECH:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter under rule 42.[Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10681THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rule 42?MR KOMAKECH:  Mr Speaker, three months back, in this -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, we are in Prime Ministers’ Time and so, rule 42 does not apply here; only rule 41 applies.MR KOMAKECH:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, I will start with Hon. Kabanda, then Hon. Nsereko - yes, we are handling them at this time. Hon. Kabanda - Buganda has four subregions, and so, Hon. Kabanda is for Greater Mubende - yes, that is how we do it. Then, the Karimojong, please, sort yourselves and get one person - Karamoja is one sub region.  For Lango, I will pick Dr Opio; for Acholi, I pick Hon. Mapinduzi; for West Nile, I pick Hon. Rose Obigah; for Kigezi, I will pick Hon. Kaberuka - I have not picked women. So, for Ankole, I will pick Hon. Kwoyekyenga; for Busoga, I will also pick a lady - let me pick Hon. Nakato. For Tooro, I will pick the woman Member for Kabarole; for Bukedi, I will pick Hon. Kasolo; for West Nile, I will pick Hon. Atima; and for Teso, I will pick Hon. Okwalinga; for Kigezi, I already picked Hon. Kaberuka; and Hon. Chemonges for Sebei. For Bunyoro, I will pick Hon. Aisha - greater Luweero? Greater Luweero is a sub-region. For Karamoja, I will pick Hon. Noman. So, let us be quick, colleagues. If I find space, I will pick more. Let us shoot right away and we get an answer.5.13MR DA VID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on social media, there has been a campaign - I do not know whether it is a campaign against banks, but many people have been complaining that their money is being deducted from their accounts, most especially in Equity and Centenary banks.Government needs to interest itself in this matter because even this morning, there is a lady who was crying that Shs 100 million has already been deducted from her account. So, I am requesting the Government to interest itself in this matter.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, it is true that I have also read the same media reports, people recording themselves in Equity Bank, somebody running up and down and the officers are not bothered. I saw this in the media yesterday. Even this morning, I saw somebody, these Kadamas - she has been out of the country, in the United Arab Emirates; she saved her Shs 100 million in Centenary Bank, but the money was withdrawn by unknown people.So, I am going to inform the Bank of Uganda so that they can investigate these allegations. I believe, Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance will come here with a report for every person in the country.Secondly, I also intend to cause a meeting with some of these banks because - we were also told that under the Parish Development Model, some of our beneficiaries were also defrauded. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  So, Mr Speaker, it is a matter of concern.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we do not need a statement here. You know, some of these things, you only need to take action. I think, the Member has just said that you take note, but that proposal of holding a meeting is a very critical one. It is the Central Bank and there is the Bankers’ Association - you take it up because these are criminal issues and you investigate. Hon. Minister, do you want to add on?   10682STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONGEN.MUHOOZI:  Also, all those with complaints should report their cases to the Police; it helps to follow up.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Nsereko is next.5 .16MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central, Kampala): Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, I request for more time -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just present your issue.Mr NSEREKO:  Thank you. Mr Speaker, it has come to my knowledge that over 7,000 students and children of this country shall miss out on graduation in different institutions of learning. However, the more prominent issue is that about 3000 students from Makerere University, through their Guild President and the guild leadership at large reached out to me with a cry that because most of them had not met their tuition payment obligations, they were denied sitting their exams; these too, will not be graduating. Mr Speaker, these are children of our own; the children of poor farmers, poor traders and officers that served this country and people that earn meagre salary. This House, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, has bailed out a number of people in the business corridors. We can talk about Roko Construction Company Ltd bailout and Bujagali that was bailed out with billions and trillions of money through tax rebates, etcetera. We can also talk about different traders, including those that had invested money in South Sudan and so on. However, none of the poor parents out there who pay their taxes to this country, would not like to see their children reaching the pinnacle of education, that is, graduating with a bachelor’s degree from a university.We know that we all went through the hardships of COVID-19. We all went for bailouts and very many businesses collapsed. I am talking about people that have sold everything to try to take their children to school – and these are thousands of children. What better thing can we do for the girl and boy children other than bailing them out during their most important time of need by investing in their education now? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayer?MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that we, as the Government, should come in with a bailout – what we would call an education rebate – because what happened is that the students’ loans were suspended. These students have tried to pay for themselves in the first and second years, but, probably are failing in the third or fourth year. Our indulgence in this matter will help us to manage the issue of mental health at university; some students want to commit suicide. Why? It is because they are seeing their future, which we promised to secure, coming to a dark end. My prayer, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you come here, is that you engage on this matter. Call the students and their parents, and see how the Government can bail them out by paying off their tuition. In the future, probably, they can pay when they get jobs. Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague, for bringing up this matter. However, I request that he gives me more information so that we can engage National Council for Higher Education and the Ministry of Education and Sports, under my chairwomanship. He can also be present.We can also engage the universities he has talked about - Makerere University and others - so that we can help our children, as the Government. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, on this issue, you projected NTR for these universities and even appropriated it. The students are getting services. I know the hardship, Hon. Nsereko, [The Deputy Speaker]10683THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023but I am afraid of the precedent we would set of saying: “When students fail.” Really?So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, go and study this matter very well. Take your time and look at it with very clear caution. Next year, you will have another Shs 8 billion. 5.20MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Madam Prime Minister, I rise on the issue of the tourism roads around Bwindi and its environs. We are grappling with the question of how we can get money for this country. Bwindi Impenetrable Forest alone is giving us over Shs 600 million per month in tourism revenue. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it is much more than that. MR KABERUKA: Mr Speaker, tourists who are giving us money are stuck on these roads. The people who go to push their cars off these poor roads even steal their properties. His Excellency, the President gave an order in 2017 that these roads be tarmacked. I would like to know: are we for this country? When are we tarmacking these roads to give us the resources to cater for other issues like education and health? I mean Kanyantorogo-Buhoma, Butogota-Ruhija and the road connecting Buhoma to Nkuringo and Nkuringo to Kisoro. We would like to know how it is going to be done and when. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, tourism roads are a priority. Recently, Cabinet discussed this and the President gave a directive that he needs the roads you are talking about – Nkuringo in Bukimbiri, which is your constituency and the ones in these other constituencies in northern Uganda.Honourable colleagues, it is a matter of us getting the money so we can work on these roads in a phased manner. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Member rose_)  No, under Prime Minister’s Time, the rules do not allow that. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the list you recently released, of the roads to be made - can I have the attention of the Prime Minister? Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the list you released recently – the one which caused more problems -(Laughter)5.23MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter concerning the payment for tobacco farmers in West Nile. Mr Speaker, you wrote a letter requesting the Prime Minister to act on the directive of His Excellency, which was issued in a meeting that was held in State House, Entebbe on 27 May 2022. In that letter, you requested the Prime Minister to act on the same; I mean to pay tobacco farmers in West Nile, the same way the ones of Bunyoro region were paid. Mr Speaker, two weeks ago, you received a petition from the farmers in West Nile over the same payment. The year 2023 is ending. Since the Financial Year 2022/2023, this Parliament has been appropriating funds to compensate everything. My concern is: when is the Prime Minister planning to act on the President’s directive and your reminder to pay the tobacco farmers in West Nile? (Applause)Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I referred the petition to the minister and gave him 30 days to respond. However, the Prime Minister might be having some information for now. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we had a meeting recently - I cannot remember the date - with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. We agreed to dispatch teams to West Nile and verify the list submitted to the ministry. After that verification exercise, we shall have a payment schedule and clear those farmers. 10684STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONHowever, I would like Members to note that this tobacco was taken by companies, not by the Government. Therefore, the Government is helping so that its people can live in harmony because some of those companies are no longer working in Uganda. The Government will then look for a way of getting payment from those licensed tobacco companies.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to avoid Members continuing to raise this issue here, you should instruct the trade minister to invite the MPs from West Nile for a meeting and he updates them, so that they are also able to update their people. Yes, Hon. Noman Ochero.5.27MR NOMAN OCHERO (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As much as it is well known that Karamoja has a lot of problems, today, I have specifically risen up on the matter of the problematic animals. This year, the weather is extremely bad in Karamoja. As we talk, people have started experiencing hunger and they have started to move out of Karamoja  in search of survival. There are small swampy areas that got some bit of rain and some gardens survived, however, it is as if the elephants in the park are also experiencing famine. They have now descended on the few surviving gardens.  Mr Speaker, these are the gardens people will survive on for this financial year. These are the gardens from where people get produce to sell to pay fees for their children. However, the elephants have descended and cleared most of them. In the last two weeks, 200 elephants settled in Abim District and cleared all the gardens.My prayers are: one, there is a provision for compensation for the losses. However, the only threat with the compensation is that when they do assessment in the current financial year, one is compensated the next financial year. I would like to ask: What will they eat this financial year? What will they sell to pay school fees this financial year? Two, there should be a provision for fencing. Some of these demarcations are known. The Government should fence off these corridors. Three, the elephants should be – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let me remind you. Hon. Noman, please wait a bit. I made an announcement that there is no more walking to the Chair of the Speaker. Access the Speaker via writing, apart from the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and the Government Chief Whip. This helps us have your attention. Please, write to me; it will be very easy. MR OCHERO: I said compensation should be done as soon as possible. The other is driving the elephants out - at least, there should be an operation to safely drive them back to the field. Additionally, there should be a possibility of fencing off this corridor. Thank you, Mr Speaker. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I request that you allow me get more information from my brother. He is asking what his people will eat - the Office of the Prime Minister has always helped. Therefore, we shall see how to survive with your people because the Office of the Prime Minister is here, headed by an able Prime Minister. On the elephants, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is going to be directed to immediately drive those elephants back to the national park so that our people – Mr Speaker, the President has been with all the leaders from the Karamoja subregion at Kaweweta. They have been undergoing some training at Kaweweta for almost a month. I was part of those people who were there with those leaders, and we have assurances as far as “Feed Karamoja” is concerned. Mr Speaker, the President directed that the budget we have, under the ministry for Karamoja affairs, should focus on providing support that can be sustainable. That we should go away from the iron sheets and other things, but focus on dams so that we can collect water, [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10685THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023desilt the dams, and have model farmers among those leaders and other people. We should help them come up with viable projects and fast-growing crops so that we can feed our people other than all the time helping our people. We are doing something. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am glad that this has been considered. Hon. Aisa and then Hon. Nakato. 5.32MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are some people whose gardens were destroyed by the team that came to erect electric poles for the transmission lines, and they were compensated. However, only a few of them were compensated - many have not been compensated. What programme does Government have?  There are some contractors who get contracts, but at the end of the day, they do not fulfil their promise. For example, in the area of Kyedikyo, the contractor erected electricity poles, but there are no lines. I heard that the contractor left. Therefore, what programme does Government have, for contractors who just spend people’s money? How is the Government prepared to treat those contractors so that people can benefit from their money? Thank you, Mr Speaker. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, what I know – because that place in my constituency - yesterday, we had a meeting with the officials from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the minister on the same. Otherwise, it is not only Kyedikyo where she comes from, but in other constituencies as well. In Bugangaizi South County and Bugangaizi West County, poles were erected, but we do not have transformers there. In areas like Kyedikyo, they did not even put the wires.  Like the other question that was asked by a Member from Kassanda, that project had issues of money. But yesterday, we had a meeting and agreed that they are going to send officials to verify and have other contractors go on site. On the payment and compensation of where these poles passed - some crops of our people were destroyed, however, some were paid, but the only unfortunate thing I found out yesterday is that they were paying some people through mobile money yet, some of our people have phones, which are not in their names. What I have observed is that the officials in the ministry do not bother and hence, they did not tell people the need to have a phone in their name. Only those that had phones in their names were paid. We agreed that these people will be assisted to get - and the people who do not have phones in their names are those without an Identity card (ID). They sometimes use their wives’, children and neighbour’s lines, but they have the phones. We agreed that we should assist them since the ministry cannot pay; if you are Nabbanja, you either have a phone or they come and pay by cash through Post Bank. Thank you. 5.36MS MARY NAKATO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a result of heavy traffic congestion and the economic activities, the Government earlier earmarked to work on Jinja-Kampala Express Highway. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I beg to know how far this project has reached. I come from Buyende - I would like to know how far the Bukungu-Kamuli Road has reached. Lastly, and with due respect, I have heard about 300 families that were affected by the natural catastrophe about three months ago. As a Member of Parliament, I managed to get some food, but they are disgruntled as far as iron sheets are concerned. My prayer is, can I receive your quick intervention urgently? Thank you. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I think some Members are wondering where I get all this information. It is not good to blow your own trumpet, but the fact is, I am always on duty. 10686STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are doing well. (Applause)  MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, we have a project or programme in the Office of the Prime Minister and Busoga is under Luwero-Rwenzori. We have over 19,000 iron sheets. I request the Member to write through the Ministry of Luwero Triangle and we shall give you iron sheets under Busoga. (Applause)  On the issue of the Kampala-Jinja Highway, it is a priority road. I may not have up to date information, as of now, but the feasibility study and designs are complete. We are just looking for money to start on the civil works because I believe even the contractors are being earmarked in order for us to decongest that road. The other one is the Bukungu-Kamuli road. The Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, Alitwala Kadaga, in February this year, during a Cabinet meeting, requested the President to prioritise that road. The President directed me to chair a Cabinet subcommittee together with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Works and Transport so that, that road can also be prioritised. We have got a pre-financing arrangement and we shall have that road worked on before the year 2025. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Right honourable, on that road, it should be Jinja-Mbulamuti-Bikungu because the other side will go to Buyende. They should ensure they reach Jinja. On the Kampala-Jinja Expressway, when you talk of financing I get concerned. The 10th Parliament passed a loan of US$ 600 million. I remember this very well and we have never reported here that it did not materialise. It was an African Development Bank (ADB), European Union loan because that road was earmarked to be under Public-Private Partnership (PPP). To reduce on the cost of the road, they said we do a PPP. If it is between $ 1 billion and $ 1.2 billion then we should be able - Donors said we should cover part of the money so that the concessionaire does not charge a lot of money to collect it over time. Procurement went on very well and they reached a stage of financials. The President released a letter where he was saying one of the participants in the process should be removed; that is CCC. You had contracted International Finance Corporation (IFC) of the World Bank to do all this work. The IFC got stuck and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) was on the ground to remove CCC. Since then, we have been stuck.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can we sort out the issue of procurement because the money is available, but also because of the PPP? We are paying interest on undisbursed loans from ADB for over three years. I request that you push your Minister of Works and Transport to expedite this issue so that we can have it sorted quickly. Hon. Okwalinga -5.41MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister relates to the issue of the Government policy on fighting corruption. Some time back, Government adopted a policy of zero tolerance to corruption. Even in the yearly reports from the Inspectorate of Government (IGG), it is clearly indicated. From the time that the current IGG came to office, she seems to have deviated from zero tolerance to tolerating corruption. Why am I saying so? They investigated a case in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries which amounted to Shs 9 billion. The culprits confessed and the IGG entered a contract with the corrupt and gave them a period of three years to pay back the money while remaining in the same offices where they stole the money. The same thing happened in Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) and the IGG, without shame, went to the Media Centre and addressed the public saying, “We are moving forward PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10687THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023in fighting corruption; we have just entered a contract with these people and we are going to recover this amount of money.”Since when did the Government policy of zero tolerance change to tolerating corruption by you signing a contract of recovery yet there are people who are languishing in Luzira Prison who have stolen just Shs 10 million from the local government? Can the Prime Minister make it clear: when did the Government deviate from zero tolerance of corruption to tolerating corruption and keeping those same people in the same offices? MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the IGG has used the pre-bargaining clause in the law and I think they are aiming at recovering money so that it can be put back to good use. Where I have a problem is when they leave those people in the office. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  To steal money to pay. (Laughter) MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, this has opened my eyes and I promise that we shall have those IGG officials, under Hon. Beti Kamya, to explain because I believe they are not above the law and action will be taken on those people. If you have stolen money and you have confessed saying, “It is true I have taken this much” and you enter an agreement and they leave you in the office then you can steal even more under camouflage. I think the Member has a point.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Take it up otherwise people will remain in office to steal money to use to repay. Hon. Kasolo?5.45MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries got some money to buy fertilisers for the rice-growing districts of eastern and Northern Uganda and the ministry has embarked on the exercise. Mr Speaker, it is to our surprise and dismay that the districts famously known for rice growing, especially in North Bukedi and others like Budaka, Pallisa, Kibuku and Butebo were not considered. The people are complaining. We want to know, as area leaders, what the criteria were. Can you reconsider the decision so that those districts also benefit from those fertilizers? Those are my simple prayers. Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I request the Member to put the question in writing so that I can get an authentic answer. What I know is that Bukedi Subregion is swampy and they grow rice in swamps. I believe these fertilizers have some chemicals and the swamps are a breeding area for fish. We can engage the ministry to make a follow up; that is why I have asked the Member to put it in writing.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You can consider it for next Thursday under questions for written response. Thank you. Hon. Koyekyenga. Colleagues, we are picking one Member per subregion. 5.47MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to the Prime Minister’s attention - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the honourable member is asking you. MS KOYEKYENGA:  I have an urgent issue. Nyakambu Bridge has been swept away by heavy rains. This bridge is between Kashari and Sheema and that is where I pass while going to Buhweju. Mr Speaker, you are familiar with Bwizibwera-Nyakambu-Nsika-Burere-Nyakabirizi Road and it is one of the roads that were earmarked for tarmacking. I would like to know the status of those roads as far as working on them is concerned. That road has been a presidential 10688STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONpledge since I came to Parliament. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister -MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the President gave a directive to the Cabinet and colleague members of the Cabinet can bear me witness. He said, “Money must be got to ensure that, that road is worked on. It is a hard-to-reach area. ” There was a time I attended Women’s Day celebrations in Buhweju. It rained and the road was cut off. I had to be airlifted and my vehicle spent a week in Buhweju because the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), under the Ministry of Works and Transport, was still working on the road because of landslide debris.The President and everybody in the Cabinet are aware that Nsika-Nyakambu-Buhweju is a priority road and the procurement process has started with UNRA. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Two weeks after the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s visit, I also visited Hon. Ephraim Biraaro for a function and they managed to push my car out after a big struggle. They said, the Prime Minister has left and she said that the road is going to be worked on. I am glad you are following it up. Colleagues, there are no follow-up questions. Let all of them be handled. Hon. Kagwera for Tooro.5.51MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is that in 2011, His Excellency the President promised the people of Tooro an upgrade of the Fort Portal-Kijura-Katoke Road from murram to tarmac. This road measures 80.3 kilometres. This area has several tea estates and factories like Tamteco Tea Company -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oguzu Lee, my brother, I request that whenever you have an issue, please, go to the presiding officer. MR KAGWERA: Mr Speaker, I asked the Prime Minister whether she is aware that in 2011, the President of Uganda promised the people of Tooro that Fort Portal-Kijura-Katoke road was to be upgraded from murram to tarmac. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, you have diverted the attention of the Prime Minister and yet they are asking her a question. MR KAGWERA:  Should I repeat it? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, please, so that the Prime Minister can -MR KAGWERA:  Mr Speaker, I am talking about the promise that the President of Uganda made in 2011 where he promised the people of Tooro to tarmac Fort Portal-Kijura-Katoke Road measuring up to 80.3 kilometres. This area has a number of tea factories like Tamteco in Kijura, Rusekere and Mwenge. There are also many dairy farms in that area, but if we are to count years in dozens, this is a dozen years -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayer -MR KAGWERA:  My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that the Government prioritises this road as a matter of urgency in the next financial year.Additionally, currently the road is impassable. I pray that UNRA works on it in the meantime, as we wait for the tarmac. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister -MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, it is true that, that road will be tarmacked. However, I would like Members to note that the President has made progress in terms of tarmacking roads in that area. We have a road from Kagadi through [Ms Koyekyenga] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10689THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023Katoke to Kyenjojo. There is a road that has just been worked on from Kyenjojo to Fort Portal that connects Ibanda District, Kamwenge up to Fort Portal.The President wanted us to first get an idea of all the roads connecting to the neighbouring countries for business, tourism and security. I cannot promise much, but I would like to request that you allow me to prevail over UNRA to construct that road so that it is in motorable state. I have not heard about it from the Cabinet. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is being honest, thank you. Hon. Nyongore then Hon. Mapenduzi. 5.55MR ENOCK NYONGORE (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can you protect me? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, let us respect our colleague. MR NYONGORE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you visited us and observed the state that Ngoma Health Centre IV is in. My concern is that by standard, it should offer services like inpatients, blood transfusion and imaging. However, because we do not have where to house these services, we cannot offer them. My question is, when shall we have infrastructural upgrading of Ngoma Health Centre IV?MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I have been to Ngoma Health Centre IV . Before I became a Prime Minister, I was a Minister of Health and I went to Ngoma. I know the infrastructure at that facility and they offer all the services that a health centre IV is supposed to offer. It is true that they need to upgrade or have storied structures, but as of now, they are handling surgical operations. They have a doctor - In fact, they have two doctors and midwives. They have everything –(Interjection) -  I am telling you. That health facility, apart from a few things, is one of the health centre IVs that offers one of the best services in this country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Therefore, the Member needs more support for infrastructure. I think that is his major focus. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I do not want to promise things that will not be done tomorrow. I have been to that health facility together with Hon. Sarah Najjuma. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Very good.5.58MR MAPENDUZI OJARA (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Between July and August 2023, the Uganda National Oil Company Limited invited applications for undergraduate scholarship programmes for students who had obtained admission from a number of universities. According to this company, this was part of the initiative to support the oil districts. The idea was that this would be in the interest of promoting national participation. However, Mr Speaker, the call to this application was restricted to the districts of Hoima, Masindi and Buliisa. I do not have a problem with those districts benefiting, but Mr Speaker, you are aware that Nwoya District is one of the oil districts and it is actually considered the district with the largest deposit of oil and gas. Nwoya has three known oil wells and those are Lyec, Jobi and Jobi East. Unfortunately, Nwoya District has never been considered in any of the programmes as far as support to oil districts is concerned. Mr Speaker, it is, therefore, my prayer that the Prime Minister calls UNOC to order so that they begin to treat all the oil districts equally. The question of equity is key. Secondly, I think there is need for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to have discussions with leaders from the oil districts and that should include Nwoya and any other district that is involved in oil and gas. Thank you very much. 10690STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONMS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, it is true that we have had several meetings with UNOC. However, we have not gone into detail to understand which districts are benefitting from what. We thought that we would prepare our people to benefit from the developments, markets and products required by the oil companies. That is where we concentrated and I did not see my brother come to that meeting. We have had a number but let me request the minister, Hon. Okasai, since you are here - Come and help.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  As Hon. Okasai comes, when I was on the Committee on Natural Resources in the 10th Parliament, we grappled with this issue of Nwoya being suffocated. The central processing facility, refinery, airport, city, roads, pipelines, - Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am sure you are going to take it up seriously. The MPs from that area are saying, “You are sucking oil from our side. Ours is for sucking and then, you take all developments to the other side when the main sucking is on our side”. All they are asking for is fairness.Secondly, there are very many programmes that have been given to one side. For example, when we sat in Parliament and passed over $ 600 million for oil roads - and more is coming - those loans are going to be paid for by all Ugandans. Therefore, if you have a loan scheme, you can say 70 per cent will go to the oil-producing areas and the 30 per cent will go to other marginalised parts of Uganda and all Ugandans will feel that the oil is for all of us. However, the programmes for welding - All of them are exclusive to the oil areas and yet taxpayers’ money from other parts of the country is being used. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want to interest you in that matter. 6.03THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY)  (Mr Sidronius Okasai):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister. First of all, equity, especially in development, is a policy of the Government. Secondly, we have a local content policy. I am glad that he is raising these issues because that project is not ending today. Development in Nwoya is actually ongoing. For example, we know that Nwoya is basically an agricultural district and it is actually benefiting from the construction of an agricultural institution to enable the scaling up of development in Nwoya. In addition, we are planning similar infrastructure development in Nwoya at the time when the oil is actually coming out. Drilling has started in those areas where the roads are, to enable the oil to come out and I know that in Nwoya, the drilling is likely to start close to the Nile. The infrastructure will follow. It is not too late for us to engage the leadership in Nwoya. We have gone to Nwoya headquarters and we had a discussion with them and we promise that the discussion will bear fruit, just like it has been in other areas.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, Nwoya also wants oil engineers. You cannot reach Nwoya and then say, it is not too late. It is late. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, take up this matter. UNOC gets money from here and if we are to add UNOC money, go and consider Nwoya. (Applause)MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I request that you allow me to invite UNOC together with the leadership of Nwoya District or Acholi Parliamentary Group to discuss this matter and have these issues settled. I promise. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Take it up, thank you. 6.06DR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my issue is about the high cost of road construction in this country. I have done an analysis of 12 roads that are under construction in Uganda, 19 roads in Kenya and 27 roads that are under construction in Tanzania. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME10691THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023To construct a kilometre of tarmac road in Tanzania, it costs Shs 2.1 billion, in Kenya it costs Shs 1.6 billion and in Uganda, it costs Shs 4.1 billion. In other words, it is twice as expensive to construct a road in Uganda than in Kenya and Tanzania. It also means that the same money we are using right now, Uganda can get twice. We are constructing about 900 kilometres of roads and it means that we can construct an extra 900 kilometres of roads. That means every subregion in this country can get 40 kilometres of tarmac roads. The Ministry of Works and Transport, in their Financial Year 2021/2022 Budget Framework Paper, said that by the end of the Financial Year 2023/2024, they would have ensured a reduction in the cost of road construction to Shs 2.7 billion. However, we are at Shs 4.1 billion. We are aware that in Lango Subregion, we are among the most marginalised. Yeri Corner-Aboke road is 55 kilometres, Dokolo-Ochero-Namasale road is 88 kilometres and Lira-Aloi-Kotido-Abim road is 120 kilometres. These are presidential pledges that are being recycled for the third time without fulfilment. I would like a statement on that. Secondly, although the Ministry of Works and Transport committed that by end of this year, they would have reduced road construction costs to Shs 2.7 billion, that has not been achieved. My prayer is that the Committee on Physical Infrastructure inquires into the high cost. I have all the data that has been analysed, more than 40 V otes for that –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you cannot ask the Prime Minister for that; you know the forum to ask. Let the Prime Minister answer the other part. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I remember when you were still the Government Chief Whip. In a meeting which I chaired, you asked the same question in the Financial Year 2021/2022. We have a problem with the land law, which we must amend if we are to go by the rates of Tanzania and Kenya. The Government of Kenya owns the land and they do not need to compensate people. The cost of compensation is higher than the cost of roads in Uganda. Honourable members, we are lucky to have President Museveni who is very many years ahead of us. He organised a caucus in 2022 and wanted to bring this matter to an end. You know the issues we have gone through. We were at Kololo Independence Grounds and everybody said, “No, the land law cannot be touched.” Therefore, we shall continue to grapple with the issue of compensation. Secondly, the law does not allow the Ministry of Works and Transport to continue with any work until they have compensated the affected people. We need to put our feet down and have that law amended without fear so that we can have our roads worked on at a low cost. (Applause)Regarding Namasale road, he is aware that there is a contractor on site. Are you not aware? The contractor is on Namasale road and I am told that, that road is now at 30 per cent. (Interjection)  Honourable colleagues, I will find out from UNRA and give you an appropriate answer. That is why I usually ask, Mr Speaker, that questions which require concrete answers should be brought through the Clerk. I request my team from the Leader of Government Business to capture the question of Namasale road and I will come back with a concrete answer. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on Thursdays, your ministers should be here to support you. They should not abandon the Prime Minister. I appreciate the ones who are here. (Applause)Regarding the question of Hon. Opio, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know you are going to push them harder to look at it and he has requested the committee to look at it. This question goes beyond compensation. For example, donor funded projects are paid by the Government of Uganda because donors do not pay financing. 10692STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONIf you look at the road from Eldoret-Kitale-Suam being done by China State and another one from Suam to Kapchorwa also being done by the same company, the terrain there might be a bit different, but you find that the cost by the same contractor without compensation triples. The contractors constructing the roads in Uganda are the same people in Tanzania and Kenya and the Ugandan terrain is sometimes better than that in our neighbouring countries. The issue is corruption and where is the corruption?  (Applause)Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it will be difficult for you to deal with corruption because they make projections, which are high and pass them over to the contractors. You now subject them to competition when the contractors know that our projections are already set high. Therefore, when they are set high, these contractors will bid within that high range because they have been told, “Aim at being the second or third, we will fight for you and you will get it.” Hon. Byanyima has been handling these matters for long. Can he first say something and then you answer at once? Thank you.6.14MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This question has been puzzling all of us. When we put it to the Ministry of Works and Transport, they said they had consulted and they were coming up with the results. We have been inviting them to the committee to tell us the results, but there is no answer. There is a road in Addis Ababa; Adama Expressway, the same as Entebbe Expressway and it is four times better. Yes, almost the same terrain, you can go there and visit. In Uganda, contractors have formed cartels, like you put it. A contractor says, “You put in.” They pay the money, but eventually, the other person takes the lead. We have not been serious about the cost per unit here in Uganda and corruption has been the main pre-occupation. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not only on roads. Look at Karuma Dam of 600 megawatts, which cost $ 1.6 billion compared to the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam of Ethiopia producing 6,000 megawatts which cost $ 4 billion. Besides that, the cost of a narrow road in Kampala is four times the cost of a road in Masaka or Mbarara, without compensation. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is much deeper.MS NABBANJA: Honourable  members, everybody is aware that there are a number of factors that affect the cost of a kilometre of road. I will give you an example of Entebbe Express Highway and Entebbe International Airport. The President directed me – remember we were testing COVID-19 in one of the facilities. Now we are completing Entebbe Airport using our army brigade at a cost of only Shs 15 billion and yet China Communication Construction Company (CCCC) wanted to complete that work at Shs 36 billion. The President has been asking us and Parliament; can’t we build our own capacity? Because most of our local contractors do not have money, they simply borrow and the cost of our roads construction pays the interest to the banks and yet these banks are very expensive. We end up paying almost three times as much. For example in Financial Year 2021/2022, they said that Hon. Nabbanja, together with the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, were struggling for Shs 5 billion. Do you remember that circus? The Prime Minister’s Office contracted the army brigade and out of Shs 5 billion, we were able to buy 200 acres of land in Kayunga - Mama  is there. We were able to construct a primary school at Shs 680 million- The contractor wanted to construct it at Shs 1.4 billion, but we constructed it at Shs 669 million. I will bring a report here for you to appreciate. Using the same Shs 5 billion, we were also able to construct a health facility called at Rwampanga at Shs 1.05 billion. One submerged and we had to replace it. We also constructed PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Deputy Speaker]10693THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023Butiaba Health Centre III, which submerged in Buliisa, using Shs 800 something million. Still on that Shs 5 billion, we constructed in Rwangara, Ntoroko District. That money was supposed to buy jerry cans, bed nets, cups - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you even bought land for Kasese - MS NABBANJA: Yes, Kasese and we were also constructing and upgrading Rukoki Health Centre IV in Kasese. That money was also supposed to be used to replace the already flooded area of - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Nyamwamba. MS NABBANJA: No, Nyamwamba flooded through Kilembe Hospital and there was a rift because they said that Government money could not go to a Private-not-for-profit (PNFP) facility. Members, if we can build capacity with the Army Brigade and our local contractors, I am telling you the sky will be the limit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have our support, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. MS NABBANJA: So, out of Shs 5 billion, they said that Hon. Nabbanja had eaten - I did not know how the money went to the Army Brigade. I have never seen it, but they were here castigating me. 6.20MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sironko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for being so passionate about issues of the Elgon Region, that is Sebei and Bugisu.However, for some time, you have kept quiet, but there are so many killings going on because of the boundary issue that has - I do not know what to say - maybe it has failed to be resolved - but the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) team is continuously extorting money from our people. Unfortunately, UWA guards are brought in for three months, they have an agreement with our people and after the three months, another lot is brought in. Just like Pharaoh who did not know the Israelites, they start fighting and our people are being killed and their crops cut down. We are wondering: Mama , did you lose the passion that you had for us, the people of Elgon region? Should we get used to deaths and our food being destroyed? Our people have gone silent and sometimes it is better for people to speak out than go silent because you can never know what they are thinking. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, kindly speak to us so that I can take back the information. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Prime Minister, the Member has finished - (Laughter) - so, you better respond. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Hon. Nambozo is aware that we had a meeting and a technical aerial survey in that region to ascertain the boundaries between our people and UWA, which was concluded in January/February. Under the Office of the Prime Minister, the President directed me, in the presence of everybody, to make sure that those people who are in the dangerous enclaves of Mount Elgon are relocated. We are ready with the compensation list and we are supposed to start paying these people. Remember the money that I talked about on the Floor of this House; Shs 10 million and another NGO from USA, which has already paid Shs 7 million to relocate 5,700 homesteads, whether they are in the boundary of UWA or outside the boundary, but in the dangerous enclaves. There are people who are hanging about in that part of the country and we are supposed to relocate them to avoid a reoccurrence of people being buried by landslides. Mr Speaker, we were supposed to have started payment of those people last week, but the politics - Because we agreed in this House that once somebody is paid, that person should 10694STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONrelocate, but the politics down there is that they pay you and you do not go. The Members of Parliament should also help us to educate their people because it is for their own good.The President agreed with us - Remember when we came here under the chairpersonship of the Speaker and they asked, “Is that money enough?” The Office of the Prime Minister has land in Bunamutye and we said, we can give these people money and at least two acres of land in Bunamutye to relocate and save their lives other than them staying there and they are buried alive and every time, Government is struggling to rescue them. We agreed with the leaders and Mama , I request that once we bring these consent forms, let people accept to relocate. After all, they have been dying there and this is to save their lives. I request for your support, as Members of Parliament. Thank you. STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK OF 24-26 OCTOBER, 2023, PURSUANT TO RULE 28 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE6.25THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, allow me to submit the following business for the succeeding week of 24 - 26 October 2023 under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure. 1. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will present a statement on the commemoration of the World Food Day.2. The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will present a statement on the rising fuel prices in the country. 3. The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will present a statement on the status of oil and gas projects in the country. 4.  The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will also come here next week to present an action-taken report on the following:i)  The Auditor-General’s special audit report on Namanve Thermal Power Plant for the year ended 30 June 2021.ii)  The erratic electricity supply in West Nile. iii)  A report on the Bujagali tax waiver.iv)  The emergency total shutdown of Isimba Hydropower Plant – remember this has been pending. v)  Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Environment and Natural Resource Sector for the Financial Year 2023/2024.Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Next item. MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SPORTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, these are reports under accountability committees. We have the reports ready and I invoke Rule 204(8) of the Rules of Procedure, which allows any Member to present a report of the committee as long as he is a member of that committee. I have two Members who have consulted with the Chairperson and I have allowed them. Therefore, Hon. Amos and Hon. Angura will, alternately, table the reports. So, Hon. Amos - (Applause)Honourable member, summarise as we have this report. The Hansard  team will capture the report verbatim.[Ms Nabbanja] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10695THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 20236.28MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to submit to the House the minutes of the meeting and evidence that has been adduced before the committee as well as the attendant documents which are hereto attached. Mr Speaker, pursuant to Rule 174 of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) received the report of the Auditor-General on the National Council of Sports on 19 January 2023. This report has already been uploaded onto our system; it is on our iPads.Allow me to pick some key issues, which are important and highlight them to Members. 3.4. Transfers to sports federations not properly accounted for Mr Speaker, the National Council of Sports is mandated, under the section of the law, which we are all aware about. Money was transferred to their account and the Auditor-General noted that the council transferred Shs 270,040,950 to Uganda Netball and Uganda Boxing Federations, which remained unaccounted for. Uganda Netball Federation failed to account for Shs 139,347,810. The Auditor-General noted that a review of the invitation letter indicates that the Netball Federation was supposed to go to Namibia and the invitation was not matching with the accountability. The committee observes that there was total mistrust between the National Council of Sports and Uganda Netball Federation. The committee also observed contradictions in the submissions by the President of Uganda Netball Federation.The committee, therefore, made recommenda -tions that:(i) The National Council of Sports develops a Memorandum of Understanding with all registered sports federations and have the grounds on which public funds will be dispersed to them clearly stipulated.(ii) Any sports federation that fails to give accountability should not receive further funding until accountability is provided.(iii) The Auditor-General carries out a special audit of all sports federations that have received money from National Council of Sports in the last three years with a view of establishing whether the funds disbursed to them by Parliament were legally available and applicable to the service or purpose to which they have been applied or charged.(iv) Uganda Netball Federation and Uganda Boxing Federation be held accountable for the unaccounted for funds and be made to refund the money within six months of the adoption of this report.(v) The Police, through Interpol, investigates the authenticity, or otherwise, of the accountability documents from Namibia and prosecute those responsible for:a) Forgeryb) Authoring false documentsc) Conspiracy to commit felonyd) Abuse of officee) Embezzlementf) Any other offences that, in the opinion of the Director of Public Prosecutions, may be sustained. (vi) The respective assemblies of the federations in issue cause the disbandment of the respective leaderships as a condition for accessing public funds.(vii) The National Council of Sports should develop a model constitution with proper governance and leadership structures for federations that may want to access public funds.Mr Speaker, those are the key areas which the committee found out in terms of accountability. The rest are policy in nature. 10696STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONMr Speaker, it is my prayer that the House adopts the report and the recommendations of the committee therein. I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPREAKER:  Thank you. I will allow three Members. Let us have Hon. Mushemeza, Hon. Kasolo and Hon. Bashiisha.6.35PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Inde -pendent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the com -mittee for this report.Parliament has been passionate in supporting sports. Look at the law, the appropriations, the motions and resolutions we have passed in this House to appreciate our sportsmen and women. It is therefore unacceptable for sports federations to misuse the money we give them. The recommendation you are proposing is that the National Council of Sports should have a Memorandum of Understanding with federations. Mr Speaker, I do not think we need this. We gave enough power to the NCS in the law –  (Applause)  – so, NCS should come up with guidelines for accountability. A Memorandum of Understanding is as if you are bargaining. There should be no bargaining because the powers we gave the National Council of Sports are adequate.I would like to propose an amendment; instead of a MoU, the NCS should draft guidelines to help federations account for public funds. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you agree with that recommendation? HONOURABLE MEMBERS:  Yes. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us pick the opinion and clean it up in the Hansard .6.37MS JULIET  BASHIISHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about hygiene in Lugogo. I am a regular visitor at the National Council of Sports offices and the sports ground. However, the hygiene there is highly wanting. The trenches are open and a danger to –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bashiisha, we are on the Auditor-General’s report. These are sectoral committee issues so they cannot fit within the recommendations. I had picked Hon. Kasolo. We have many reports - I am stopping on this. You will contribute to the next report.6.38MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the idea of Prof. Mushemeza on the National Council of Sports drafting regulations and not singing Memoranda of Understanding.The Uganda Netball Federation has been doing very well. It has done wonders for Uganda and we have seen them excel.There are issues that have been raised in the report; that they spent money erroneously and so forth. However, to my recollection, this matter went to the Inspector General of Government (IGG) and I believe IGG exonerated this leadership. The committee is now recommending other actions –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, we are processing the report of the Auditor-General. A committee of Parliament does not forgive people who have done wrong. If you have not sorted out your issues with the Auditor-General then through the treasury memoranda, the minister can report that the IGG looked through and cleared it. However, audits are totally different from investigations.MR KASOLO: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I  believe that it will bring a contradiction in the way we operate as Parliament with the IGG. Thank you.[Mr Okot] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10697THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are processing the Auditor-General’s report under Section 53 of the Public Finance and Management Act so we cannot mix it with the IGG reports.I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Auditor-General’s report on the National Council of Sports for the year ended 30 June 2022 be adopted with amendments.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted with amendments.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE JUSTICE, LAW AND ORDER SECTOR FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 20226.41MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Article 163(4) of the Constitution mandates the Auditor-General to submit to Parliament an annual report of the accounts audited by him or her for the financial year immediately preceding. I will go straight to the scope. The report covers audit queries contained in the report of the Auditor-General for the period ended 30 June 2022 in respect to the Justice, Law and Order Sector and in particular, focusing on the Judiciary, Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prison Service, the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. However, in this report, I will only cover three queries because the other two were received in the earlier report.For purposes of appreciating this report, you are aware that the general sector has made a concerted joint effort in trying to dispose of matters that are related. The committee came up with a few general observations and recommendations. I will go to the independent units therein; just one or two which are general and covering all of them. The committee noted that access to justice is still hampered by slow disposal of cases. This is despite several interventions by the Government and development partners in improving access to justice for all Ugandans. The major players in the justice sector, that is, the Judiciary, the Office of the DPP and the Uganda Police are still grappling with increased case backlogs. I would like to highlight some observations that the committee realised while interfacing with these institutions: The average case disposal rate in the Judiciary was at 41 per cent, but varied significantly across different courts. Overall, the lower courts had higher disposal rates than the higher courts. The committee observed that there have been persistent delays in the criminal justice processes, notably, investigations, prosecutions and adjudications. The committee calls for additional reforms, as a matter of concern, in criminal justice processes and the expansion of measures already undertaken by the Government. The committee further noted that the modern electronic case management systems that were introduced to enhance delivery of justice have not been fully operationalised - I am skipping, I am not going through everything, but trying to pick some of the key content. The committee welcomes the introduction of strategies and mechanisms for timely and efficient disposal of cases. Another very serious concern that the committee observed as cross cutting was the issue of domestic arrears. Domestic arrears range from different entities, but the committee noted that inadequate budget provisions and the lack of litigation risk management by some of the MDAs are the major reasons for the escalating domestic arrears. The committee noted the delayed settlement of court awards due to inadequate budget 10698STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONprovisions, despite continuous pleas to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for more budget allocations for settling outstanding awards. The committee further noted arbitration and preferential treatment in settlement of certain court awards and compensation pointing to possible collusion. You are aware that this report is uploaded so, you can follow up on the other details at your convenience. The committee came up with the following recommendations: 1. The committee reiterates previous resolutions of Parliament that the Government prioritises the settlement of these court awards to avoid interests getting out of control;2. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should develop strategies for settlement of court awards in a fair and equitable manner;3. Parliament and the Auditor- General should review all files of mandamus  payments under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with a view of establishing the status of pending and settled cases and report back to Parliament within three months such that they can be considered in their next appropriation. I now move to the Judiciary - those were a few specific observations - and I want to go straight to a few critical areas. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, the report will be captured in full in the Hansard  for proper record. MR ANGURA: The accounting officer explained that the Judiciary has developed a number of strategies, as detailed below. This is to support them in executing their mandate.(i)    The Judiciary has increased its coverage, following the recruitment of more judicial officers. You are aware that we now have new Judiciary premises across the country to support the disbursement of justice. (ii)  The Judiciary is also analysing the current data of backlog by sorting out backlogged rulings and judgments to ensure that these are delivered. Data on capital cases of a backlog nature in the Magistrates’ Courts is also being collected so as to engage the Office of the Director of Public Prosecution (ODPP) for their withdrawal or committal to the High Court for trial. On that note, the committee noted that although there has been a steep decline of case backlog, the judicial system is still fraught with massive number of cases across all levels of the Judiciary. The committee expressed concerns over the slow rate of disposal of pending cases which has further clogged the courts. The committee welcomed the introduction of strategies and mechanisms for timely and efficient disposal of cases. You are aware of those new innovations that have come up; plea bargain, among others.The committee recommends that a law be put in place to streamline settlement of matters, especially small claims and procedures in relation to that. I do not want to go into detail. Management of domestic arrearsNon-payment of domestic arrears exposes the Judiciary to the potential risk of litigation and payment of penalties and fines for delayed settlements. The accounting officer explained that delayed settlement of domestic areas is due to inadequate provision of domestic arrears funds from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. [Mr Angura] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10699THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should release money for arrears. The Electronic Court Case Management Information Systems - I think you can read about that as one of the new creatures and inventions from that sector. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, Article 163(4) of the Constitution states that the Auditor-General will bring reports here and in (5), that Parliament shall, within six months, process and consider these reports –  MR ANGURA:  In this case, Mr Speaker – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I guided you, but you do not want to follow my guidance. Please, move and we conclude. We have the report and we have been reading it. MR ANGURA:  Thank you. The next one – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Move that we adopt your report. MR ANGURA:  I, therefore move, Mr Speaker, that the report for the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) comprising the Judiciary, the Directorate of Public Prosecution and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, including the Uganda Police and Prisons, be adopted. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank  you. Honourable colleagues, the report was presented here on 3 February, which means that regarding the six months, we are already violating the Constitution; we are already behind schedule. In the 10th Parliament, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, brought a proposal and later on, a motion was brought here that if we cannot process these reports on time, they are adopted. Once they are adopted, the Government is able to take action and report back to Parliament within six months. The Treasury Memoranda is taken back to the accountability committee to see if action has been taken on the recommendations of the Auditor-General. When you read through the report, you find that 99 per cent of the recommendations are what the Auditor-General recommended; they are just being repeated. We shall guide the accountability committees that when you get the Auditor-General’s report, the meetings should not be what I have been seeing where you spend a month on one entity, with the media covering and all that and then you reproduce the same recommendations by the Auditor-General. Call an entity and the question would be, “Are there issues, which you raised in the exit meeting and the Auditor-General did not consider?” Interrogate those issues. Parliament cannot be like what Hon. Kasolo had said; that we are here to forgive accounting officers. No, these are issues raised by the Auditor-General so why didn’t you answer before him? Thereafter, go ahead and take action as the Government. Report and we will come in to verify what you have done, as the Government. Otherwise, the finance minister says that he cannot take any action before you consider and adopt. It, therefore, became a practice and that is what we have been following. I will pick a few Members: the Member from Katakwi, Hon. Rwakoojo, Hon. Okwalinga, Hon. Obigah and the Member from Jonam. As we talk, he is a leading Opposition Member in this House from the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) party. 6.54MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and I have had the benefit of listening to the report and the recommendations. 10700STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONI am touched with one thing which we, as a House, should actually take a stand on. I am very concerned when it comes to issues of the court awards.  Like it has been stated clearly, you find that some of these awards are pegged with interest, which is cumulative hence you find that as a Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, recommendations are made by Parliament for money to be allocated to clear some of these Court awards. However, what happens is that the finance ministry does not release this money. It is, therefore, a burden, which is growing because where interest is levied, it does not get small. It instead grows. As a Parliament, we really need a comprehensive statement from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on some of these court awards that we are handling such that we see how to sequentially resolve the issue of court awards. Otherwise, I appreciate the observations and efforts that the Judiciary has put in to curb the issue of the court backlog. They have made a lot of progress, but there is one component; recently we sat as a House and agreed to increase the number of the judicial officers. The responsibility still comes back to us on the wage issue. If we can see how to factor in the wage and have more judges recruited, it will go a long way in resolving some of these issues. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Rwakoojo.6.55MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two comments to make and one is on delays in the criminal justice system. I want to thank the Government for the increase in the number of judicial officers. However, when you increase judicial officers, you must increase the lawyers, both in Attorney-General’s Chambers and DPP’s Office. Otherwise, the judicial officers will sit and get their salaries for nothing because they will not have people to appear before them. There is need to look into that concern together with the issue of increasing their salaries. Regarding the payment of court awards, I worked in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for a long time and I know that the Court Awards Committee considers high-interest cases; first in, first out and human rights cases. However, the problem is what Hon. Okiror commented on; the money does not get there in good amounts. Right now, they have decentralised the payment of court awards so, if it is a police car that has knocked you, Police is supposed to pay you. However, they have a system that they use. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Oseku –6.57MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This has been one of the easiest reports to look at. The report of the Auditor-General speaks to the challenges that the Justice, Law and Order sector is facing. Particularly, my comment would be that the problem of lack of releases to these entities which are supposed to discharge justice poses a very big challenge to these people. At the end of the day, it is the population which suffers. In this country, litigation is one of the painful areas because the time that it takes is comparable to the cost of our roads. In Uganda, justice is very expensive and it takes a long time. Even when awards are made, after perhaps litigating for five years, still you are not paid. That is more painful and unjust to the persons affected. Otherwise, this report is okay. My colleague has just spoken about the releases. The Office of the Director of Public Prosecution (DPP) is one of the areas that need to be brought to a level; at par with the Judiciary so that they discharge justice together. [Mr Okiror] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10701THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023You will find that the Office of the DPP is underfunded or they have a lot of gaps in terms of manpower. For example, in this report, their budget is approved at Shs 60 billion, but by the time they are -(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable chairperson of the committee, these are issues that the committee should focus on. I remember we had an incident last financial year where we had provided money for the recruitment of judges, but the Judicial Service Commission had no money to carry out the recruitment. On the other side, there was a budget for salaries, but the issue was the money to effect the process. I remember we had to put money in this financial year and I want to thank you, chairperson and your team. Even just partitioning an office of Judicial Service Commission for people to have offices and you want to recruit over 100 judicial officers - This mismatch – (Member rose)  - no clarification; no one is on the Floor. (Hon. Okwalinga rose)  Hon. Okwalinga, I did not pick you.7.00MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I have heard and I am happy that the backlog is being cleared. If we go into the details of the type of cases that are being cleared, personally I imagine the issues of land still remain and take a very long time. No wonder we have cases where people are being killed because of land disputes because the Judiciary department is not disposing them off. I would like to give you an example; the Jonam have their customary land in Nwoya District. For more than 10 years, justice has not been made to our people and as a result, as we speak, in a whole subcounty, the people of Jonam have been chased away from their customary land and we feel very bitter. I am bringing this up because I think apart from the backlog being cleared, we need to be keen about the cases that still remain and take a long time, particularly issues of land. Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Rose Obigah -7.02MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I applaud this august House for improving the salaries and payments to the Office of the DPP. Previously, the situation was bad. There was a lot of corruption and they were not interested, but I can see they have some smiles. However, we need to add to their numbers so that they can match the newly employed judges and magistrates. They are a skeleton staff with a lot of files. They are more rejuvenated to work, but we need to increase their numbers and give them a better budget. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Apea -7.03MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, the chairperson, for presenting the report. I agree with the committee’s observation on the issue of access to justice and the 41 per cent of case disposal. I guess this 41 per cent could be in the urban areas. However, in hard-to-reach districts like Amolatar, access to justice has remained a big challenge. Sometimes I go and sit there because the nearest court - I do not know how they grade them - is Dokolo, which is some distance away. In Amolatar, you are lucky to see the - I do not know whether it is a judge or the magistrate – judicial officer who sits once a week or once every two weeks. Much as we are talking about the numbers, remuneration and all that, the institutions also need to be keen on work ethics and absenteeism from work. In most instances, you hear that the magistrate is there, but the DPP is absent. 10702STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONThe coordination and performance of these roles leaves a lot to be desired and our people are so frustrated with the judicial system. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) and the Auditor-General’s report on the Justice, Law and Order Sector for the year ended 30 June 2022 be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE, 2022.7.05MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As per Article 163(4), the Parliament received these reports and the scope of this report covers the education sector. This is in respect of the public universities which include, among others, under the Ministry of Education and Sports: Muni, Gulu, Lira, Soroti and Makerere University Business School, Nakawa and Makerere, Busitema, Kabale and Mbarara Universities. Mr Speaker, let me go straight to the Government of Uganda (GOU). The committee notes that a shortfall in the Government of Uganda’s revenue affects the implementation of planned activities at the V ote level and subsequently nationwide.The shortfall in releases was due to the finance ministry’s failure to fully fund the entities’ budgets citing poor economic performance. This observation should be made on the finance ministry because these entities have no powers over budget release, cuts, among others. In some entities like Kyambogo University, critical activities were affected by budget cuts and these activities had to be rolled over to the next work plan of the Financial Year 2022/2023.During this Financial Year 2022/2023, the finance ministry improved releases to Lira University and Makerere University, among others.  The committee recommends that the accounting officers should always engage the finance ministry on releases and pursue the balances so as not to curtail the implementation of activities or events depriving their budget lines. Honourable members, since these reports are already uploaded and I know you have already gone through them, let me interest you to look at issues that the committee observed.The committee further observed that non-implementation of planned activities implies that expected services to the beneficiary communities were not attained.The committee notes that while COVID-19 and its effects were factual, the finance ministry be held liable for late releases and going forward, desist from making late releases to entities as it curtails efficient and effective achievement of planned activities. To further explain this, many times, as we heard yesterday, warrants are issued and the finance ministry releases funds to these entities late. You are aware that some of these funds are supposed to be for recruitment and procurement and the time available for them to absorb those funds, when released late, is not possible. In summary, it leads to non-implementation of these activities. Honourable colleagues, aware that the report is big and that you have also gone through it, as raised by the Speaker, in conclusion, it is my prayer and that of the committee that this august House adopts the recommendations contained in this report on the education sector. I hereby move. [Ms Obigah] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10703THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Okwalinga, Hon. Komakech, Hon. Itungo, Hon. Max and Hon. Baba. I will do a quick one.7.09MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for ably bringing out some of these issues that were highlighted in the Auditor-General’s report. My concern relates to the issue of inadequate funding by the Government to the universities. While at Makerere University, I saw a number of departments and sometimes individual professors writing proposals to foreign entities and obtaining funding. An example is Mbarara University where all of you must have heard of Prof. Ogwang who was able to obtain funding for the research that he did in herbal medicine. I am not certain that the report has clearly highlighted this other silent funding that these professors get so that it aggregates the larger funding that the Government brings to the universities. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, those are overheads on projects because each university should have its overheads policy. For example, I visited about two universities in the USA and when they are paying, say a salary of about US$ 100,000, the university will give you only US$ 40,000 and you will be required to attract projects that are going to raise overheads and top-up the US$ 60,000 and that is your target.From my experience, I have learned, as I worked very closely with these universities, that we are weak and poor in attracting overheads. Most of the funders say, no overheads, but in America generally, overheads are 55 per cent of the project money. That is how Harvard, Yale and Stanford Universities are making money. They say that you are giving us this money because of our name and for us to maintain the name, we need a lot of funds.It is very attractive, but there is also corruption, as you said. When writing projects using a university’s name, they sign with the funders that overheads will go to the principal investigator and the team, not to the institution. Therefore, this is a very good point which we should interest ourselves in; on how project overheads can contribute to the funds of public universities. It is a very good source of funding.7.13MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues. One, we are now beginning to see a lot of high-quality research outputs from many of these universities. My appeal to the Government is that we must begin to commercialise these areas of research that scientists are producing.In the software area especially, these young graduates are doing a lot of work. Apart from Kiira Motors, which is now making electric vehicles, no other project has been taken up for commercialisation.Secondly, we are praised for being an agricultural country, but the real resource of this country should be the human resource. Therefore, as a country, we must invest in our people. This business of under-capitalisation of universities should not arise because that is our base. A country like Japan relies entirely on human resources. There are over 700 universities in Japan, most of them of a technical nature. The guys who produce your Toyota, Panasonic, and all these modern gadgets you run around chasing are from these technical universities. As Government and NRM party members, let us work to capitalise our universities so that they can produce the human resources that can transform this country quickly. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I hope the sectoral committees are taking note of such good submissions. Hon. Baba, on that point and the issue of intellectual property for universities, you have known that people make 10704STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONinnovations and then individuals go with them. Like this banana project in Bushenyi, you heard that Mbarara University is fighting with Dr Ogwang saying, “We were funding you and now, you have gone to commercialise and you are saying we cannot get anything.” Then there is Kiira. That is very critical. Thank you, honourable member.MR NATHAN TWESIGYE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance from you. I have been sitting on accountability committees and you promised to meet the leadership of the accountability committees. However, I request that you also meet the Office of the Auditor-General. We have issues with entities whereby you find an entity has mischarged; it has no inventory for the assets, it has land issues, it has not met statutory obligations, but at the end of the day, the Auditor-General says that this entity has an unqualified report. Therefore, you wonder how you unqualify an entity that has audit issues. When you invite these entities, they come with an attitude saying, “We have a clean report; what do you want from us, as a committee?” As you meet the leadership, I request that you meet the Office of the Auditor-General because they have some issues.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The findings are different from the recommendations and the opinion.MR NATHAN TWESIGYE:  You find that they already have an unqualified report, but when you are making a report as a committee, it is as if you are killing the entity and they say, “Which is which?”Secondly, I would like to find out from you, as a committee, do we have powers to either qualify or unqualify the Auditor-General’s report? At the end of the conclusion, you will find that what was an unqualified report should be the qualified report.Finally, which one should take precedence; the recommendations of the Auditor-General’s report or the recommendation of the committee in case there is a conflict? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I will give you that answer at the end after getting submissions. I need to consult.7.17MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak):  Mr Speaker, the chairperson has indicated that the universities need to be funded. He has decried delayed releases and it is on that, that I wish to speak. The issue of management of limited resources is very key in these entities. Earlier in this very sitting, Hon. Nsereko submitted a matter of national importance highlighting that there are thousands of students who do not pay. It is on those payments that non-tax revenue is expected to support the universities. That means if the students are not paying, then the limited resource envelope that the university gets from the Consolidated Fund is constrained to serve both private students and Government-sponsored students.I am aware that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development manages the cash flow of this country. In managing the cash flow, they look at the performance of the tax revenue together with the loans and grants. That is the basis on which releases are made. The recommendation of the committee to hold the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development accountable for not releasing the money might be too much because they release what they have. The question I have on public universities in Uganda is that; are we biting too much that we cannot afford? I am aware that public universities have been distributed politically to all regions in the country except Karamoja. We are waiting for it. If we are distributing politically – (Member timed out.)[The Deputy Speaker] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10705THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you request for more time; you do not switch on the microphone again because your time is up. Conclude please.MS NAKUT:  My conclusion is: Given that the universities are many and our budget is constrained and given the fact that the hands of the finance ministry are also tied because they have to release what they have, can we edit that part of the recommendations because it is not achievable? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let Hon. Angura answer.MR ANGURA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start from that: When I raised the issue of warrants and what we commonly refer to in our committee as “resources swept back”, what is unspent is swept back. We have been having discussions with the Auditor-General and Accountant-General as to what happens when resources are swept back. There has been a harmonious position – that the Speaker and other leaders together with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister raised recently – that resources that are appropriated and are unabsorbed and are swept back, should be brought back in the first supplementary schedule for the next year of appropriation such that we have those resources absorbed time and again. However, Mr Speaker, I also want to raise something in respect to what Hon. Opolot said as far as off-budget receipts are concerned. These universities also receive support from entities and partners abroad and these funds come as off-budget funds.What the law provides is that whatever you receive should come back to Parliament to be appropriated because that constitutes part of your budget. However, many times most of these intuitions open separate accounts and do not remit these funds to the Consolidated Fund, but now, they are beginning to comply. Regarding the issue of Hon. Baba –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable member, we will not go into all these issues and finish.MR ANGURA:  I would like to conclude with what Hon. Itungo raised. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The problem is that you take long. MR ANGURA:  As I conclude, we come from two different committees, but serving the same purpose. You are aware that recommendations keep coming and some of them are from the Auditor-General. At committee level, we drop some of these recommendations depending on the circumstances and the explanations given. You are aware that when the Auditor-General starts his audit process, he has an entry meeting, a management letter and exit meetings in relation to his assignment. There are certain circumstances whereby the entity may not be able to provide all the necessary requirements and evidence at that particular time. Maybe the officer concerned is on leave and cannot be reached. When that entity appears before the committee, they come with all evidences that the Auditor-General may not have got. Therefore, we quickly drop some of those queries and proceed. I thank you, honourable colleagues and request that the report be adopted. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Faith, the issue you brought is not punitive, but more of cautionary. We also know that sometimes the finance ministry is selective when giving out money and that is what the committee is emphasising. They are saying that the finance ministry should be fair in this process. Honourable colleagues, I made a proposal some time back that we need to be cautious. Sometimes, they bring a supplementary, you pass it here and a few days, like five days to the end of the financial year, you know that money will be released today under supplementary and swept back tomorrow as unabsorbed. It is really bad. 10706STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION7.24MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Mine is basically to endorse the recommendations in the report, specifically, the recommendation to the extent that “accounting officers should constantly engage with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure timely and adequate release of funds.” We all know that releases are a function of many things, including what Hon. Faith Nakut said – that is availability of funds. Also, in cash flow management, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development considers the work plan, the procurement plan, the recruitment plan and the capacity building work plan. All of those put together, influence the amount of money that is released to a particular entity and the time at which it is released. Therefore, I endorse the recommendation that the accounting officers ought to constantly engage with the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development to ensure that they update their work plans and other plans. Thank you. 7.25MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, but this is another report that portrays how the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is actually sitting on education in this country. A learned citizenry is easy to lead. An educated nation is one that is going to develop. Why can’t the Ministry of Finance prioritise education in this country as an important aspect in development? Besides education, I want to interest you in the Ministry of Health too. Currently, in Pader, children suffering from nodding disease -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable member, that is not how we debate. We are on a sector; speak to the report and remain in our lane. MR KOMAKECH: Mr Speaker, if there was a way this Parliament could direct the Ministry of Finance to prioritise education in this country, it would solve a lot of issues. Thank you.7.26MS AGNES AMEEDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and would like to endorse it, especially in the area of underfunding. Every country has a university that is ranked the best. Recently, I had a ride around Makerere University and I could not recognise my former hall of residence – Africa – and Livingstone because they are so dilapidated. These halls of residence are long overdue for renovation. Halls of residence in other universities are privatised, and are managed privately to the standard of a hotel and universities generate money from such residences. However, the story of Makerere University is very sad. That cannot help the university to attract foreign students. Secondly, the university management should be more creative. For example, universities abroad, as the Speaker has alluded to – the towns around the universities are centred on the university. The renovations with big companies are about the university. However, how much is Makerere University feeding into the Kampala community? That leaves a lot to be desired. The planning, social work would all be evolving around the university. The university would be owning estates in Kampala to feed into their income. Thank you. 7.28MS SYLVIA BAHIREIRA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the submission of other Members about the late releases of funds. STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10707THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023No single country can develop beyond the education levels of its citizens. So, we must agree that education is one of the cornerstones for the development of our country. Much as there may be a delay in release of funds to other sectors, education should be prioritised. For example, there are times when we, MPs, get maize seeds late to take to our constituencies and you feel embarrassed. However, the farmers usually improvise and use their own money to buy seeds to plant. How do you expect a public university to run when the release of funds is delayed and it is a habit? So, I beg that we prioritise our education sector if we expect our country to develop. I beg to submit. 7.30MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. The education sector is very important. If you look at the universities, especially the public universities in this country, many of them are beautiful. However, in some of the new universities like Muni and Soroti, there are structures, but with a few faculties. Students would want to apply to faculties like medicine, but they do not exist in some universities. The universities cannot create these faculties because they do not have funds. I am happy that the Government created a system where all students pay directly through Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) to the Consolidated Fund. This means that these universities are not in control of these funds. Why don’t we pay back to the universities so that those faculties are put in place? Management in most of the universities becomes a problem, especially, the new ones. Once a university is established, why don’t we fully operationalise it before creating new ones? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Auditor-General’s report on public universities for the year ended 30 June, 2022, be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Itungo had asked for guidance of the Speaker on the issue of the recommendation of the committee differing from the one of the Auditor-General. That is why the law says “process”. So, the recommendation of the committee and of the House prevails once adopted. However, when making that recommendation, you should be very cautious because it should be based on additional evidence. Otherwise, if the Auditor-General exhausted everything, the committee cannot say that it carried out a fresh audit and has a different opinion. If there is missing evidence, an officer should explain why they did not submit it to the Auditor-General; what if they did it deliberately? That is my guidance.On the issue of opinions, yes, I have also seen it. An entity gets an unqualified opinion and when you read through, the issues are totally different. Another scenario is when an entity gets a qualified opinion, they have justified, but their justification has been ignored and their evidence not taken into consideration. I remember one incident when the President ordered a special audit on Makerere University and we went to Rwakitura to receive the report. In the report, the Auditor-General said that the leadership was to be held accountable for additional money from fees which they had found on their account. We asked for their basis because the university had not lost money. The university administration had given them the numbers and the Auditor-General team had failed to verify them and were instead accusing the university leadership. 10708STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONSo, the President asked them for the kind of verification they had used, and they said they conducted a roll-call: They asked all students to appear, counted those who came, and asked the university for an explanation for those who did not come. We asked if they had employed any punitive mechanism for those who did not report for the roll-call and the time at which they did it. There are evening students at their work places and if you did a head count at 10.00 a.m. why should they leave their work to be counted like primary school children? Yesterday, I had a long chat with the Speaker and we agreed that we are going to meet accountability committees and the Auditor-General and harmonise these issues. We had very many issues with the reports of the committee, where you could see that a lot needed to be done. I also held a meeting, in the morning, with the Leader of Opposition over these issues and we said we are going to take it on, as the leadership. MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL GOVERNMENT) ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON UGANDA’S FOREIGN MISSIONS IN: WASHINGTON D.C.; NAIROBI – KENYA; DAR ES SALAAM – TANZANIA; BUJUMBURA – BURUNDI; KIGALI – RWANDA; KINSHASA – DRC; UGANDA’S CONSULATE IN MOMBASA – KENYA; AND UGANDA’S PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS – NEW YORKTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the last report for today, honourable colleagues. Hon. Amos?7.36MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move a motion for the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Auditor-General’s report on Uganda’s Foreign Missions in: Washington D.C.; Nairobi – Kenya; Dar es Salaam – Tanzania; Bujumbura – Burundi; Kigali – Rwanda; Kinshasa – DRC; Uganda’s Consulate in Mombasa – Kenya; and Uganda’s Permanent Mission to the United Nations – New York. Mr Speaker, this report was presented on the Floor on 19 January 2023. In accordance with Rule 174 of the Rules of Procedure, it was referred to the committee –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not moving a motion, but presenting a report. MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you. Mr Speaker, this report is a bit bulky; so, allow me to go to the general observations and recommendations. 4.1. Implementation of mission strategic plan Mr Speaker, at the mission in New York, the Auditor-General noted that the strategic work plan was not followed. In Washington, D.C., the strategic work plan was not followed and not approved, but implementation of activities was done. The committee found out that it was because of lack of competent staff to manage the planning functions at the respective missions. The committee, therefore, gave these recommendations:1. The committee recommends that missions abroad must be brought on board at the inception and rollout of any Government policy and regulation, taking into account the peculiarity of their operations.2. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should arrange periodic capacity building training programmes with the programme-based budgeting team to bridge the knowledge gap across all missions. Mr Speaker, allow me to talk about the performance of non-tax revenue at the mission in Washington. [The Deputy Speaker] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10709THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023The accounting officers explained to the committee that there was an error in posting figures because they have been found to have realised NTR at 100 per cent. At the mission in New York, the Auditor-General noted that Shs 5.22 billion was collected during the year. However, a review of the entire NTR estimates, the revenue sources and rates charged at V ote level revealed that the entity did not budget for the NTR, despite receiving Shs 2.5 billion from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee notes that the failure to budget for NTR renders the budget system redundant. Performance of Government of Uganda receipts The committee recommends that the Government considers reinstating the travel abroad component of the mission’s budget so that they can carry out their diplomatic functions effectively. 4.4. Implementation of quantified outputsThe mission in Washington had planned to implement four outputs with a total of seven activities and an expenditure of Shs 17.07 billion. However, three outputs with 35 activities were partially implemented. The committee found out that the implementation of the activities was affected because of COVID-19. Recommendation The committee recommends that the accounting officers should ensure that all the planned and approved outputs are implemented. The accounting officers should further ensure that they undertake a deliberate step in enhancing the capacity of their staff in planning, budgeting as well as monitoring and evaluation, with specific emphasis on tracking outputs as per the strategic plan. Submissions of quarterly performance reportsThe committee recommends that the accounting officers should prepare budget monitoring plans and quarterly performance reports to facilitate performance tracking within the stipulated timelines. 5.0. Specific observations and recommendations 5.1. Uganda’s Mission in Washington5.1.1. Delayed transfer of end-of-year balances to the Consolidated Fund While meeting the committee, the accounting officer acknowledged the query of not remitting the fund to the Consolidated Fund. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure that all NTR collected during the financial year and any unspent balances are always promptly transferred to the Consolidated Fund, in line with the requirements under the Public Finance Management Act. Others are policy-related 5.1.2. Management of fixed assets Allow me to say this, Mr Speaker. In Washington, D.C., the committee found out that for the building on Plot 5911, there was a serious pipe burst in late 2020, causing flooding of the entire ground floor that resulted in increase in the mission’s insurance premiums. This is crucial because it has lasted for some time. The committee gave recommendations that as a matter of urgency, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should find money to undertake repair works at the mission in Washington to avoid more damage, which would require more expenses. That is very crucial. 10710STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONMaintenance of an updated assets registry That is in our iPad; Members can read it. 5.2.  Uganda’s Permanent Mission to the United Nations, New York5.2.1. Long outstanding receivables – debts that we have to payThe committee notes that the increase in the long outstanding receivables may present complications in the recovery of outstanding rental revenue, which may lead to default and eventual loss of funds. There is a risk of failing to recover all the amounts due.When you read item 8, you will find out that the missions engaged New York State Law Firm to recover those arrears. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should follow the case at the New York State Court relentlessly with a view to recovering all the monies – Mr Speaker, due to time, allow me to skip that. Members can read through.5.3 Uganda High Commission in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania The entity had an approved a budget of Shs 5,644,896,312 billion, out of which, Shs 5.3 billion was warranted. There was off-budget financing of Shs 220 million that was not remitted to the Consolidated Fund.The committee notes that off-budget financing is not only contrary to Section 43(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and budgets execution guidelines issued by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST), but also distorts planning and may result in duplication of activities. The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officer should always return all unspent funds to the Consolidated Fund following an expiry of an appropriation as provided for by the law and seek supplementary or have the activities re-voted in the subsequent year, where necessary. 5.3.2 Partial known or partial implementation - Mr Speaker, allow me to skip that and go to recommendations.The committee recommends that the accounting officer should implement all activities and outputs as planned to avoid distortions to the work plan.Performance of Non-Tax RevenueThere was an unrealistic set target and because of that, the committee noted that seemingly excellent performance of the NTR was due to unrealistic set targets. The entity should know all its sources of income to inform its projections. The committee further notes that non-participation of the entity during the estimations of NTR by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not right. Therefore, the committee recommends that the accounting officer should map out all possible sources of NTR to arrive at more realistic projections and always get participation from the entity when projecting.Mr Speaker, Members can read through Uganda’s High Commission in Nairobi, Kenya and therefore, consider the recommendation. For Kigali, Rwanda, allow me to say this. In Rwanda, there were a number of discrepancies in the mission’s final accounts, especially NTR. So, the whole issue is around the NTR. They do not disclose, they do not spend it well and at the end, you find they received more than what was planned. So, there are issues which have to be taken care of.Mr Speaker, allow me to go to the last page which is the conclusion.It is true that what bedevils the performance of most of the Uganda missions abroad is [Mr Okot] STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT10711THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023inadequate funding. The Government should find it worthy to invest in foreign relations by increasing funding capacity of our foreign missions. It is, therefore, my prayer and that of the committee that this House adopts the report and its recommendations. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hajji Iddi – I will allow four Members.7.50MR IDDI  ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. I have noted in the report the issue of training and capacity building of our staff. Mr Speaker, this is a very important issue. When these staff  are selected to go and work in foreign missions, they are a mirror of our country. Therefore, the ministry should take interest in training and building the capacity of these staff. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Thank you. Hon. Ayume? Hon. Kajwengye, you can submit as Hon. Ayume gets a microphone.7.51MR WILSON  KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the report and I have had the privilege of having been a Foreign Service officer for some time. Now, I am a legislator, and these matters keep coming to the Floor year in, year out. I would like to request the committee to specifically take interest in the following:First, why are we interested in always appropriating money for rent that sometimes could have bought buildings in those countries where we are? Why are we interested? Why can’t our people stop giving money for rent and ensure property x or y is bought for our mission so that we do not rent? (Applause)Secondly, high commissioners and ambassadors are not accounting officers. Accounting officers are specific people trained here, sent abroad and accountable to PS/ST. They are a responsibility of the PS/ST. Why don’t they get disciplined for offences they commit in contravening these matters?Thirdly, I am happy we have a face to show elsewhere, but it is absurd – I would like to raise a disclaimer that ambassadors and high commissioners who have been politicians and posted have nothing to do with money at all. If they get their hands into the kitty, it is the responsibility of the accounting officers because they have the power. Therefore, I would like to request the committee to invite the Permanent Secretary, who disciplines – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Conclude, honourable colleague.MR KAJWENGYE : …who disciplines the ambassadors and high commissioners where all missions sign what we call a charter with the Permanent Secretary, and they must adhere to it so that next time, we do not complain about the same things here on the Floor. I submit.7.53DR CHARLES AYUME (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report.There was a very big cross-cutting issue of NTR. It is not only in the Foreign Service, but it extends to other sectors. Imagine you are a mission; you have a rental income of over $5 million and you wish to fix your plumbing system, but you first have to remit it and then it comes back in a quarterly release. The temptations to put your hand into the till are quite high. As a country, we need to streamline the turnaround time of appropriations in aid. It should not only be for the foreign services sector, but should include the health sector, so that people are motivated to increase and improve collections of NTR and remit it.I also agree with my colleague, the predecessor, on the issue of renting. If missions can identify strategic properties and we buy them or we 10712STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONconstruct, then this issue of rent should be out and dusted in the next five years. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I visited our embassy in Rome. It is in a corridor behind, like a go-down. I am saying this before Hon. Baba, because I know he was one of the longest serving ambassadors and one of our encyclopaedias on issues of our embassies abroad, so that when he speaks, he can even guide me on my fears.When you look at Rome, it hosts the biggest financing organisations for the agricultural sector. It has the Food and Agricultural Organisation, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and I think other prestigious organisations, but it is a concentration. I was called to visit the Embassy. You have to use Google Maps and go through a channel. You avoid the highway, then they start taking you in the backyard. I had been requested to go there by one of the big people in FAO who said, “Look at what Uganda makes people go through to access the Embassy. Ask your people if there is any high person from FAO that can come in this backyard”. He said, “We cannot dare to come because it means you do not consider what you benefit from such a country”.To be honest, we have given up on our foreign service, from my own assessment. We have to put our foot down. (Applause)  You have an ambassador who oversees eight countries. For five years, he has never presented credentials in some of the countries that they have been representing. You have Kenya here, where we do not have a High Commissioner. We do not have a deputy High Commissioner. Recently, I went there and the High Commission people came to welcome me. They did not even have access cards; they wait for you at the exit point, where taxis wait. (Laughter)One person said – really, let me ask you colleagues – I know that a representative of the Leader of Government Business – “Kenya is our sister country, but don’t you think you have downgraded our diplomatic relations? For a country like Kenya, which is your biggest trading partner and transit route, you do not have a High Commissioner and Deputy High Commissioner!” Then career diplomats are nowhere in very critical places. I travelled somewhere; when we reached the meeting where I was with some MPs, one ambassador said, “If I had not come here with the Speaker – I have been requesting for a meeting here; you have never allowed me.” I felt very small. I responded, “It depends on the people you send to these embassies.” Hon. Baba, as a senior in this area, I said I wanted to pour out my heart. 7.58MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Mr Speaker, you have said it all. The mission in Rome at the backyard is a very bad reflection of us, as a country because embassies abroad are the image of the country in that capital. If you are in the backyard, I do not know what you are like. It is very unfortunate, but all this is a function of resources. If we decide to open a mission somewhere, we must match it with the funding to run it appropriately.The issue of acquisition of property can be made easier if we all agree that money is provided for a down-payment because in many of these capitals, this is possible. You do not buy property outright; you can make a down-payment of a certain percentage and remittances as rent can now go to offset the balance of the price of that property. This has been done in a few missions, but should be replicated everywhere because the Government may not get all the money at once. The most critical issue for me is the issue of career diplomats vis-à-vis  the political appointees. We all choose our professions. You want to become a doctor, a soldier or a policeman; you expect to rise to the highest level. These young Foreign Service Officers, STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [Dr Ayume]10713THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023men and women, join with the expectation to become ambassadors to head missions. They are now being denied that opportunity totally.  There are now mid-level entries.Except for the Ambassador in Saudi Arabia, all the heads are political appointees. How do you expect performance there? I am not saying some of the political appointees are not competent. They are extremely competent people who have performed well as ambassadors, but the majority are just nyama-nyama , so to say. (Laughter)  It is not English, but really, they disgrace this country, yet they have important roles to perform in those capitals. Other countries have used the UN system to maximum advantage. You see Ethiopians, Nigerians and Ghanaians – (Applause) – all over in the UN systems, but you do not see Ugandans anywhere. Ugandans who are in international jobs went there on their own, without the support of our Government. All this is a factor of whether you have career diplomats and competent people to manage these missions. Therefore, we need to revisit this. I have been pleading with my Government. I have ever intimated to the President that let us have at least a ratio of career officers vis-à-vis  political appointees. Give your political appointees maybe 60 per cent and the career people 40 per cent to balance it out. Let the bulk of the support staff be career people to support the political appointees. However, if you bring in mid-entries at the beginning – people who have no knowledge of the service and have not been trained, then you cannot expect good performance at all. I would like to thank the committee for the report, but we have an image to protect out there. If we cannot afford good residences and good embassies, forget about it. Actually, I would like to pay tribute to the late Apollo Kironde. At independence in 1962, this gentleman had the foresight of identifying a plot opposite the UN headquarters – Plot 336. That plot remained vacant for a very long time because there was no money to build the mission. He had problems even getting money from the Government and Parliament to buy that plot in 1962. It was not until the period of Idi Amin, when he had problems with the Americans and was told that Uganda had property opposite the UN that he decided to build that mission.He asked how tall the American Embassy was because we were next to the US Embassy. They told him the American Embassy was 13 floors. He then said, “Build mine up to the 14th floor” – (Laughter) - “so that when I come, I can look over at the Americans.” True to form, the Uganda Mission in New York is 14 floors and the American Embassy, until the time I left, was only 13 floors. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am told when he died, they immediately went above. (Laughter)MR BABA: I think so. Thank you very much, the committee, for the excellent report. We have to do something about our diplomatic service. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am going to take up this matter seriously and I will also share it with His Excellency. We have talked about it a little bit before, but I now want to take it up even more. (Applause)  I had already closed, but I had – No, we have captured everything and we still have a motion. Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) on the Auditor-General’s report on Uganda’s foreign mission in Washington-D.C., Nairobi-Kenya, Dar es Salaam-Tanzania, Bujumbura-Burundi, Kigali-Rwanda, Kinshasa-DRC, Uganda’s consulate in Mombasa-Kenya, and Uganda’s permanent mission to the United Nations-New York be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted. 10714STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Honourable colleagues, I request you to bear with me and we just process one small item. This is to do with the entities which the committee had not yet processed. Like we did yesterday, we need to sort them out now. I briefed the chairman and all chairpersons of the accountability committees. I will call the next and last item. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ADOPT THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE, 2022 8.06MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I hope you have not given out our document as collateral. (Laughter) MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker, Hon. Kabanda is not a moneylender; he is a Member of Parliament. Therefore, there is no collateral. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to adopt the recommendations contained in the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year that ended 30 June 2022. I move this motion under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you need to read the motion so that the Members can second it or not. MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker, I thought I would talk to the motion after it has been seconded, but since you have guided- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is moving and not talking to a motion.  Read it so that we know what we are seconding. MR SILWANY: The motion reads: “WHEREAS the Auditor-General is required by Article 163(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, and Section 13(1) of the National Audit Act, 2008, to audit and report to the public accounts of Uganda and of all administrations, universities, public institutions of like nature and any public corporations or other bodies established by the Act of Parliament; AND WHEREAS the Auditor-General in accordance with Article 163(4) of the Constitution and Section 19(3) of the National Audit Act, 2008, submitted to Parliament the report for the Financial Year 2021/2022 and the same was presented to Parliament on the 19 January 2023; AWARE THAT Article 163(5) of the Constitution and Section 19(4) of the National Audit Act, 2008, requires Parliament to debate and consider the report of the Auditor-General take appropriate action within six months after submission of the report;ACKNOWLEDGING the need to consider the report of the Auditor-General within the prescribed time in order to ensure timely preparation of Treasury Memoranda and timely implementation of the recommendations of Parliament; NOW, THEREFORE, Parliament in accordance with Article 163(5) of the Constitution and Section 19(4) of the National Audit Act, 2008, resolves to adopt the recommendation of the Auditor-General in respect to the following local government entities: - “ THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your motion is still incomplete. Please, finish it; we must know the entities. MR SILWANY: “ .. Entities under Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) . I beg your pardon. 1. Ministry of Science and Technology and Innovation, Vote 023.MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION10715THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 20232. Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.3. Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, Vote 022.4. Uganda Cancer Institute, Vote 114.5. Makerere University Business School, Vote 138.6. Auditor-General, Vote 131.7. National Citizenship and Immigration Control, Vote 120.8. Ministry of ICT and National Guidance, Vote 20.9. Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, Vote 004.10. Busitema University, Vote 111.11. Uganda Management Institute, Vote 140.12. Ministry of East African Community Affairs, Vote 021.13. Uganda Heart Institute, Vote 115.14. Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory, Vote 305.15. Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, Vote 151.16. Mbale Regional Referral Hospital, Vote 170.17. Fort Portal Regional Referral Hospital, Vote 164.18. Masaka Regional Referral Hospital, Vote 169.19. Moroto Regional Referral Hospital, Vote 175.20. Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, Vote 112. Missions Abroad: 1. Mission in Belgium, Vote 219.2. Mission in Geneva, Vote 214.3. Mission in England, Vote 202.4. Mission in France, Vote 224.5. Mission in Italy, Vote 220.6. Mission in Japan, Vote 215.7. Mission in China, Vote 212.8. Mission in Abu Dhabi, Vote 230.9. Consulate in Guangzhou, Vote 232.10. Mission in Germany, Vote 225.11. Mission in Canada, Vote 203.12. Mission in India, Vote 204-“(Interjection) - I beg your pardon. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, continue with your motion. MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker, protect me from Hon. Rose Obigah. 13. Mission in Canberra, Vote 228.14. Mission in Juba, Vote 229.15. Mission in Denmark, Vote 218.16. Mission in Tanzania, Vote 207.17. Mission in Russia, Vote 227.18. Mission in DR Congo, Vote 221.19. Mission in Nigeria, Vote 208.20. Mission in Accra, Vote 233.21. Mission in Malaysia, Vote 235.22. Mission in Egypt, Vote 205.23. Mission in Iran, Vote 226.24. Mission in Saudi Arabia, Vote 217.25. Mission in Sudan, Vote 223.26. Uganda Embassy in Algeria, Vote 237.27. Mission in South Africa, Vote 209.28. Mission in Ethiopia, Vote 211, and29. Mission in Somalia, Vote 234.” Mr Speaker, I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by Hon. Komakech, Hon. Noman Ochero, Prof. Mushemeza, Hon. Nakut, Hon. Sylvia, Hon. Kabanda, Hon. Aisha Sekindi, Hon. Okaasai, Hon. Huda Oleru, and many of you, honourable colleagues. Thank you. 10716STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONDo you want to speak to this motion? Hon. Namukuta Brenda, the seconder. 8.13MS BRENDA NAMUKUTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion. First, I thank the mover of this motion. As Parliament, we are the legislative arm of the Government and we must be seen to uphold the Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land. In addition, our Rules of Procedure are very clear, specifically Rule 174(6) requires the chairperson of the committee to present the reports before the House for debate within a period of six months. As I speak now, the Auditor-General did his job and submitted his reports on 19 January 2023. However, we are now in the 10th month since this date as stated in the motion. Mr Speaker, allow me to remind the House that our mission statement, as Parliament, emphasises accountability as a core focus for this 11th Parliament. If we do not approve these reports, some of the recommendations of the Auditor-General will not be implemented by the Finance Ministry. Mr Speaker, it is from this background that I stand to second the motion. I beg to submit. Thank you. 8.15MR JULIUS TUSIIME (Independent, Rwampara East County, Rwampara): Thank you, Speaker. Allow me to applaud the mover of the motion- it is timely; the motion for a resolution of Parliament to adopt the recommendations contained in the Auditor-General’s report for the Financial Year ending 30 June 2022. I wish that this House is cognisant of the provisions of Article 163 that mandates the Auditor-General to present this report and also Section 13 of the National Audit Act, 2008. Timeliness in the execution of our work is paramount. You have always guided us ably that we should judiciously pay attention to our work as committees and ensure that we deliver as Parliament. You mentioned at the start of this Parliament that we are a pro-people Parliament and indeed our mandate is to execute some of these tasks that we have for us to be seen to be a people’s Parliament. For the recommendations to be acted upon in time, it is important that we also do our part. The Auditor-General is a staff of this Parliament and has enabled us to do our work easily. I, therefore, second this motion that we adopt the recommendations aware that we shall creatively in the future have a way of working and ensure that committees deliver on their tasks. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, as I guided earlier, once we finish this adoption process, then Treasury Memoranda will be brought here. Then someone had asked me that, what are the committees going to do? The committees have Treasury Memoranda which they should now start processing from the previous years. That should also be now a major focus; Treasury Memoranda are actions taken. I also encourage sectoral committees to interest themselves in these reports when they are processing Ministerial Policy Statements. The committees should ask: These issues were raised; how come we are not seeing them being covered in your budgeting process? How do we ensure that we follow up on them? Thank you. Honourable colleagues, is there anyone who wants to say anything? I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to adopt recommendations contained in the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year ended 30 June, 2022 be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)[The Deputy Speaker] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION10717THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I want to thank you, especially you who have remained here since yesterday because you have supported us as the leadership of the House to ensure that our business for the week is completed. Yesterday we processed 12 items and today, we have done 10; it is unbelievable. (Applause)  This means we have managed to catch up with the day we had lost. As the leadership of the House, I will be consulting our senior colleagues and each one of you, let us reach out to our brothers and sisters in the Opposition. Let us not reach out to them by showing that we have the numbers and we can do business. It is not the right way of doing it. Let us reach out, we need their voice; they add and contribute a lot to what we are doing. Therefore, let us use this weekend to reach out to them. I will be reaching out to some of you to talk to our friends and the moment you use good language, people feel accommodated. We should not use language that is so dismissive to our colleagues. In the end, we are all honourable Members of Parliament and we face the same. I thank you. Hon. Kabanda you want to say something; I saw you itching and this weekend you will be in the media. 8.20MR DA VID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende):  Thank you, Speaker. First of all, I think we should begin by thanking the Members who have been able to stay, even when our colleagues on the other side have chosen to leave the House because we can also decide to go. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I started with, honourable member.MR KABANDA:  Nobody has chased away our brothers and sisters on the other side. Maybe what they are doing works for them in their constituencies and at their headquarters. You know we are in a period of renewing contracts of leadership and they are also competing for these positions. Maybe Hon. Mpuuga and his colleagues are doing is to compete for those positions. Therefore, let us support them to continue doing what they want to do –(Interjection)-  yes, we support them to continue doing what they want to do.Mr Speaker, we have been following. We want to thank you, as this side, for your resilience and commitment to supporting these people. There is nothing that you have not done for them. (Applause)  They are the ones who are not grateful. Nobody should think that the 11th Parliament and its leadership, especially the Deputy Speaker who has been chairing all these sittings, has not been accommodative. You have supported them and I have been following comments on social media; nobody has condemned your actions. There is no Ugandan who has not been satisfied with your leadership. Therefore, stay calm. Be firm. We are here to stand with you and we will be here to continue standing with you even in the near future. Do not be shaken, do not be moved by their politics. We are here with you, Mr Speaker. Even in the next kisanja , if God wishes, we shall be here with you. Nobody should intimidate you. As I conclude, by you, the leadership of Parliament, giving these people a chance to have their item on the Order Paper, they should also be grateful. We have been coming to your offices, but you say, “Okay, let us first give them.” Supposing you had decided to put their item to be the last on the Order Paper, what would have happened? You are being accommodative; therefore, I want to appeal to these people; Nobody should take your good heart for granted. You have been a leader, you are tolerant and for us, as Parliament Members on this side, we shall continue supporting you. (Applause)10718STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Kabanda. Honourable colleagues, you know our Speaker is on leave, but I requested her to join me in all this and she had to cut her leave short – despite the difficult conditions she is in – to remotely join us and we tried to talk to our brothers and sisters. The only request I would like to make is that we should not get tired. I was trying to avoid opening this up, but if you can allow me, I can pick a few seniors; Prof. Mushemeza, Hon. Byanyima, Member from Jonam County and Hon. Oleru. Thank you.8.25PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Political democracy entails three important elements; contestation, respect of civil liberties and participation. Uganda chose a multi-party system during the referendum. The multi-party system will not be complete in a legislature when the Opposition is outside the House. This is why I appreciate the Speaker’s advice to the Government side that they should continue to engage. We need to applaud the Speaker on that. (Applause)  Yes, we have the numbers, including the Independents, who are NRM-leaning, but that is not enough. Some of these Opposition Members are actually friends. However, how do we package our messages even when we are in this House? Just one sentence or statement, can send the fire and even tarnish the image of this House. I side with you, Mr Speaker, that we continue to engage our colleagues. (Interjection)  I do not expect to be heckled when I am submitting on a serious matter. These are the kind of statements that put our honourable colleagues on tension. In the earlier session, one of our honourable colleagues, Hon. Rev. Fr Onen, made a very serious statement that he even thought of resigning from this House because of the kind of behaviour he was seeing. Sometimes, when I am seated, such thoughts come; “Am I in the right place? Is this the kind of behaviour?” And some of the honourable members are my former students. I ask myself, “Are these the students I taught?” (Laughter)  We have to re-examine ourselves on the way we behave. I have never accessed a microphone without the permission of the Speaker. Even when I stand and I am not picked, I go back and sit. Sometimes, the way you grab a microphone and talk to a colleague – even on the same side, I think we need to re-examine ourselves. The way we behave among ourselves and towards our honourable colleagues, is what will make the public to respect us, as legislators and not representatives of the small conclaves. Once we are here, we are national leaders -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I will resist from responding to people who are not on record.  (Laughter)In conclusion, let us continue with the engagement both formally and informally so that the other side is here. That is when we shall enjoy the House and be able to respond to those who raise issues firmly and scientifically.8.29MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Much as I would like to agree with Hon. Mushemeza, as you put it this afternoon, yesterday some of us had the courtesy of being invited to your boardroom. It was a cross-section of Members of Parliament across the country. We had a very candid and heart-to-heart discussion. We agreed that we would not have anything concerning the earlier issues so that we cool down, but you saw what happened. I am worried that they might be up to something that we do not know. Yesterday, we agreed with the Leader of the Opposition together with Members from the Opposition and NRM, and I thought we would come back because we all trust you.We are happy with your leadership and you do not need to get worried because we are behind COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR10719THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023you. However, as Parliament, we become a whole when they are here. But at the same time, we cannot overstretch. We cannot burn our bridges, but they are burning their bridges. When you burn a bridge, where will you pass when you come back?Mr Speaker, these Members are up to something else. They are good friends of mine and I talk to them, but they change like chameleons any time. Yes, some few Members should stretch a hand and talk to them, but let us keep our loyalty to ourselves and be more disciplined than them. I thank you. (Applause) 8.31MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko):  Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to my colleagues on our side to maintain calmness and discipline while in this House and I commend Members in doing so. The other side is being deliberately provocative, as earlier on, alluded to. They are up to something, but we must not fall into their trap.They want to play to the gallery; they want publicity and attention for reasons best known to them. Having said that, we must also work for a win-win situation. In working for a win-win situation, we must be able to concede in some areas in order to win them to our side. I am sure, Mr Speaker, you are very capable of doing that.These people are in a game to embarrass Government and they will not give up, and they have identified a few people to spearhead this chaos. We must reach out to those who are reasonable, talk to those who can influence the others to calm down in a win-win situation. We are fully behind you. Thank you.8.33MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am almost failing to speak because it pains me. When I am campaigning in Jonam, there is one thing I keep telling those people. And maybe I should start by saying that Pakwach is 85 percent NRM, but I am in FDC. When I am finishing my campaigns, I tell the people of Pakwach that; “The day you elect me and I am going to Kampala to work, I will leave my party in the house. I am going as a national leader and not going to be putting on the lens of the FDC or of the Opposition. I am going to be reasoning on issues the way they come before me.”Based on what Professor has stated here, that even from the NRM side, let us try very much – like the Speaker said, we know that we have the numbers, but let us also try to look at issues in the ways they have come. I see that some of us sometimes want to look at issues through the lens of our parties. To me, that will not take us far, and I am appealing – I do not know if my colleagues in the Opposition are seeing – I am appealing that let us to speak to our hearts and the hearts of the issues that brought us here. That we are going to be looking at issues and ensure that we function as a Government.I personally look at myself as being part of this Government. You may say; “He is in the Opposition,” but I am part of this Government because I am here in Parliament. That is the spirit in which we should be looking at issues that come before us. You remember in my first submission today, I stated that sometimes because of orders from above, we push our security personnel into doing things that they even question in their hearts. We also need to be asking ourselves about some of these things.As I come towards the end, I am very proud to have a commissioner here who was my staff. I worked purely with international non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and that is why maybe sometimes my outlook on issues and also politics is totally different. Hon. Solomon Silwany was my staff; he knows exactly who I am, and that is why sometimes when I see him excited, I go and remind him that “I am your boss.” (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I think the joke which you made when we were in Bukedea, you remember you joked and said that, “Emmanuel, now 10720STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITIONwhich FDC are you in?” That joke was about to cause me problems for some other people, but fortunately, I will never be derailed. Honourable – your neighbour, you better do something for me. You remember in one of the dailies, the New Vision  of a certain Saturday, it was all about me being in a secret meeting with MK and it was just that greeting in Bukedea. (Laughter)  I even do not think that MK can remember my face because I only greeted and talked to him for two or three minutes. However, coming back to what the Speaker and also Professor has stated, where we can reach out to our colleagues, let us try to. Of course, if you also see a certain age group, some of them are still very excited, but we can still try to reach out to them. Those who want to listen, fine, but those who do not want to listen, let us go ahead and make sure that the Government runs well. That is all I can say. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. We shall assign Hon. Kabanda to reach out to these people because most of them are his colleagues and they have been together for a long time. (Laughter)8.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Ms Huda Oleru):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us this opportunity to make a few comments on the issues that have been going on in this august House. I thank you, for showing all the characteristics of being a good leader – Being patient, tolerant, kind and accommodative, you have done it all. (Applause)We are in multiparty politics and indeed, there are times when we are discussing and we can go with our party positions, but as Members of Parliament and specifically me, who sits as a member of the Central Executive Committee (CEC) of the National Resistance Movement, sometimes when you are leading us here, I even feel together with my colleagues who are watching you as the leadership of this House, we feel that you give more opportunities to the Opposition.However, because we want to move together, we agree with it. But it is like your kindness has been taken for granted. We are in this House as Members of Parliament, and our cardinal role is to represent the people who have voted for us.Therefore, if you have decided to leave the House, you are cheating your people. If it were in a mature democracy, some of your voters would give you a vote of no confidence because you are misrepresenting their issues.Just because we developing our democracy and our people do not know what we are supposed to do here, they may be praising you for leaving the House, but it is wrong. These are some of the issues that we are grappling with, but we shall handle them. As a member of the ruling party, we know that we have the numbers that can make this House to run, but aware that we are in a multiparty dispensation, we want our colleagues to be here because sometimes the issues they raise here are like checks and balances for us in Government.We pick the issues here, we refine them and come back to give better solutions for this country. So, if they can look at it in that direction, let them come back. However, if they do not come back, the House will continue as it has done today; the ball is in their hands. Lastly, Mr Speaker, take heart, you know that we are watching and you are doing us proud; continue to do it. For God and my Country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Huda, being on the Central Executive Committee of the ruling party – honourable members, there is a platform that the political [Mr Ongiertho] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR10721THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 19 OCTOBER 2023parties have, I think we need to engage the Electoral Commission on this. The National Consultative Council, which is provided for under the Political Parties and Organisations Act – because the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) is not provided for under that law. It needs to be activated because, here, we are made to handle issues in which we have not played any role. These are issues to do with civic space that should be handled at that level, where the Chief Executive of the country plays a very critical role. The political parties should be able to talk. However, here, it seems that when you talk to someone, it becomes a problem. Hon. Emmanuel said he greeted Hon. Kabanda’s principal and it immediately became a full story. Just greeting alone. People even fear to greet. I have had some MPs who have come and whispered to me. “My brother, forgive me. If I don’t…” They have been telling me: “If I don’t follow suit, I am going to be in trouble.” You could also see that many of them are not even coming.That is why I said we should have continued engagement – and we should not get tired.Honourable colleagues, I gave you that analogy – I do not know whether Hon. Kabanda was already in – where Mr Hare was going to be eaten by a lion. We talked about it yesterday with Hon. Byanyima. The lion said: “I am going to eat you.” The Hare looked at it and said: “Well, you can eat me because you are stronger than I am, but I will not allow you to eat me with onions, salt – and you fry me. You will eat me with dust. I will soil the meat and I will be too dusty for you to enjoy.” (Laughter)So, can we try to ensure that, indeed, we accommodate each other? That is what I pray for. ADJOURNMENTThe House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.(The House rose at 8.47 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 October 2023, at 2.00 p.m.)