

Tuesday 4, October 2016

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have just been informed that the motion under item No.5 will not be moved today, because the honourable member who is moving this motion is hosting His Excellency the President, in her district this afternoon. She will, therefore, not be able to move this motion today, but she has requested, together with the seconder, that the motion be moved tomorrow. Therefore, the motion will not be moved today; it will be moved tomorrow. 

There is a matter that was pending that should have been handled today, but it was not brought to the attention of the presiding officer early enough; that is the motion on food security. That one will also be handled tomorrow because by the time they came, the Order Paper had already been published. 

Honourable members, as the Clerk was reading the prayer, I was reflecting on particularly the last words of the prayer when I heard it today - “Let your blessing descend upon them here assembled, and grant that they may, as in your presence, treat and consider all matters that shall come under their deliberation in so just and faithful a manner as to promote your honour and glory and to advance the good of those whose interests you have committed to their charge”. 

Honourable members, have you been able to reflect on this prayer properly? I think when we sit here as Parliament, it is for the good of those whose interests have been committed to our charge. So, there is no individual in this Parliament. There is no Jacob Oulanyah, Godfrey Kiwanda, Ruth Nankabirwa or Angiro Gutumoi in this Parliament; there is the Parliament of Uganda. 

We are charged with that one responsibility - those interests that have been committed to our charge, and my simple understanding of this is that these are the interests of the people of Uganda. Therefore, whether we propose questions or motions, or conduct debate in the manner in which we do, or whether we make rulings, whatever we do should be guided by that same principle, that the one guiding principle is the interest of the people of Uganda. If we focus on that, then we shall avoid a lot of things. 

Therefore, honourable members, if matters arise that are within your knowledge, you have a duty to clarify to this Parliament and to the country; otherwise, misinformation will take over everything. If you have information in your knowledge and something has come out portraying it differently, you have a duty to this Parliament and to the people of this country to say, “No, that is not what happened; this is what happened”. That will save people from speculating and would save this Parliament from being anxious over nothing. 

Therefore, honourable members, if you have information about some of the things that have happened or that are happening, you have a duty to inform the House and the people of this country, “Honourable members and fellow Ugandans, this is what is going on”. That way, there will be peace in the House and peace in the country. If the highest legal forum has issues, then the interest of the people of Uganda is threatened; we cannot articulate these issues properly if we are focusing on other things other than what we need to focus on in this Parliament. 

When I heard this prayer being read again today, I thought we should reflect more on what actually it means - “Promote your honour and glory and to advance the good of those whose interests you have committed to their charge”. We should reflect on this a little more and find out what we are being called upon to do by our prayer to God. Thank you. 

2.13
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance, concerning the people of Burahya County, who I represent in this Parliament. 

About two weeks ago, we were hit by heavy rains, hailstones and heavy winds. One of the sub-counties in Burahya called Kasenda, with a total of about 20 villages, was badly hit. People have nothing to feed on; all the bananas are down and all their crops have been spoilt by the hailstorm. 

We have written to the Prime Minister’s Office, and we have registered everybody in this sub-county – every homestead that was affected, but we have not got any response. I do not even see any minister from the Prime Minister’s Office here, especially the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. 

This is not the only area which is affected. Mr Speaker, you know the geography of Kabarole District; it is hilly and there are heavy rains in that place. As we speak, the roads are impassable in these subcounties that have been affected. The other subcounty that was affected is Busoro Subcounty. This happened over the weekend; there were heavy rains and winds and all the bananas are down. The villages affected in this place include the President’s model village of Rwengaju, Bakebwa, Kicuna and Kigarama. These ones are not as badly off as the other one where the whole subcounty was affected and families were left with nothing to feed on. 

The people are looking up to Government for assistance. They have nowhere else to look. The affected communities need relief in form of food and seeds that can germinate quickly, so that they can have food in the next two or three months. They also need inputs like hoes and iron sheets because some families had their roofs carried away by the heavy wind. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I want to thank hon. Margaret Muhanga, who has raised this pertinent matter. Mr Speaker, the motion you talked about, which you should have probably been briefed about, and which will be moved by hon. Jacquiline Amongin tomorrow, includes many areas which rotate around preparedness. Today it is Burahya, tomorrow it will be some other area and yesterday it was another area. I think we need a comprehensive solution to this. 

I usually stand and say I will inform the ministry in charge, but this is not enough. I think we need to reflect more on this matter. Bad rains are still coming and we need to find immediate, short-term and long-term solutions. 

As I speak, I cannot promise that tomorrow I will be in Burahya with something. However, I know that after the debate tomorrow, we will agree here in Parliament to do what we call “prioritising”. Areas that are extremely affected will be given priority with the meagre resources available. The Shs 3 billion, which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has now released for the disaster sector, is not even enough to handle what we have on the Floor. 

Therefore, I request, Sir, that tomorrow as we debate comprehensively, we will come up with an agreed position on areas to prioritise, because money is not enough. This is all I can say.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The same problem that was witnessed in this House last week is again emerging; the member for Burahya is raising a matter of urgent public importance and there is nobody to give an answer, but there is only a generalised statement by the Government Chief Whip. 

The procedural matter I am raising is based on rule 103(1), which reads, “For any Ministry, the Minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend sittings of the House; and where none of them is able to attend, a Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interests in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly.”

Mr Speaker, I would have risen up much earlier but I did not; it is just that we are again sequestered in the same problem. Where are the responsible ministers? Last week, a directive was made to the Clerk of this House to come up with a list of the names of ministers who have made this a habit. Despite that warning, you can see that in the whole office, there is nobody to give us consolation, a way forward or to show that indeed Government is in charge.

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Speaker to give a directive to this House and it ends in vain or goes without any recourse or the attendant response it deserves? Are we procedurally right to continue lamenting about disasters, in this particular case, when the responsible ministers are deliberately away without any explanation to the Speaker? You ought to be in the know. We also have no explanation from the Government Chief Whip telling us the way forward.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before I give guidance on that matter, Government Chief Whip, where are the ministers responsible for this sector?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, hon. Hillary Onek is in Geneva on official duty; he communicated to you and to my office. Hon. Musa Ecweru is also on duty outside this country; he also communicated. There are only two ministers in that docket, although they are under the Office of the Prime Minister, where the Government Chief Whip sits and attends top management meetings. 

Yesterday, we had a top management meeting, so the information I was giving was not just a gamble; I was giving you facts. I am sorry I should have probably begun by giving an apology for the ministers who are not here; maybe that was an omission, but the ministers are out on duty and the office of the Speaker was informed. The Leader of Government Business is in the know and so is the Government Chief Whip. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I guide on the procedural matter raised? Honourable members, this House has a mandate to discuss, pass laws and do whatever it has to do under the Constitution. In doing that, it has to be assisted by the Government whose responsibility it is to move most of the business that is handled in this House. The absence of the sector ministers badly affects the operation of this House. You can see some of the manifestations of this lack of cooperation coming from the Executive. 

Today, I had to limit matters of urgent public importance; we should have had 12 of them but I have limited them to eight and I have scheduled others for tomorrow and they are already four. Why? This is business that is not on the Order Paper and it makes it difficult for the Speaker to finish business that is on the Order Paper. It is because Members are trying to find avenues where they can get quick solutions to what they have to raise and yet the rules are very clear about what we should do. However, because the Executive is not responding to the issues by the Members, now we use these avenues and this is not good. For one hour now, we have been considering urgent matters. That is not part of the business scheduled and agreed upon by the Business Committee; why are you forcing us to do this? 

Government Chief Whip, your response – for lack of a better word – was most unfortunate. To say that you are waiting for the debate tomorrow and then you will rank priorities on how you will intervene on disasters – When you have a Cabinet, why would you wait for the House? (Applause) I thought you would be saying, “We are coming tomorrow with ranked priorities and we will advise the House on how we are going to proceed with this matter”. Now you want to leave it to this Parliament to discuss a motion and come up with priorities. I think that is not fair. This House is only trying to fix this because there is a gap; if there was no gap, there would be no motions to that effect. So, please, do not rely on this House to generate priorities for you. Please, do your work and let us do ours. (Applause)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. However, the Government Chief Whip stands in between Cabinet and the House. I thought that I was respecting this House when I listened to hon. Jacqueline Amongin and we agreed that we should come up with a comprehensive position. However, much obliged, Sir. 

I wish this House to note that I mentioned Shs 3 billion, which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as of yesterday released to handle the current disasters. That Shs 3 billion is just a drop in the ocean according to the requests we have got on the Table. We will prioritise where we do not have adequate funds. We may even stretch and see where to reduce in order to save the lives of the people. 

I will inform this august House on what we have come up with, but taking into consideration the recommendations that would have come from the Floor of this august House. We shall do that tomorrow; I have not asked for two weeks. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. It is unfortunate that after we had discussed this matter at length last week, the Government Chief Whip, whom we tried to help to devise a method of whipping ministers so that they are available, today seems to have shifted her position. 

We agreed last week that today this Parliament would read out the list of ministers who have been absconding from this House. We would like to know why they accepted to be ministers and yet, they do not attend the sittings to answer some of the key issues that affect their sectors. The Government Chief Whip was present and she laboured and said that she had used all the means within her powers to move the ministers, but they do not comply. However, the same Government Chief Whip today seems to be covering them up. 

Mr Speaker, if the motion raised by hon. Amongin did not come up, how was Government going to bring those priorities here? If the motion was never brought to this Parliament highlighting the plight of the people, how were you going to come to this Parliament with those priorities?

It is important that this Parliament addresses the issues of fear of the Government to deal with matters that affect the people. The Government Chief Whip should stop covering up the ministers. She has one office; she does not sit in all those offices. The Government Chief Whip should do her work and not be seen to be doing other people’s work. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, this is for record purposes. There were two issues in the matter which was raised. There was a matter raised by hon. Muhanga regarding the calamity that has befallen the people of Burahya. The other matter was raised by hon. Ssekikubo regarding the attendance of ministers. I stood here to answer hon. Muhanga and also to give accountability for the minister in charge of the issues that hon. Muhanga raised. I was not supposed to defend any minister who had not been mentioned. 

When hon. Cecilia Ogwal stood on a point of procedure, she deliberately continued misunderstanding and portraying me as a person who does not have a clear stand - that on Thursday, I was spot-on about the ministers who were not attending but today that I am covering up. Is she in order to misunderstand me? (Laughter) 

Last week on Thursday, there were five ministers present in the House. Today, we have 20 ministers and by close of the House, we may probably have more than 20 ministers. I did my best and I am still continuing to do so with the help of Gen. Moses Ali. I am not covering up for anybody else. I was uncomfortable and wondered whether she is in order to insinuate that I am covering up for ministers, yet I am not covering up for anybody? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the first point that was raised was whether the Member was in order to misunderstand. That is difficult to rule on because in this circumstance, you cannot understand who is misunderstanding the other. (Laughter) However, concerning the issue of making statements that seem to suggest or infer improper motive on another, I think there is a rule against that. If that is where the honourable focused by saying that the Government Chief Whip was covering up, that clearly imputes improper motive in this House and would not be in order.

However, concerning the procedural matter that was raised by the Member, I think that is what I said. I said that it is not proper for the Government Chief Whip to even be caught thinking that it is this House to generate business for the Executive. It is the other way round; it is the Executive to generate business for this House. For you to say that you are waiting for the motion of this House to be debated and thereafter, you will generate your priorities, I think is changing it. 

Let the Executive handle its work, come up with priorities, bring policies, attach money to them and we will approve the policies, loans and budgets. However, you should not suggest that you will wait for our motion and then you move; you will be overloading this House. 

I am not even sure of the extent of your preparations to debate that motion tomorrow from the way you are proceeding now. By the time that motion comes tomorrow, you should have had bullet point responses on what the Government will do in relation to the matter raised in that motion. However, it seems that you are waiting to see how the motion will progress and then you pick pieces from it. That may not be proper, Government Chief Whip.

2.32
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, considering your good guidance and your very informed position on this matter; and considering the statement raised by my good mother, hon. Cecilia Ogwal; aware that the issue concerning the persistence absence of ministers in Parliament was raised last week; further aware of the statements brought forward by my brother, hon. Ssekikubo, from Ssembabule, I am moved to proceed under rule 48 - oral notice of motions - which states, “Notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 47 –
(a) a Member may with the leave of the Speaker, give oral notice of a motion during a sitting…”

Mr Speaker, I would like to use this opportunity to give notice of a motion that I intend to move on the displeasure with the ministers and the Executive concerning the way they are handling their business in Parliament. You are aware that all over our country –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you justifying a motion which –

MR OKOT OGONG: I am giving the preamble-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is no preamble because you are just giving notice. Honourable members, when the Member is ready, that motion can be moved. Notice is received. 

MS MUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I just had one complaint to raise with the Government Chief Whip. In the event that these ministers are out of the country, I do not think they move with their offices. She has talked about the Shs 3 billion that they discussed about yesterday in their management meeting, but not all of us attend top management meetings in the Prime Minister’s Office. When we write letters to the Prime Minister’s Office or any other office such as education or health, they should at least have the courtesy of replying to our letters and queries, about the things that are required in our areas. 

I have written letters to them but they have not replied. I now hear the Government Chief Whip talking about the money from another meeting all together. Somebody should have had the courtesy of writing and letting us know that they had received our letters, but as per now, nothing can be done. They should have advised us to be patient while Government plans what to do. That is what we are asking of them because ministers have assistants. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think the concern is noted and corrective measures should be taken. 

2.35
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to draw your attention as well as that of the honourable members of Parliament here to something that happened this afternoon. We were supposed to receive students from Buyaka Senior Secondary School from Bulambuli District who were invited by my sister, hon. Sarah Wekomba, and I. 

On a sad note, I have just received very bad news that while on their way here, they were involved in a terrible accident. As I speak, four of them are dead and the survivors are in a very critical condition in Mbale Referral Hospital. That is why I thought it best to share this grief with my fellow Members of Parliament.

I actually had another issue of national importance to raise but now I have no energy. As you see me now, I am very weak because we had invited them to see what exactly takes place in the House and to also see how I deliberate on issues. Unfortunately, Satan decided to disorganise my plan. 

Mr Speaker, I request that the members join me in mourning the gallant sons and daughters of Uganda, who would, probably, have been the next Members of Parliament in 2035 when I leave. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we take the sad news from the honourable member for Bulambuli. Our prayers are with the families of those who are deceased and those who are in hospital; we pray that they may recover. For those who have departed, may their souls rest in eternal peace. 

Honourable members, it would be proper for us to rise at this moment because those were our guests; they were coming here. So let us observe a moment of silence. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

2.39
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the disaster and calamities following the heavy rains in Buhweju County. 

I appreciate that the Government Chief Whip is talking about bringing a motion to this House tomorrow. However, the road connecting Buhweju to Rubirizi District is no more because the bridge was washed away. Vehicles are stuck and there is no business going on. There are also four other bridges that have been washed away. About 10 families have nowhere to go because their houses were destroyed, and banana plantations have also been destroyed. 

Of course, it is the role of Government to protect people and their property. As we wait for the ministers who are not around, what will happen to our people? I am sure the ministers will not even be here to debate tomorrow’s motion. I would like to request that Government steps in to help the people who are dying in Buhweju. It is their right to live and it is also the duty of Government to protect the people and their property. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think there is a similar matter from the Member for Kashongi County. Where is the Member? 

2.41
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday, 3 October 2016, there was a heavy downpour all over the country and Kashongi County was affected. As I speak now, many homes were blown off by wind and most of the cash crops, including food crops, were affected. Last month, I raised the same issue on this Floor of Parliament. I requested the Government of Uganda to come to the rescue of my people in Kashongi but nothing has been done so far. Therefore, I would like to report to this House. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday’s rain and wind destroyed six homes as well as crops in my county. One Pentecostal church got demolished by the heavy downpour. At Karama Community Primary School, four classrooms were completely wrecked. Many cash crops such as cassava, coffee and bananas were also lost in this weather. 

I call upon the Government of Uganda as well as the Prime Minister to come to the rescue of the people of Kashongi County. The rains have not only affected Kashongi County, but the whole country. My appeal to the House is that these people do not only need help in terms of food relief but also provisions of other items, including iron sheets and food crops. The rains are very important but whenever they come, they affect most people. I, therefore, call upon this House to come to the rescue of these people of Kashongi for steady progress. I rest my case.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT)(Mr Henry Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue raised by my colleague, hon. Mwijukye, about the road being washed away from Buhweju to Rubirizi, will be taken up immediately. We shall use our emergency fund at Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and see whether this road can be handled. Therefore, by the close of the week, our team should be on the site to make assessments and action will be taken immediately. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. I have heard what my two friends, hon. Mwijukye and hon. Turamye, have raised. The minister has talked about an emergency fund in UNRA, but we have what we call the Uganda Road Fund. I wrote to the Uganda emergency fund last year in September but up to now, they have never given me the money I asked for, and yet it was an emergency.

I would like to seek clarification as to whether we have an emergency fund in UNRA or it is the Uganda Road Fund; where do we go when we face such problems?  

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Concerning the question that my colleague has just asked, as a ministry we have to be prepared. We know that the rains are on, so there are some critical areas that might be destroyed. Therefore, out of our budget, we prepare and put aside some funds to make sure that we can handle such emergencies that crop up under situations like excessive rainfall and such other sources of disaster.

On the issue of the road fund, this is a matter that my colleague should know about; the Road Fund is an agency, which is still under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The sector of works and transport gets resources from them, but we are not in charge of the fund. It is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that is in charge of it.

The other issue is that I am surprised that my colleague has said that he wrote to them. When the road fund sends money, they do not send it to Members of Parliament; they send the money to the districts. Each district receives its quota from the Road Fund. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, with due respect, has the minister answered my question? He has not. I asked him whether we get the emergency fund from UNRA or Uganda Road Fund. The answer is simple; it is either UNRA or Uganda Road Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the minister said that in his own ministry, they created this fund he is talking about because they would have foreseen the things that are likely to happen that they would have to intervene. They have their own money, which they set aside for emergency. That is what he said. He did not have to say whether it is the Uganda Road Fund or not; he said that the one he is referring to is the one that is in his ministry.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, the minister is not helping these Members. If what he is stating is true, they would not be raising this matter. Their concerns have not been attended to and that is why they raised them here. This is the reason why the Members are saying that the House should help them. 

If there is money, why don’t you attend to these issues because it is raining everywhere now? Since you are in charge of that ministry, you should be in the know about the roads and the areas of Uganda where rain has started and which areas need help. Why should we be here asking for money yet you have it? Mr Speaker, let them report back tomorrow.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague is insisting on a matter that is really obvious. I am the Minister of State for Works and Transport in charge of transport. I have categorically said here that the Uganda Road Fund is an agency in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; I am not at liberty to speak for the Uganda Road Fund.

I categorically said that for us as the Ministry of Works and Transport, we know that during the rainy season, there will be destruction of bridges and some roads will be washed away. Therefore, we use part of our budget appropriated to the sector and set aside some resources, so that when there is an emergency of that nature, we can use it. 

At times when a bridge that has been washed away or broken down is a very large one, we may not be able to handle it with these funds, so we seek the assistance of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or Government in general. We then take the matter to Cabinet to look for resources. However, for small emergencies, we can deploy our equipment and use our vote on account because we have that little money that is put aside. Therefore, I have categorically said that we can only handle small emergencies immediately.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. After he has made a commitment to my colleague to have the road that has been washed away in his district fixed, I am sure he is equally aware of the matter of urgent public importance that I have raised before about Bududa. In Bududa, we have not only had roads washed away but also bridges. 

We now have heavy rainfall in Bududa, Sironko, Bulambuli - in fact, the whole of the greater Elgon region. Surely, if this money that he is terming as an emergency fund exists at all, it should not be selectively distributed. (Applause) We all require equity and attention. Therefore, is he also going to commit himself to attend to Bududa issues? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was information.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter of my colleague from Bududa is also noted. We are going to dispatch a team to see whether what has been washed away is within our means of management as of now. If it is not within our means, then we shall engage other partners in this case and see how we can fix these roads and bridges.

2.54
MR KENNETH ENSIANGU (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I arise on a matter of urgent public importance regarding the state of affairs and management of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. 

Mr Speaker, as of yesterday, Soroti Regional Referral Hospital has almost been grounded to a halt. This is occasioned purely by a gap created by the absence of the director in charge of this hospital. It is alleged that the director is on the run because of criminal allegations that are still under investigation. This has created a very big gap because he has not delegated his duties to anyone within the hospital. As such, the functioning of the hospital is almost grounded to a halt.

After further investigations, I managed to get some basic facts about this issue. I discovered that this is actually not a new issue. The Ministry of Health is aware of issues regarding the management of this hospital, but the action taken so far, dating from almost two years back -(Interruption)

MR ELOTU: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform my colleague that the problem of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital dates back to 2003. On 25 May 2015, the Chairman LCV of Soroti wrote a letter to the Director General of Health Services complaining -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter we are dealing with is the urgent one that happened yesterday. The Member is seeking for intervention regarding that. Therefore, 2003 is hardly of any help now. That can go to a committee, but for now we want a response on what happened yesterday.

MR ESIANGU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I request that since the ministry is aware of the issues concerning Soroti Referral Hospital, they should urgently address this matter; otherwise, I am quite aware that the public is almost taking this matter into their hands. Thank you very much.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to assure the House that we are very aware of this matter; it was brought to our attention yesterday. We received a letter from the Chairman LCV telling us to immediately transfer the director from the area - (Interjections)- Yes, he said that we should immediately transfer the Director of Soroti Regional Referral Hospital.

Mr Speaker, we are sending a technical person to go and find out exactly what the problem is and then we shall take appropriate action. However, I wish to make an appeal to colleagues. We have seen this happening in other districts; there was another case in Gulu where we discovered that the chairman had written asking the Director of Gulu Regional Referral Hospital to vacate his office and yet the authority lies elsewhere.  

Therefore, colleagues, although we are political leaders in the districts, let us respect the channels of communication. If there are any issues, please report them to the relevant offices so that action can be taken. Mr Speaker, we are aware of this issue and we are handling it. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it is now 3 o’clock and we have only been handling urgent matters and we are not even halfway through. I am now going to defer the other matters to tomorrow. Let us go now to the Order Paper. 

Members, at the end of this session of Parliament, we will not be assessed on how many urgent matters we handled but on how many motions, reports, Bills or questions for oral answer we handled. Even if we spent the whole day handling urgent matters, we will not be judged by that. Let us now go to our core responsibility, which is already outlined on the Order Paper. Tomorrow we will deal with the remaining matters from Kibaale, Ntengeru South, Pallisa County, Ngora County, Busongora North, Tororo North County and Buliisa. For now, let us go to the Order Paper. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week in the Speaker’s communication, she raised the same matter and stated that we are now four months into the Tenth Parliament but Government has not brought any business. She asked the Leader of Government Business to look into the same. Hon. Gumisiriza also raised similar issues and indeed, we were expecting to have something of that nature today.

Mr Speaker, would it be procedurally okay, because issues of national importance and statements have been handled, for the Leader of Government Business to tell us the status of Cabinet. Otherwise, as you have stated, we are not being judged well. We want to catch the big snakes and not the small ones. Wouldn’t it be procedurally okay for the Leader of Government Business to update us on why they are not giving us business, now that the frontbench is full?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that we have reminded the Leader of Government Business to give us more business. I was informed this morning that there are Bills that have been reprinted. Those Bills were already read for the first time, and there was a ruling by the Speaker at that time that Bills that have already been saved for work by this Parliament should not be read again for the first time, because they had been already read. She said that they should be reprinted and brought to the attention of Members. 

Therefore, this morning we noted that some Bills have already come here. Those Bills that have been reprinted will be laid on the Table tomorrow for purposes of the Hansard capturing them, and then we will refer them to committees. Those committees that are satisfied with the reports that have been prepared by the previous committees can adopt those reports and come back to the House so that we can read those Bills for the second time and proceed with processing them. 

In any case, those Bills that are coming in tomorrow to be laid on the Table and referred to the existing committees would not save the business of tomorrow, because the committees will also need time to look at them. So, there will still be no business tomorrow based on those Bills and probably even Thursday.

You also know that on Thursday, this House will rise for recess and resume on 14 November. We are hoping that by that time, all these issues will have been resolved. However, it would have been better if by the time we are going for recess, these Bills are already with the committees so that possibly, some committees could seek leave of the Speaker so that they can handle them. This would ensure that by the time we come back in November, we have business that we can handle. That is where we are, so let us proceed with what we have. Today we have statements from ministers, so let us handle those.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE ONGOING AND UPCOMING ROAD PROJECTS 2016-2020 UNDER UGANDA NATIONAL ROADS AUTHORITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is the statement circulated? Members, do you have copies of this statement? Proceed.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 24 August 2016, we presented a report on the status of the ongoing and upcoming road projects under the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) during the years 2016 to 2020. During the subsequent debate, Members observed that the statement was incomplete because it omitted some roads and bridges that had been included in the budgets of the previous financial years. Further, the statement omitted roads and bridges, which had been pledged by His Excellency the President for improvement at various fora. 

In view of the above gaps, we were advised to prepare a comprehensive statement that includes all roads and bridges planned for improvement during the 2016 to 2020 period, and thereafter update the House. Mr Speaker, I wish to, first of all, -(Interruption)

MR MANGUSHO: Mr Speaker, on Tuesday last week, when this House was being presided over by the Rt Hon. Speaker of the day, the people of Sebei presented a petition to this august House, detailing the uniqueness of the Sebei road. The petition was signed by over 8,000 members of the elite class of the Sabiny. Even the most senior Members of this honourable House testified that the people of Sebei had been promised “air” for the last two decades. The information is available here.

The Speaker of the day directed the Ministry of Works and Transport to come today and give the august House a clear statement concerning the Sebei-Kapchorwa-Suam Road, which has been pledged since 1986, when the NRM came into power. I can only give records of the most recent pledges, including that of hon. John Nasasira in the year 2008, affirming to this House -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural issue, please.

MR MANGUSHO: Is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to bring an omnibus statement instead of considering the petition by the people of Sebei? He is referring to a different situation and defying the petition of the people of Sebei, which he was told to present to this august House today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this particular matter was before this House and there was even a debate, but the debate revealed that there were gaps in the minister’s statement that needed to be beefed up with information. Members were not satisfied with the report and they asked the minister to go and develop a more comprehensive report and come back to the House. That is why it is scheduled on the Order Paper today under item No. 3(a). 

Therefore, is he proceeding correctly? Yes, he is. Are we proceeding correctly as a House? Yes, we are. However, your matter could be one of those that are still being processed. We will wait and see when it comes and then we deal with it, but this statement has also been pending. Proceed.

MR BAGIIRE: Mr Speaker, I wish to reiterate that investments in the transport sector are guided by the National Development Programme II (NDP II) and the National Transport Master Plan of 2008 to 2023. 

My ministry plans to finalise the Road Sector Development Programme, Phase 3 of 2017/2018 to 2024/2025. It will guide investments in the roads subsector during the next eight years, corresponding with NDP II and subsequently NDP III.

The road projects included in this statement have been compiled from the following sources: 

a) 	The National Roads Development Plan for Financial Year 2016/2017; 
b) 	The NRM Manifesto 2016-2021; 
c) 	The Government assurances for the works and transport sector, 2001-2016; 
d) 	The progress report for improvement of tourism roads by Uganda National Roads Authority; 
e) 	Various correspondences on the pledges of His Excellency the President regarding roads and bridges improvement;
f) 	The final report for the preparation of the third phase of the Road Sector Development Programme.

Mr Speaker, a lot of care and effort has been taken this time round to ensure that roads and bridges planned for improvement from the above sources of information are all included in this statement. 

Roads prioritised for tarmacking or rehabilitation and bridges selected for improvement during the 2016 to 2020 period have been selected on the basis of the following criteria:

a) 	Roads that meet the conventional economic appraisal parameters for internal rate of return, net present value and the cost benefit ratio.

b) 	Roads that serve as primary or arterial routes and are critical for opening up the hinterland of the country.

c) 	Roads in hilly or mountainous areas that are difficult to maintain as gravel or earth roads.

d) 	Roads that connect strategic border posts of the country, thereby promoting regional trade and integration.

e) 	Roads that are critical for the promotion of agriculture, trade, tourism, oil production and other economic activities.
f) 	Roads that are critical for provision of security, social and administrative services in rural areas.

g) 	Roads that are planned to decongest Kampala City.

Mr Speaker, with the above background, I wish to update the House and highlight the projects prioritised for implementation during the period 2016 to 2020. The projects have been categorised according to their current state in the project implementation cycle as follows:

(a) 	Road upgrading projects: The roads included in this category add up to 1,269 kilometres and are presented in Appendix I.

(b) 	Road rehabilitation projects: The roads included in this category add up to 690 kilometres and are presented in Appendix II.

(c) 	Bridge development projects: There are 25 bridges and the second Nile Bridge is in this category. They are presented in Appendix III.

(d) 	Road projects under procurement - civil works: The roads included in this category add up to 1,160 kilometres, and over 144 bridges are presented in this category in Appendix IV.

(e) 	The other category is roads that are under design. The roads included in this category add up to 3,130 kilometres; three bridges and the Kampala flyovers are among them. They are presented in Appendix V.

(f) 	The road projects under procurement - that is design consultancy. The roads included in this category add up to 1,190 kilometres and are presented in Appendix VI.

(g) 	Tourism roads: The roads in this category add up to 3,928 kilometres and are presented in Appendix VII.

(h) 	These are the ferries and landing sites. There are nine ferries and five landing sites in this category, which are presented in Appendix VIII.

(i) 	We have pipeline projects and in this category, we have 1,800 kilometres of roads. These are presented in Appendix IX. Mr Speaker, allow me to shed some light on what we mean by pipeline projects. This category represents projects that have not yet attracted funding but are already in the queue to commence the project cycle.

Mr Speaker, we also received a couple of handwritten comments and questions from honourable colleagues during the sitting of 24 August 2016. A number of questions and comments were raised by colleagues during the debate that followed my statement. For purposes of emphasis, I have provided specific responses to the questions and comments raised by colleagues in appendices X and XI. I also wish to note that some of the information provided in my specific responses is already provided in the other appendices, depending on the stage of the project cycle for the road or bridge in question.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, my ministry and UNRA are committed to improving the national roads network as outlined in the above projects, in support of other Government projects and also to facilitate economic activities and provision of security, social and administrative services. 

The projects outlined above call for adequate and reliable funding by Government and our development partners. I pray that Government and the development partners continue allocating sufficient financial resources to the roads sector in order to facilitate timely implementation of the ongoing and upcoming road projects during the period 2016-2010. Of course, Mr Speaker, we rely on Parliament when it gives appropriately to the sector.

Mr Speaker, last week, as my colleague has mentioned, and I would like to thank you for having ruled in my favour, the issue of our brothers and sisters from the Sebei sub region was brought up. It is addressed in this report. In addition, on Tuesday last week, we were directed to say something about ferries and particularly the Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido (BKK) Ferry. I have some more information on this ferry and it has been circulated. I do not know if I will be allowed to take the Members through that particular matter. Mr Speaker, I would also like to go through the responses and comments that Members raised in appendices X and XI.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it is so required, we will need to be able to give this particular statement a full and comprehensive debate. We actually had a debate that day and that debate was quite intensive and extensive. However, we said that there were gaps that needed to be filled. 

You can see that the minister has given a short statement and the appendices to the statement have the details of the particular roads, the categories they are in and at what stage they are at. The details are in all those pages going up to page 60. Are we ready to deal with this and finish it now? This information is quite a lot. 

If you are ready to debate it, I have no problem. However, if you want to study it so that you have very comprehensive responses to this, it would also be okay because it is quite bulky and the minister has only highlighted what is in the bulk of the report. Maybe we could allow the minister to give responses to those specific issues and then we see how to move on when we commence debate. Would that be okay?

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Considering the importance of this subject, I think that we should defer the debate to tomorrow because the explanation is brief but the details in the appendices are many. I feel that we cannot comprehend it now. I, therefore, beg your indulgence that we defer the debate to tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would it be okay for you? Should we take the responses on the issues from the minister now? [Members: “Tomorrow.”] Okay, we shall deal with the whole thing tomorrow so that we can finish with this sector. We can refer the other outstanding matters to the committee to consider them within its mandate and report to the House.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I would gladly support that view but perhaps we could let the minister make his presentation now and finish it and then tomorrow, we come for the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the minister has finished.

MR MAGYEZI: I thought he had some things to add on the appendices.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if there are issues that you want to raise now, this would be the time, so that tomorrow we debate and possibly have the responses.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to refer honourable colleagues to Appendix VIII on the ferries. This is an issue that came up last Tuesday and the Speaker directed that we talk about it.

Mr Speaker, under ferries and landing sites, we have the following:

1. 	To procure a second ferry on Lake Kyoga for the Namasale to Zengebe crossing. I would like to report that the ferry has been assembled and is under trial; it is on water.

2. 	To procure a new ferry for Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido crossing on Lake Kyoga, popularly known as BKK. I was directed that I must give this House a detailed explanation as to why this ferry is not in place. This is the paper that I am going to present to the august House, Mr Speaker.

3. 	To procure a new ferry for the Wanseko-Panyimur crossing. The ferry is being assembled and will commence operations this month.

4. 	To procure a new ferry for Sigulu Islands in Bugiri District –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the guidance you gave was very good, that Members should take time and read through the document so that we can engage meaningfully tomorrow. However, the honourable minister is trying to explain but he is just reading. I thought that he would actually respond to those issues tomorrow because we are going to read the document tonight and engage tomorrow. This would ensure that we do not waste Parliament’s time today. I would like to ask you, Mr Speaker, to ask him to sit down and give time to this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I had thought initially, but there are responses to a debate that was already carried out. Maybe it would help if they were actually responses but you are reading for us a list. Honourable minister, do you have responses to specific issues that were raised from the previous debate? If they are there, you could summarise them so that tomorrow, we handle both your response and also the pending matters in the report. Maybe you could go straight to that.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of ferries was specific –(Interruption)

MS CHEKWEL: Mr Speaker, I can see that the minister is responding to exactly what the Speaker directed last Tuesday. The issue of the ferry was raised as a matter of national importance and the issue of the Kapchorwa-Suam Road was a petition, and the Speaker directed that the minister comes here today to give detailed information on this road. I am now hearing the minister talking about the ferry only. I would like to ask whether the honourable minister is procedurally right to respond to only the ferry issues and leave out roads and yet these instructions were given at the same time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think we had finished with that part. We said that concerning the issue of the ferries on the list, Members will look at the list and have a debate tomorrow. However, there were issues that were raised in the debate and I think that includes – If he is ready with responses to the matters that were raised last week, he can also deal with them now and then we leave everything and do a full debate tomorrow. That is where we were. 

MR ABALA: I am very sorry, but this is very important, Mr Speaker. Appendix III, No. 19 is about Agule-Aleles-Ngora Bridge and it says, “Works substantially completed, opened to traffic and due for completion.” I would like to get clarification from the minister on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought we agreed that we would do that tomorrow. Please take note of these issues and those will be your points of debate tomorrow. 

MR ABALA: Mr Speaker, the problem with this is that nothing has been done there. That is why I wanted to get detailed -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, on what matter do you rise? 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for this statement. I think we are getting a problem because the minister combined all the questions that were asked and brought them under one statement. Therefore, it becomes a little bit hard for us to consider them in bits. 

I would, therefore, suggest that since he has combined the other statement, which he would like to give, with the main statement, we just wait and handle them both tomorrow. I would, therefore, ask the Members who asked those particular questions to get the opportunity to look at the information that the minister has provided and crosscheck it with what is on the ground. As we discuss tomorrow, we will then be in a position to merge the issues on both the ferries and the roads because we will have information regarding those issues.

Mr Speaker, I would pray that we just stay the matter until tomorrow when we shall be in a position to discuss everything. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, would that be a good way to proceed? I had suggested it earlier but there are gaps that you needed to fill. Honourable minister, can we handle this tomorrow?

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This matter was raised on the 24th September like I have alluded to here. However, subsequent questions and issues arose and some of the issues that were raised on Tuesday last week were in the report. A directive was given here that on Tuesday this week, which is today, I must bring a report on the status of the ongoing roads and that I must also talk about ferries. Ferries are also roads and this was a directive - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are saying that you have done all that and now we want to debate your statement. We are saying that we will do the debate tomorrow; that is all. We are not saying that you have not fulfilled your obligations. You have done so, but we will have the debate tomorrow after looking at the statement. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was in the House when the Minister for Works and Transport was directed by the Rt Hon. Speaker in the Chair to bring a detailed ministerial statement regarding the status of BKK and other ferries in the country.

Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is whether Appendix VIII can adequately substitute what can be construed as being a ministerial statement. By the look of Appendix VIII, my understanding is that it falls short of meeting the requirements of what a ministerial statement is because it lacks the details. If you want to understand the status of BKK, you cannot understand it from the summary contained in Appendix VIII.

Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether we are proceeding rightly if we allow the honourable minister to merely bring a summary in an appendix and he wants to equate it to a ministerial statement. Are we proceeding rightly, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, last week was not the first time that the matter of roads was discussed in this Parliament. I was presiding when a ministerial statement on the roads sector was brought, and I guided a debate here on the roads sector, bridges and all kinds of things - I remember the Member for Lira talking about Kaguta Bridge somewhere. Members contributed to the debate and we came to the conclusion that the report, as was then presented, was not sufficient. We therefore took a decision here that a more comprehensive statement be made, and that is this statement.

However, along the line, there were other debates on the same roads, bridges and other things and the Speaker directed then that a statement be made. All those issues are still on the roads sector and this is a ministerial statement. What the minister has tried to do is to combine all those things so that we can have a debate. If there are still gaps, we will handle those gaps. If the statement is insufficient and needs more interrogation, we will refer the matter to the committee for more comprehensive coverage so that the House will guide on where we are on the roads sector. 

This is the ministerial statement. All that the minister has tried to do is to put everything there so that the House can be guided. If there are gaps, we will raise them. If it is still insufficient, we will see how to proceed. However, as of now, I think we are okay. Honourable minister, you are waving documents –

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was getting to the issue of BKK. The statement is here and it has also been circulated to Members. When I started talking about ferries, because Members asked about five ferries I gave the details in Appendix VIII. Regarding BKK, I was directed to give an in-depth explanation about the status of BKK and it is right here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when I gave you the opportunity to present it, you started reading a list from the appendices. You did not guide the House that you had a statement; did you? Okay, proceed with that statement, honourable minister. 

Members, do you have a copy of this statement on BKK? Please check. Let us finish this so that we can have a comprehensive debate, honourable members. Otherwise, we will have gaps. Can the minister start while the paper is being distributed? Proceed, honourable minister.

MR BAGIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a brief on Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido Ferry.

In August 2007, the Office of the Prime Minister conceived a project to provide ferry services on Lake Kyoga. A formal memorandum of understanding delegation agreement was signed between the Office of the Prime Minister and Ministry of Works and Transport on December 11, 2007 to provide ferry services on Lake Kyoga, hereinafter referred to as the Bukungu-Kaberamaido-Kagwara (BKK) Ferry.

Later in February 2008, the need to procure ferry services across Lake Bisina was added to the project. The Office of the Prime Minister released some funds to Ministry of Works and Transport for procurement of two ferries; one for Lake Bisina and another one for Lake Kyoga. However, when the Office of the Prime Minister was presented with the total estimates for procuring the two ferries, they could only afford one. The Bisina ferry was procured, assembled and started operations in April, 2016. The balance of the funds was used to commence the procurement of the BKK Ferry as outlined below:

Progress on the Procurement of the BBK Ferry

I will begin with the background, Mr Speaker. The distance to be plied by the ferry was extensive. The lake condition and expected traffic volume was unknown. A consultant was engaged to study the crossing and come up with the selection/design of a suitable ferry to navigate the routes.

The routes would be marked with navigation aids. The consultant would also design suitable offshore infrastructure for the ferry and recommend their locations.

The Feasibility Study

Ingo Shulter Marine Consultants, a German company, was awarded a contract in 2010 amounting to €313,300 to, among others: 

i) 	Survey the route that the ferry would ply;
ii) 	Design and select the ferry and design the corresponding offshore infrastructure;
iii) 	Assist the ministry in procurement of the ferry and supervise its construction.

The consultant was also to assist in procurement of a contractor to build offshore infrastructure and supervise the construction works of both the ferry and offshore infrastructure. The activities were programmed to be achieved through the following three phases outlined below:

Phase 1 was to survey the following routes:

Bukungu and Kagwara;
Bukungu and Muntu;
Bukungu, Kaberamaido and Muntu.

This phase was completed and the routes decided: Bukungu (Buyende)-Kagwara (Serere)-Okile (Kaberamaido)

Phase 2 was to undertake the following: 

1. 	To design the ferry and its fabrication/maintenance facility known as the slipway.
2. 	To design the offshore infrastructure, which includes landings, passenger sheds, to mention but a few.

The phase was completed in August 2011.

In Phase 3, this was what was supposed to be undertaken:

1. 	To assist in the procurement of the builder of the ship and her slipway;
2. 	To assist in the procurement of a contractor for the offshore infrastructure;
3. 	To supervise the building of the ship and the construction of the offshore infrastructure.

Mr Speaker, the funds released by the Office of the Prime Minister were only enough to implement phases 1 and 2 of the project. Phase 3 is awaiting confirmation of funding in order to commence.

Mr Speaker, below are the estimated costs of acquiring the ferry and the corresponding infrastructure. The consultant came up with a final design of the ferry and related offshore infrastructure whose estimated cost is as follows, and that is dependent on the exchange rates as of now:

1. 	The ferry and its slipway, airbags, winch and associated costs of the construction, delivery and placing of navigation marks, labour and crew training would cost us US$ 7.96 million, which translates to Shs 27.46 billion as of now.

2. 	Preliminary cost estimate for the ferry offshore infrastructure at Bukungu, Kagwara and Okile would cost us US$ 4.4 million, which translates to Shs 15.18 billion.

The total cost would be US$ 12.36 million, which translates to Shs 42.6 billion.

Plan of Action

The Office of the Prime Minister later communicated to the effect that they were not in position to finance the project and advised my ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

On 4 February 2012, the Minister of State for Works and Transport wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appealing for the required US$ 12.36 million. However, as of now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not yet found the resources. The project is therefore still on halt pending availability of funds.

We are still engaging the Office of the Prime Minister to prevail over Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that in this planning budget cycle, this resource is availed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I think we are now okay with this matter of the BKK Ferry. Can we now have this debate tomorrow in order to have a comprehensive coverage of this subject? The debate is deferred to tomorrow and then we will conclude.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FUNDING FOR HEPATITIS B CONTROL FOR FINANCIAL YEARS 2015/2016 AND 2016/2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can see that this statement is going to be made by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and not the Minister of Health. That means that some issues have been resolved and we are looking forward to this statement.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE PLANNING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Reference is made to the concern raised by the Minister of Health on the Floor of Parliament in regard to the funding of hepatitis B control.

Before I read this statement, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that this House directed us to go and harmonise our position on this issue with the Ministry of Health. I am glad to report to you that we have harmonised it and we are here as a team to communicate the actions that have been taken and that we are going to take in moving forward.

Mr Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to provide clarification on the funding and releases made by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the financial year 2015/2016 and financial year 2016/2017. The Government of Uganda, in the financial year 2015/2016, allocated Shs 10 billion towards the procurement of vaccines, laboratory reagents and test kits for the treatment and prevention of hepatitis B in the Ministry of Health’s budget. The entire budgetary provision was released to the Ministry of Health on a quarterly basis. 

Additionally, a supplementary budget of Shs 11 billion was approved for the financial year 2015/2016. Out of the Shs 11 billion, Shs 3 billion was released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Ministry of Health.

For financial year 2016/2017 budget allocation and releases, the budget allocation was split between Ministry of Health headquarters and the National Medical Stores. Shs 2 billion was allocated under Ministry of Health to cater for data collection, data collection tools, training of health workers, vaccination of health workers, mobilisation, facilitation for testing and vaccination activities. Shs 8 billion was allocated to National Medical Stores for the procurement of the actual vaccines and test kits.

Out of the budget allocation for this financial year, 2016/2017, the table below shows the releases that have been made for the first quarter. In summary, we have released Shs 500 million to vote 014, Ministry of Health, and Shs 4.160 billion to National Medical Stores for this quarter.

Mr Speaker, the balance of the budget allocation for this item will be released in accordance with the cash flow plans of the Ministry of Health sector to support the control of hepatitis B. In brief, we will be able to release these funds as and when - according to the work plan of the Ministry of Health. 

I beg to submit on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on this issue and also on behalf of the Ministry of Health. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have a quick response from the Minister of Health about where we are, based on the statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

3.46
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for his submission. I also thank him for saying the truth, that the releases to the Ministry of Health have been minimal to support the response to hepatitis B effectively. 

I would also like to appreciate what Members have been raising on the Floor regarding hepatitis B. It is true that the release for this financial year - the Shs 10 billion that he has spoken about - has started coming to our accounts. However, you will realise that if we go at the pace that the money is being released to us, and with that amount, we are not going to be able to control this outbreak that is ongoing at the speed that is required.

Therefore, I still would like to appeal to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reconsider even the original supplementary that was allocated to the Ministry of Health because only Shs 3 billion of it was released to Ministry of Health. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is where we are. Not once, twice or thrice but more than five times this Parliament has engaged on this matter of hepatitis B. The issue was zeroed down to money - the shortage of it, its slow release - and there were issues of accountability and issues brought by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. That is where we are.

Therefore, we are not on the substance or the gravity of it because we know that matter and it has already been expressed. However, the issue now is the budget. Let us not divert from this. Speak on this and mainly, it should be issues of clarification. This matter has been debated. Let us agree, okay? Let us now deal with the issue of points of – Usually, when the Speaker is speaking, Members normally are seated but it looks like the circumstances have changed since hon. Betty Aol would like to speak. Can I finish what I am saying while you take your seats, honourable members? 

Let us do it this way: Let us raise clarifications to the minister on issues that you think have not been properly resolved and then we see how to proceed. Therefore, the issue of debating is not here for now; it is the issue of raising points of clarification and that should not take long. Clarification usually takes one minute; so, we will be making our interventions in one minute so that we can quickly cover what needs to be covered.

MR MUKULA: The clarification I would like from the Minister of Health is that in the budget, there seem to be no funds allocated for mass sensitisation of the people out there. Our people are dying and they do not know why. Where I come from, for example, people do not know about hepatitis B. They say that there is a disease called “appetite”, that if you have an appetite for sex, you die. Therefore, there is need to sensitise them. That is the clarification I need. 

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification about the districts of West Nile like Yumbe District. I am a member of the Committee on Local Government Accounts, and on 2 October 2016, we were in Arua and we interacted with people from a number of districts that had audit queries. 

As we interacted with the Yumbe District Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), we found out that Yumbe District is not catered for under Hepatitis B immunisation. May I get clarification from the minister on the arrangement for Yumbe? 

MR DENIS OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first red light on Hepatitis B in the Ninth Parliament was raised by the Member of Parliament for Ajuri on 19 September 2013, and this is the official record of Parliament. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development stated clearly that they have been releasing money on a quarterly basis, but for this particular financial year, he was not specific. He is simply saying “as and when”. 

May we know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when the balance of the funds that this Parliament appropriated through the supplementary budget, will be released to the Ministry of Health? Secondly, if you have already released funds for the first quarter for this financial year, when will the balance be released? Be specific – fourth, third or second quarter - as that gives us hope.

To the Ministry of Health, I would like to say that hope is a poor man’s income, which is only sustainable during the day; at night, a poor man will sleep with his stomach empty. From 2013, the people of Alebtong have been waiting for hepatitis B vaccines. If funds from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are released to the Ministry of Health, will Alebtong District be part of the first districts that will be considered in the second phase, arising from the fact that the red light on hepatitis B was raised by a Member of Parliament from Alebtong? Why must you leave out Alebtong? We are also people. We need Government services.

Mr Speaker, this is a matter of life and death. At times it is a bit sentimental. I raised this issue about hepatitis B in Alebtong in 2013. This is 2016 and nobody in Alebtong has been vaccinated - (Interrupted)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural issue. Listening to my brother, hon. Denis Obua, we are likely to have the same issues come up because somebody mentioned Yumbe, now it is Alebtong and soon Kasese will come on board. 

Mr Speaker, I presented a detailed report to this House and we discussed it for over an hour. For us to extend services to your districts, we need to have all the money that we requested for. This matter was referred to the committee and we appeared before the committee. I am very sure that they are working on a report which they will present to this House. 

Therefore, is it not procedurally right for us to wait for that report, which could even be ready by next week, and then we discuss these matters at once? I believe the committee is going to come here and report to you about how we should resolve this matter of hepatitis B? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ALUM: I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The issue of hepatitis B has really been disturbing this House for a very long time. We are well aware that the House will break off for recess on Thursday and yet the minister is talking about next week for the committee to present its report. When we go on recess, our people will be asking us questions and we shall continue to bury our people. 

Is it in order for the minister to tell us to wait for the report of the committee and yet we are going for recess and our people continue to die from hepatitis B? What shall we tell the people? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the honourable member want to rule on this matter? (Laughter)

Honourable members, if this House had listened and followed my guidance, the minister would not have ended up where she is. We drove the minister to raise that issue of this matter being with the committee, which is a fact. Now, if the matter is with the committee and the committee has not reported, you cannot extract anything from the minister. If we refer a matter to a committee, we wait for the committee report.

I was aware of this because I did it, and that is why I said that the only issue that is pending that we now need to discuss and conclude is the issue of the money and the budget. If we start with the issue of where and when - We have found out that there is an emergency and there is need for money to intervene. However, if we start breaking it down to districts and other things, we shall then go back to the old debate that we know was referred to the committee. So, can we deal with the issue of the budget, because it would help? 

You do recall that I referred the matter for discussion between the ministries of health and finance because it was the issue that was pending. Can we deal with that because it will help us? We agreed that we shall do so in one minute.

3.58
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for the update on this statement. 

This money was passed as a supplementary based on the issue at hand, and that was an emergency. However, for the finance ministry to tell us that they have only released Shs 3 billion and right now people are not receiving treatment and the vaccines are not enough - Are we condemning our people to death? Why don’t we cut some budgets and save the lives of the people? This is unfair. The Ministry of Finance has to look around to get the balance for the Ministry of Health to handle the problem properly. 

The Ministry of Health does not mention treatment here but only vaccines and testing kits. What about the treatment and why are we quiet about that? What message should we take to our people? Should we tell those who are sick to wait for their death? This is very unfair. I thank you.

3.59
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I realise that the Minister of Finance is releasing the money in quarters and that is why they have only given Shs 500 million out of Shs 2 billion to the Ministry of Health. 

Honourable minister, this is an emergency; are you convinced that the disease is also spreading in quarters? Why wouldn’t you release the entire amount of money to the Ministry of Health for training health workers, mobilisation and so on? Why are we treating it as ordinary usual material? This disease is an emergency and a crisis; you cannot say that we wait until the next quarter when you will release another 25 per cent.

I am appealing to the honourable minister to release the money to the Ministry of Health because this is an emergency. I thank you.   

4.00
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very disappointed by the statement of the Minister for Finance who says that they have harmonised their position with the Ministry of Health. To me, the two ministries have instead caused a financial loss of Shs 3 billion. 

In the last meeting that we had, hon. Beatrice Anywar raised an issue to do with all the people who got vaccinated, and she used the example of Kitgum District where people did not complete the vaccination. Vaccinating against hepatitis B is supposed to be done three times; the first and second times are one month apart and then the third time is after six months. When you miss the second, you are supposed to start afresh. This, therefore, means that the Shs 3 billion spent on the first vaccination was lost. 

Since the time that the matter was raised - I did my calculation - only Shs 17.7 billion has been spent on a very serious disease like this one here. This shows that we are not serious. I would like to support the position of the minister. The remittances for hepatitis B should not be on a quarterly basis. If you do not have enough money to start somebody on the hepatitis B treatment, then do not start it because you have to follow the schedule - (Member timed out.)

4.02
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wonder whether the problem is with the Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Finance. When we met with the Minister of Finance, he complained about the work plan being the biggest problem. 

The Shs 8 billion that was taken back to the Ministry of Finance was caused by the Ministry of Health. Ministry of Health needs to submit its work plan to the Ministry of Finance so that the Ministry of Finance does not complain. The Shs 5.4 billion should be released but it can only be released after Ministry of Health has submitted their work plan and accountability for the Shs 4.6 billion that was released. 

Therefore, can the Ministry of Health please do that and then we follow up on the Shs 8 billion that was also a supplementary? Out of the Shs 11 billion, only Shs 3 billion was released. It is very unfortunate that money is there but it is the Ministry of Health that seems to have no capacity to absorb the money that has been agreed on. We need the help of the Minister of Health. 

Even when we talk about treatment, you have not handled treatment at all. Our people are languishing and dying without being attended to and yet the Ministry of Finance accepts that there is money for hepatitis B. It is you, who should now clarify to us whether you have handed over the work plan. I thank you.

4.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. It is worrying that when the ministry comes here to ask for a supplementary budget, we have been asked as Parliament to treat the matter as a matter of emergency. 

I remember when the Minister of Finance appeared before this House with a request for a supplementary budget to handle payment of public servants. We wanted to inquire into the expenditure but all eyes were cast on whoever proposed that we defer the debate until we have looked into the matter appropriately. The impression was that we did not want the civil servants to get their salaries. We were put under pressure to pass the supplementary budget. Unfortunately, after we passed the supplementary budget, it took public servants another three months to receive their money.

It is the same issue we have here; when Members were passionate about a disease called hepatitis B and how it was eating the lives of Ugandans, the minister came up with a supplementary budget. All Ugandans thought we were getting a remedy for the killer disease. As Parliament, we thought that the minister asked for a supplementary because the money was available. I am surprised that the minister could not even have the courtesy of passing on the money to the owners after Parliament approved the supplementary budget.

I recall on 20th September, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, spoke on the Floor of the House regarding that money. I would like to quote him verbatim: “Mr Speaker, this is a matter of life and death. Let me go back to the ministry, look for the money and give it to the Ministry of Health. However, they must be ready to account for the money. I will release the money, but I need accountability, otherwise you will be the same people accusing me.” 

May I ask whether hon. Bahati is defying the orders of his senior minister or has the honourable minister defied his own orders? We have been waiting to hear that all the money was given to the Ministry of Health and that it is the health officials who did not do their work and then we would ask hon. Aceng to resign. Where did the balance of the Shs 11 billion go?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, what is the way forward on this matter? We are going back to a debate we have had so many times. This is not why this matter was sent back to you. If you do not have money, say it here and also tell us why you do not have money. 

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. First, let there be no impression created that the Ministry of Finance is not sensitive to this matter; we really are. However, the issue is that we are operating within some limits, and I will give an example. 

When the Ministry of Health came here to ask for a supplementary of Shs 11 billion, we passed it and we said we were going to look for the money. We only found Shs 3 billion. Because we are operating a cash budget, you can pass Shs 12 trillion here but if we are able to collect only Shs 5 trillion, that is what we provide. Passing money here does not necessarily mean that we have it. 

What we can do to resolve this matter is to request the Ministry of Health – they still have Shs 6 billion on their budget – to ask for an accelerated release so that we can release the Shs 6 billion remaining for this financial year. The Ministry of Finance acts on the instructions of the end users. If the end users ask for money on a quarterly basis, that is what we release. We do not want to release more than what the ministry needs. In case they have pressure and they want us to accelerate the release, we still do that. We therefore request the Ministry of Health –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification because the minister said that when they request for a supplementary budget, then he would go and look for the money. This is against the law and procedure of this Parliament. 

When you request for a supplementary budget and it is approved, you must prove to the committee and to Parliament that you have already identified the source of the money and that the money is available; otherwise, you do not get that supplementary passed. That is the clarification I am seeking. The minister must be honest because we are all very concerned about what is happening. 

I would also like something else clarified by the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Finance has actually disclosed to me – I was very concerned and I stood on the Floor of Parliament on 23rd August and told the House that I heard a rumour that there was going to be a commemoration of Hepatitis B Day in Dokolo. I would like to disclose to you that Government had wanted to commemorate Hepatitis B Day in Dokolo, but I also would like to confirm that it was never done because they said there was no money. 

However, the people of Dokolo mobilised their own money and massively tested and vaccinated the people; they did that on their own and this is commendable. The most important thing I want to share with Members is that the Ministry of Health did not even send any representatives to find out what was on the ground. There was no representation at all. 

Secondly, we had a testing machine but the vaccines ran out and it took us time and pain to plead for vaccines, which were available in the National Medical Stores. To plead for those vaccines to help the people who are dying every day was nearly an impossible task. It was as if we were trying to extract the manhood of a dog – That is how we say it in Lango. However, we managed to do it with the intervention of the minister. As I talk, Dokolo is massively testing and vaccinating the population. We are getting people from as far as Nakasongola, Kaberamaido, Alebtong and Apac coming to Dokolo because the population is desperate; they have realised that this is a very deadly disease. Therefore, those of us whose people are affected want to help but you are frustrating us. 

The Minister of Finance has informed me that although they asked for this money in form of a supplementary, they did not ask for the money to be downloaded. In other words, they asked for a supplementary and it was approved but they did not go to request for the money. I do not believe that story. Therefore, I would like the minister to tell me if it is true that the Ministry of Health knew that the money was there and they did not request for that money, so that we can know who the culprit is here; is it the minister, the technocrats or someone else? 

Mr Speaker, these people are playing with the lives of the people. Let me tell you, Members, the worst scenario is in Karamoja and nobody wants to talk about it. The Karamoja population now has a prevalence rate of 25 per cent and it is 20 per cent in northern Uganda and 18 per cent in West Nile. The percentage is increasing every day and we really want to help. The worst of it all –(Interjections)- before I get your information – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you rose on a point of clarification.

MS OGWAL: Yes, I am giving it and I hope they are noting the clarification. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek the last clarification. When a person is tested for hepatitis B and found to be positive, this villager is asked to go to the referral hospital to get confirmation before they can get treatment, which is also paid treatment. The Ministry of Health has to tell us where the problem is; why are they asking our people to confirm they are sick and then sending them back to go and die? They must tell us. The money is there and they do not want to request for it and yet they keep coming here to lament that there is a problem.

I think it is high time the truth is told to the people of Uganda. If there is a conspiracy to see some population of Uganda depleted, particularly in northern Uganda, then tell us in clear terms –(Interjections)– I am not going to accept any point of order. If there is a conspiracy, we must be told so that we can call the international community to help us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the national Parliament; when we express our concerns, we should also observe some character of a national Parliament. Let us control the remarks we make so that we bring the House together to support the issue we are debating rather than making it partisan in one way or the other. I urge Members to focus on these issues and debate them as a national Parliament. That will be helpful, because we need the support of all the Members when we are articulating these issues.

Honourable minister, again, we have debated all the issues being raised and I need you to help this House. The issue that is pending is about money. That is why I do not want us to go into other debates. Let us see where we are on the issue of money. 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the minister. This is an emergency and from your explanation, you mentioned that the Ministry of Health did not request for the money to be released on a quarterly basis. 

The clarification I seek from you is: in case of emergency, do you advise the ministries to request for money to be released on a quarterly basis? I thought money that is released on a quarterly basis is for payment of salaries, for instance in the education sector, whereby you plan and it is released throughout the entire financial year. However, being an emergency, what advice do you give to the ministry? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Let me first make this statement and then I will take points of clarification from colleagues.

Mr Speaker, this issue has been debated again and again. The issue, as you have said, is about money. The last financial year is already gone and we had approved Shs 11 billion and we released Shs 3 billion. We should now focus on the new situation. The new situation is that this financial year, we have approved Shs 10 billion and we have so far released Shs 4 billion. We are going to work with the Ministry of Health to request for the Shs 6 billion, which is remaining, and they frontload it - accelerated release - and then we move with the Shs 6 billion. As they implement, if there is need for more funding, then we come back again and ask for a supplementary budget for this financial year and handle the situation.

We can debate this issue again and again but if we do not implement it, the problem will remain. The problem is bigger than the Shs 11 billion we are talking about. However, given the conditions we are operating in, we are saying that from what we approved as Parliament, we are going back to request the Ministry of Health tomorrow to request for an accelerated release. We will release the money and then see how the situation will be as we implement. I think that is the best we can do as the Ministry of Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is about money and the Minister of Finance has said that there is Shs 6 billion of the Shs 10 billion that had been budgeted for this financial year. He says that the request has to be made by the Ministry of Health for an accelerated release of that money. Can we have that done? 

Honourable minister, you are two in this House; one of you should leave and go and issue the instructions - (Applause) - and we want an update tomorrow that the request has been made. We will also hear from the Minister of Finance that the request has been received and the funds have been released before this House rises on Thursday. We are not going on recess before the matter of the Shs 6 billion is finalised. (Applause)

MS ACENG: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to see one of you leave now; that is how serious it is. (Laughter)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I saw my sister, hon. Sarah Opendi, following the senior minister, maybe to see how – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I authorised only one to leave.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has pointed out an issue here, which I think we, as a House, should interest ourselves in. 

Mr Speaker, you were the presiding officer then and the matter of the commemoration of the Hepatitis B Day came to this House. The minister informed us that the day would be hosted by Dokolo District. I vividly remember hon. Angelline Osegge rising up to say that we did not need to celebrate when people are dying. She then proposed that we should instead buy kits and possibly add onto the drugs we have so that our people can be saved. She said that there is no need for celebration when we are still at war. 

At that time, the issue was pointed out that the money had already been committed and that some people had been hired. It was also said that procurement was in place and we could not divert the money to procure either drugs or test kits. I am, therefore, shocked that even when we had received this kind of picture, that the procurements had been made, service providers had been hired and the ministry was in high gear to ensure that we popularise the disease, nothing has come out from the ministry. I thought it would be unfortunate for the minister to just walk away without clearing this kind of assertion. 

It is hon. Opendi who made that issue very clear and I am glad she is here. Can you clarify whether these service providers really punished the people of Dokolo by denying them the service or you did not have the money to pay them? Also, clarify on which money you had committed to the service providers if there was nothing that arrived in Dokolo. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall my guidance on this subject. Imagine a situation where this House had passed the honourable member for Soroti District’s motion that we stay the money, it would have been this Parliament to be blamed. We would have set ourselves in a situation that we would not have gotten out of. Now if the member for Dokolo is saying that there were even no representatives from the Ministry of Health, then there could have been issues. However, the minister is present and she can help us understand.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not walking away but we were going to resolve a small issue from the corridor. 

Mr Speaker, we planned to have a commemoration in Dokolo District and a budget was prepared. By the time I was assuring the House, I had been given confirmation by the technical people that all had been scheduled to take place on that day. I travelled for a World Health Organisation meeting in Addis Ababa - another important meeting where we discussed hepatitis B on the African continent –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister has said that she went for a meeting to Addis Ababa but she is not the only honourable minister in the Ministry of Health. Is it in order for her to run away from the issue of the Dokolo commitment not being undertaken?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to first listen to the conclusion of that statement.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, we sometimes need to be a little patient. What I was saying is that while in Addis Ababa, I kept in touch with my senior colleague over this matter and fortunately, I returned before the commemoration day. However, I was informed that unfortunately, there was no money released. 

Since we will discuss this issue, allow me, Mr Speaker, to get the details and come back to this august House. However, the minister was in touch with hon. Cecilia Ogwal over this matter and we agreed to postpone the commemoration. I think that was the communication you were given. That was the same day we also had the sector meeting with the President at State House and the minister too was unavailable. It was difficult for us to proceed due to the challenge of funds and also importantly, His Excellency the President had convened a meeting which could not be called off. 

Mr Speaker, let me get further details so that when we discuss this matter on Thursday, maybe we can report. We postponed the event but we did not completely cancel it – (Interruption)       

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the minister has confirmed that she stood on the Floor of this Parliament and confirmed the commitment of the Ministry of Health to have a commemoration day in Dokolo District. However, she is now trying to shift the blame by saying that after the cancellation, she kept communication with me.

Mr Speaker, I did not have the advantage to have my education in Oxford or Cambridge but I am always careful in choosing my words whenever I speak. When I stood on the Floor of this august House, I said that I heard a rumour about a commemoration day in Dokolo District and fortunate enough, it is the minister who corrected my statement by confirming that it was not a rumour but a fact. Therefore, the people of Dokolo went ahead and prepared to receive the team from the Ministry of Health and from all over Uganda to commemorate the day. 

Mr Speaker, this Parliament has never - I am sure if the Speaker had received any letter about postponing this national day, the Speaker would have communicated to the leadership of Dokolo. It is not only me but even the chairmen, speaker and other Members of Parliament who were elected by the people of Dokolo never got any official communication from the Ministry of Health cancelling or postponing that commemoration day. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister, instead of apologising to the people of Uganda and specifically to the people of Dokolo, to say that they constantly communicated with me? I am the most disappointed about the behaviour of the people I consider to be responsible leaders. Mr Speaker, I beg that this House orders the Minister of State for Health to apologise to the House and to the people of Dokolo. Is it, therefore, in order for the minister to divert attention from the core issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the member for Dokolo has said if the information had come to the Speaker, she would have communicated. That was not a function of Parliament; it was a function organised by the Ministry of Health and we got to know about it as a by-the-way when the member for Dokolo raised it as a “rumour”. 

Parliament was not aware of this commemoration. There was no statement from the ministry highlighting the event or informing the House that there will be a commemoration day in Dokolo. Therefore, there was no way Parliament would have gotten involved in communicating the postponement. However, the honourable minister has said that this matter was postponed and hon. Cecilia Ogwal also said that the postponement was not communicated formally. Honourable minister, did you notify the concerned people formally or you did it on phone?

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I did indicate that my senior colleague, Dr Jane Aceng –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you formally communicate or – 

MS OPENDI: No; I guess it was not formal because of the short –(Interjections)– However, I have requested to come with a proper statement on Thursday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it on the cancellation of the commemoration day for this Parliament?

MS OPENDI: Detailed information of what transpired because it was the Minister of Health who told me that she had linked up with all the relevant people and informed them of the challenge that we were facing at that time.

Mr Speaker, I request that you allow me to give more detailed information with clear facts since I was not on the ground. I have indicated that it was my senior colleague, who was on the ground communicating with the district officials.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you should write to Parliament because I am not so sure whether we will have space on the Order Paper to accommodate the statement on the cancellation of the commemoration. Today, we did not have a lot of business but tomorrow, we will have a lot of business and on Thursday, certainly, when we are going to close, there are matters of national importance that I want to bring back to see if I can release the pressure from tomorrow. Therefore, let us see what to do, but please write to Parliament formally to notify us. If there is a slot, then we can accommodate you. Thank you, honourable members. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.35
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I have been informed by the Clerk that the report I am going to lay on the Table has been uploaded to our iPads; so, I want that confirmation before I proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this is laying of papers; you are just going to lay it on the Table. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to lay on the Table the report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda to the House of Lords in the British Parliament in Westminster, London, United Kingdom on 12 September 2016. Mr Speaker, this document contains a number of important issues - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please- 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like Members to know what document I am laying on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, follow the rules, honourable member. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I thought you gave me five minutes - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To lay the document on the Table.

MS OGWAL: The Order Paper says five minutes. To read one sentence in five minutes is very difficult, so I thought - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member - 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda to the House of Lords in the British Parliament in Westminster London, United Kingdom on 12 September 2016. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that. Honourable member, with reports of delegations of this nature, a slot will be found when the report will be debated. Whatever experience the Members had from that trip can be shared, and we shall see what we can pick from this particular report of the delegation. Thank you. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising concerns our iPads. Although we have received the report that has just been laid on the Table, we shall not be able to read it on our iPads. Since this Parliament started, we have been requesting for internet connection in vain and even after receiving the new iPads, there is no network. 

We always go to the Information Communication Technology (ICT) offices and they promise us internet connection but we do not get anything. Today, I was here early in the morning but I did not get network until midday. It is good that we have received the report but we shall not be able to read it on our iPads. Mr Speaker, I do not know how we shall handle that. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can you handle this with the ICT people so that the matter is corrected? Honourable members, the next item has been deferred to tomorrow because the mover and the seconders are not present. 

There being no other business today, and in order to release the pressure from tomorrow, we will go back to the Members who had issues to raise and see how many we can accommodate this afternoon. I will start with the member for Kibale County from Kamwenge, if he is here. 

4.39
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I represent Kibale County and it borders two national parks, Queen Elizabeth National Park and Kibale National Park. Of the six sub-counties which make up Kibale County, four of them have been invaded by wild animals, specifically elephants and lions. 

In the last three weeks, we have lost six cows. Gardens in Kiziba Parish in Kamwenge Sub-county have been destroyed and now my people face imminent famine. This is a common problem and it happens often but we are not getting support from the local Uganda Wildlife Authority team. 

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the ministry responsible comes to the rescue of the people. As I speak, the people in those three sub-counties are not at peace. They cannot even sleep because these wild animals are everywhere. The ministry concerned should come to our rescue and send a special team to the area to rescue our people because in addition to destroying crops and killing animals, this is a very big risk to human life. Therefore, the minister should act as soon as possible.

Secondly, these are peasants. You will understand and agree with me that it is very painful for a peasant who owns two cows to wake up the next morning and find that a lion has killed them. I do not know if there is any kind of modest compensation for these people who have lost their animals and whose crops have been destroyed. 

My prayer, therefore, is that the ministry concerned comes up with a statement. I am aware that this issue has been raised in this House before but it is recurring. We do not know how we are going to coexist with these animals, especially when they keep on coming to our areas. It is now beyond our control. People have resorted to demonstrating and are now living in fear. The ministry concerned should bring a special statement and intervention to rescue our people. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this matter has been raised very many times. I do not know how we concluded the Queen Elizabeth National Park matter the last time; did we task somebody to do something about it? This is because it is becoming a very common matter now for communities that are bordering the conservation areas. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue has come up many times just like you said. It has actually been affecting the districts of Kanungu and Kasese and those other districts that border Queen Elizabeth and Murchison Falls national parks. We have tried all means and failed to stop this. 

The last hope which Uganda Wildlife Authority gave us was a proposal, that we could amend the law to create a compensation section; otherwise, they have no capacity to compensate anybody who is affected by those animals. My prayer, therefore, is that when that law comes to this House, all the Members join us and we see how to deal with it. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The law is coming soon, but in the time being, what happens? The member for Nwoya has raised this matter; many times people living in the areas surrounding Queen Elizabeth National Park and other conservation areas have raised this matter; - people from Agago complained of elephants - and many more things have been coming up. Is there any way we can handle these things in a more comprehensive way?

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, the last time we discussed this issue in this very House, the Government Chief Whip said they were in the process – She actually said that the process is known. I even tried to challenge her to cite an example where they compensated people who had been affected by the activities of these animals, but there was no single time.

For me, what the honourable member for Kanungu has said could be the right thing to do. If we rely on what the Government Chief Whip said here, I think we shall wait for a long time. We waited from the Eighth Parliament, the Ninth Parliament, and now the Tenth Parliament, and maybe we shall wait for it even until the Eleventh Parliament. We need to change our law in order to have our people compensated in case of problems. I rest my case.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember in the last Parliament when we comprehensively discussed issues of human-wildlife conflict for two days, the then minister, Maria Mutagamba, promised that they were working on a law. She said that they were working on an amendment to the Uganda Wildlife Act, which would not only deal with compensation but also other issues. 

There were many directives that were issued to Government including investigating killings that were going on in the national parks and circumstances where our people were disappearing and not being accounted for. We did not know whether the animals had eaten them because there was no trace of the many people who were disappearing in the park. Unfortunately, up to now, we have not got any reports or credible information.

However, on 8 December 2015, the then minister convened a meeting with the Uganda Wildlife Authority Board in Gulu. They called all the Members of Parliament from districts neighbouring conservation areas and I attended with some Members from Oyam District. We agreed on a number of issues and one of them was that if Government could not compensate, or while we waited for the law on compensation, the Uganda Wildlife Authority should have in their budget an item that they should call “compassion”. 

This compassion money could be used if animals destroyed crops, for example. It would not be equivalent to compensation, but at least it would be something that could relieve families of the pain. It could even be used in instances where animals kill or injure someone. Sometimes the parents are killed but members of the family remain without assistance and all this becomes the responsibility of us, the leaders. Therefore, the minister and the team agreed that they would create a budget item called “compassion”. Since there were some changes in the leadership, I do not know what is going on now. Maybe they can help update us on what is happening. 

However, sincerely, we want a Government that listens. If you came from those areas like Nwoya District – That is why I almost chose not to talk because I felt it would be useless talking when nothing is going to be done. In Nwoya District, we have one sub-county where a parish has been named “the elephant field”. I am in pain because last week, the communities in the area abandoned their land; they cannot dig. Also because of the drought in the area, they went to collect maize on the farms of the White farmers. Deliberately, one woman was run over by a tractor as they collected the maize that had dropped from the combined harvesters. That is the price of having investors who do not understand the local content.

I am at a loss. What can Government do? What can we do to save such people? They can no longer farm their land. Government is not supporting them. I cannot carry them on my head. I cannot do anything as a leader. What can we do? Government is there, the ministry is there; what can we do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Prime Minister?

4.50
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS: (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, this matter has been in this House many times. However, the information I would like to give the House is that the Uganda Wildlife Authority (Amendment) Bill was sent for printing and anytime it will come to this House for discussion. It covers all the problems that have been raised. It is no longer just a statement; action has been taken and the amendment Bill is being printed. It will follow a small process and will come here for discussion and Members will then satisfy themselves when the Bill comes here.

However, I also want to give general information about these animals. The problem now is that the population of Uganda has been increasing; we are now more than 30 million. These animals have been living with us and they know exactly what their area is, but now they do not know who is occupying their area. (Laughter) So, when they come and find the honourable member encroaching on their land, they will just do what is happening now. (Laughter) 

I am sure that this problem is widespread; even on the border between Adjumani - (Interruption) 

MS ADONG: Mr Speaker, we are speaking with a lot of pain based on what has happened. It is very urgent and Government has the responsibility to protect the people of Uganda. The areas we are talking about are those that have been inhabited by people from time immemorial, where animals do not even cross. 

I think that everybody is aware that we have a lot of challenges with climate change and animals are finding that their areas are getting smaller and they are now moving to the public. This is not something that was going on before. Is it in order – I find it so bad saying this but I have no alternative - for the Prime Minister to say that the population has increased so maybe the heat that has come up because of the increased population is the one attracting the animals? This is because it is not the people who are going to the park but the animals are moving out to the community. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I need to get some clarification from you before I make this ruling. Are you suggesting that the people who are being disturbed by the animals from the game parks have encroached on the reserved or protected areas and that is why they are being disturbed or are you saying something else?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Indeed, I cannot say that these people who are being disturbed by the animals have encroached on the protected land or they have not. However, if the animals have destroyed crops, then we should determine where the crops have been planted; the crops were definitely planted in areas that have been frequented by the animals -(Interjections)– No, that is my belief.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, then in that respect you are out of order.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will leave that subject -(Laughter) - because you have ruled, but the fact remains. (Laughter)

When I was the Minister of Wildlife and Antiquities some years back, because of overpopulation I had to transfer some elephants from Luweero to Murchison Falls National Park. We lifted them in big containers and Lorries and dropped them in Murchison Falls National Park. The purpose was to offload the pressure that was being mounted on the people in Luweero. At least, that is proof or an example of an activity done due to overpopulation. 

One cannot also deny facts about overpopulation because it is you people that produce. (Laughter) So, why are you denying it? When you produce, you need land and the land belongs to these animals and since the animals have no court to go to -(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My constituency has seven sub-counties and literally all of them depend on farming, and there is a farming area gazetted on the plains for cultivation. The poor farmers in my constituency go and process loans from banks, because they have land on the plains, and they use that money from the loans to plough and cultivate their land. However, when it draws close to harvesting, the animals come and destroy everything. 

As I speak, we have registered about four deaths of helpless farmers committing suicide because the banks wanted to confiscate their small pieces of land. Mr Speaker, it grieves my spirit that when our communities and the other affected areas are crying for valid answers, here we have the Leader of Government Business trying to massage a big problem. 

Mr Speaker, someone talked about the Uganda Wildlife Authority (Amendment) Bill. I do not know whether there is a possibility of fast-tracking that Bill. If we cannot do that, can we have some electric fences erected to deter the animals from attacking or continuing to destroy the crops? I am saying this because when that Bill gets here, I wonder whether those that have already been affected will be compensated. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Prime Minister to continue defending the unjustifiable when our affected population are crying out and waiting for answers? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has been on the Floor of this House for a long time. The issue of erecting electric fencing has been discussed before. The issue of digging trenches has also been discussed. I remember the minister saying that the elephants have even become clever; they fill the trenches and go over them. So, they are basically unstoppable. A solution has got to be found to this problem. 

MAJ. GEN. KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to this House from the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. The land size of Uganda, minus the water bodies, is 276,000 square kilometres. When we got independence, we were 5 million people but this land has never increased and we are now 34 million. Now, we are fighting for the same land. 

When we did the mathematics, we got the population and divided it by the land size and found that every square kilometre, as we talk, will be occupied by 172 people. So, please, for these fights, we should find another solution. We cannot expand the land; what we have to do is change the mode of using it. If we do not think of that, we shall just keep fighting each other. That is the information I can give. Those who understand better English than I do can come and talk about it. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Mr Speaker, last week in this House, we expressed concerns about the answers that we get from the Office of the Prime Minister. The same story has happened today. You have just seen how the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister responded when a Member expressed concerns about a very serious matter.

Mr Speaker, because we are under attack by the media, the media will begin quoting answers that come from the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and say Parliament said this and that, and people will think that is what we are saying. I would suggest that when a Member raises an issue of public concern, you just request the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister to take note and instruct the minister concerned to bring us the right answer if he or she is not there, or report to the House on a day that you stipulate, other than allowing him to give answers that are not convincing. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a debating hall; we cannot behave like machines where when this happens, you do the other. We deal with circumstances as they arise. If a matter has arisen and there is an answer, why should you wait for another date? We handle situations as they come, and depending on the resources we have, that can guide Parliament on how to proceed with a particular matter.

On the issue mentioned by the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, credit has to be given to him; he got up and stated that the law that we have been talking about has gone for printing and it will be coming to the House anytime. That was a concrete answer that this House wanted. What better answer could we have got from the Prime Minister other than saying that this law is actually in the offing and it is coming to this House soon. The honourable member for Nwoya said there was need for a law and now the Prime Minister said there is a law coming to this House. What more can we ask for?

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, you are aware that mankind is known to protect self. Our ancestors used to live in bushes and caves with animals but they protected themselves and that is why we are here.

I think the problem is that the Government has crippled people from defending themselves from these animals through restrictions. We are lucky that some of these animals are even edible. What if we empower the communities to defend themselves by saying to them that if any animal crosses into their gardens, they should find a way of making sure that it does not go back?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will propose that amendment in the law that is coming because we cannot start debating -

MR KAMUSIIME: Yes, so that they can eat –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As of now, you cannot do that; you will go to jail. So, when the Bill comes, propose that amendment and the House will handle it appropriately. Honourable members, can we stop here? 

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister for informing us that the law that we have been waiting for is about to reach Parliament. However, Mr Speaker, you know the processes these laws go through to come to Parliament. When they reach here, it takes about 45 days or even more for these laws to be debated, assented to and become operational. 

When we, the communities or the districts affected, met in Gulu, we came up with action points that we gave to the minister as a resolution but up to now, some of those action points have not been implemented. Therefore, I would like to ask whether it would not be procedurally right for the minister in charge of tourism and wildlife to come here and tell this Parliament, or the people of Uganda who are affected, what the Government is doing as we wait for the law. 

I am saying this because the reason being given, that the human population is so high, is not correct. In my district, the elephants went up to Atapara Hospital, which has been there since time immemorial. I have also learnt today that we are suffering in Oyam District because of the high population of elephants, which were brought from somewhere else to our community. On that note, I think that it would be procedurally right for the minister in charge of tourism and wildlife to come and tell this House about the resolutions that – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of information -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you giving information on procedure? The honourable member had risen on procedure. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: With your permission, Mr Speaker, can I provide information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will allow you to speak later. Let her first raise her point.

MS ALUM: Mr Speaker, I was raising an issue of procedure. We mentioned putting up posts for rangers so that they can protect people from going where the elephants cross from. We also talked about sensitisation of the communities on how they can defend themselves. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the honourable minister to come and inform the House and the country about these good resolutions that were made in Gulu? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues of human and wildlife conflict have been discussed here many times. We are now looking for solutions for both the short and long term. The Bill might be a medium-term solution because it cannot help us tomorrow. What is Government going to do possibly from today, tomorrow and so on while we wait for the laws to be put in place and the amendments done?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I saw the First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business trying to justify a position for the invasion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have already ruled him out of order on that. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, but I have just a comment -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means you are commenting on my ruling now; not so?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, this is to compliment the Prime Minister. I remember when we were at the university, some driver knocked down a monkey. He was the line minister at the time and he pursued the driver for over 10 kilometres, arrested him together with the dead monkey and took him to police. That shows how he is so passionate when it comes to animal rights. I still recall that story; he was the line minister then.

The point I want to raise, however, is that we have always had elephants in these national parks but the recent developments - the seismic activities and the blasting of rocks in Karuma area, which affect Murchison Falls National Park, and the oil drilling in the western region, which borders Queen Elizabeth National Park - have had an effect. We may legislate here, and that is very good, but why is there a resurgence of animals in those areas? 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you may wish to know that even now, according to reports, because of that stress from the developments taking place there, elephants have taken two years without giving birth - (Laughter) – because they are stressed. That is a scientific fact. Therefore, as long as we have mining activities, blasting of rocks and oil activities still going on, we shall still have problems. These activities take place in an ecosystem that is sensitive and that is why apart from the population, which members have talked about, animals like elephants are running away. That is why they were able to reach Atapara Hospital, as the honourable member has said, and that is something that had never happened.

Honourable colleagues, we may legislate, but I think Government should put in place contingent measures; otherwise, as long as we have investors disturbing the environment where these animals are living, we will need much more intervention than mere legislation. It is only then that - (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, hon. Ssekukibo. I would like us to note that apparently, there is a revenue collection sharing of 15 per cent that is supposed to benefit the local communities surrounding the national parks. However, most of this money is not utilised or even realised by the community. 

Therefore, as we wait for the law to come to the Floor, we need to make tourism very exciting and beneficial to the local people, beside the losses that they incur. I went to Katwe-Kabatoro Town Council and I was told that two children had been killed by the crocodiles. As we look forward to the law, and knowing the bureaucracy of having these laws in place, can we first of all strengthen this and make sure the communities access this little revenue collection that they deserve? Secondly, this revenue collection can even help to handle compensations as we wait for the law to be brought to this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, you realise that we have debated this matter for quite some time now and there has never been anything conclusive. Even for the law we are talking about, which is a good way to proceed, there is no timeframe. Unless another Member tomorrow again stands on the Floor and raises a matter of national importance in regards to damage caused by the wild animals, we will not debate this matter again. 

It started in the Ninth Parliament and today we are in the Tenth Parliament; I do not want to come back to the Eleventh Parliament and we are still discussing the same issues. Maybe we should be setting timeframes and strengthening what is already in existence like the revenue sharing with the communities. That is the information I have, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker and Members, whereas we await the Bill to be debated, what we need now is urgent intervention and it can be done. Let us operationalise the community development action plans for those communities living around the national parks. It is true that these parks are national treasures and we all benefit as a country, but the communities neighbouring the parks bear the brunt of these animals’ actions. 

Therefore, we request Government to set into motion and operationalise the community development plans for Karuma and Queen Elizabeth National Park areas. It is only then that we can have something to help – (Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, colleague. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to give information. Because of the trouble that the animals are giving the surrounding communities of Nwoya, the students of Pakwach College of Commerce invented an elephant repellent. I would like to interest the ministry in charge of tourism, particularly Uganda Wildlife Authority, to work with the students and test it to see if it can be applied. 

The repellent is a herb. You can use about 20 litres to spray a garden and for one month, the elephants will not cross that area. It would help the communities that live in the area. It was research conducted by the students and funded by a Japanese company to help students solve problems in their community. That is how it was discovered.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With all these ideas, we can find a lasting solution to the animal problems and alleviate the plight of our people and the communities neighbouring these wildlife centres.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I think the important statement is the one I made and you got it. I cannot say it again and again. Let us wait for the amendment Bill, which is coming, and all these good ideas will be incorporated; you are the ones going to discuss this Bill. 

I think the wonderful information about the herbs should not wait for the Bill. It should not even wait for the Uganda Wildlife Authority to come in. They should just apply it against these elephants’ movement and if it can work, we shall be very happy. Otherwise, how are we sure that these elephants can really be repelled that way? How many herbs will we need to work on these elephants? However, it is good information and I will ask the wildlife people to follow up with the honourable member for more information. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Is the member for Ntenjeru South here? He is not here. Is the member for Pallisa County here? He is not here. There were those who were supposed to come tomorrow. Is the member for Ngora County here? He has left. The members for Busongora North, Tororo County North and Buliisa have also left.

Honourable members, there being no further business on the Order Paper, I would like to make an announcement and then allow hon. Reagan Okumu and the honourable member for Amuru to say one or two things after this announcement. 

The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament will host His Excellency Salvador Valdés Mesa, the Vice-President of the Republic of Cuba, tomorrow, Wednesday 5 October 2016 at 3.00 p.m. in the South Committee Room. All members of Parliament are, therefore, informed that the ground level parking lot in the South Wing will remain sealed off to accommodate the guest’s entourage. 

Therefore, the parking area in front here will be occupied. Honourable members are advised to park in the slots in the basement so that the Vice-President can be hosted by the Speaker tomorrow. Please, take this information and do the needful, so that we can conveniently accommodate the Vice-President of Cuba tomorrow. 

Honourable member for Aswa County, you have something to say?

5.20
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I stand on a sad matter of national importance. As a country, many people have impacted on our lives and many people have helped us develop in a number of areas. Among those were missionaries who came to this country. Some time back, one of these missionaries, who built Lacor Hospital, passed on. According to his will, his body was flown all the way from Italy to be buried in Gulu and this House honoured him.

Mr Speaker, today I would like to inform the House and the country at large that we have lost a second missionary, who has lived in this country for over 60 years and gave his life for this country. He fell sick some years back. Three months ago, he asked to be returned to Uganda and that was his last flight. They accepted to fly him back to Uganda. He was suffering from cancer. He passed on this morning at 6.00 a.m. at Nsambya Hospital. His will states that he should not remain in the hospital and as a result, his body has been transported to his residence in Biina where there will be a mass at 5.30 p.m. today and thereafter, the burial will be arranged.

Many of you may not have known Fr John Scalabrini, but for those who go to Luzira, you know Bishop Cyprian Kihangire Secondary School and you also know St Benedict Hospital that he built. You also know Biina Parish in Biina as well as Radio Maria, which broadcasts throughout the country.

Mr Speaker, I thought I should make this announcement because the late has been a very prominent missionary and devoted his life to this country. I think as a nation, we should honour some of these individuals for their economic, social and other contributions to Uganda. I wish to convey this message, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have now been notified of the passing on of Fr John Scalabrini. The honourable member has elaborated his contribution to this country. I think the House should observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

5.24
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am here to inform the House about a very important celebration that will take place on 20 October this year in Paimol, Agago District. You may be wondering why I am making this announcement instead of the Member of Parliament for Agago. 

This year, Lacor Deanery, which falls under the districts of Amuru and Nwoya, will be animating the martyrs’ celebration, that is, Blessed Daudi Okello and Jildo Irwa. There are people who may not know them but these are two martyrs who were catechists and are waiting to be canonised as saints. We are only familiar with the 25 Uganda Martyrs, but there are also these two from Acholiland.

This is a call to all Members of Parliament and all Ugandans to go in big numbers on 20 October to celebrate with the people of Acholi in Paimol, Agago District, as we wait for their final canonization. Above all, we seek for your support.

Be blessed as you come. We shall arrange for buses for those who are willing to go. I know it will be at a time when Members will be on recess but just spare some time that day and go there and be blessed. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 October 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

