Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.



Thursday, 30 October 2019

Parliament met at 3.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise profusely for the late start. We were working on the East African Community Games, which are going to take place in Uganda in a few weeks’ time. As usual, we shall try and make good speed.

Honourable members, I have some difficult news. I would like to inform you that we lost the former Member of Parliament for Kalaki constituency, hon. Simon Ross Euku. He died yesterday. He was here in the Eighth Parliament. The Members from Kaberamaido are working on the details and will let us know about the burial. However, I wanted to let you know and we shall stand up for one minute of silence. 

I also want to let you know that our colleague, hon. Ngabirano, was involved in an accident today. He sustained some broken ribs; he is in Mbarara Referral Hospital. They say he is out of danger but he is in the hospital. 

Let us stand up for a minute of silence, in respect of hon. Euku.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we agreed that we will give sufficient time to the debate on issues of Makerere University today. The minister made his statement yesterday. There were also petitions presented but we should not discuss the prayers. Let us just have some debate on the way forward. The floor is open; hon. Mpuuga, please use three minutes.

3.32
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will gladly partake of the three minutes and with your indulgence, any extra time as shadow minister, to make a substantive response to the minister’s statement. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. The statement actually is a good insight into what the Government thinks of this great institution.

I would like to invite this House to consider the happenings at Makerere University without any partisan connotations but with insight to where we want this country to go and in particular, to how we deal with challenges that arise routinely in the public arena as servants of our people.

I would like to remind this House and the ministers that Makerere University is a public institution and therefore, whatever it does, it provides a public good. As such, any obligations thereof, relating to the running of the university, the first call of duty lies with Government. Any subsequent additions to support this university - the parents, public, students and their benefactors - are only supplementing the cardinal duty of Government of sustaining this university. 

Therefore, we do not expect Government to come and tell us that they are considering fees increment to supply water, electricity and ICT services to Makerere. That is an abdication of duty on the part of Government to expect parents, who pay tax to sustain this university, to again directly pay for water and other utilities at the university.

The gist of the minister’s statement was to explain why Makerere is on fire. As Parliament, our concerns are essentially two: one, when the challenges arose, why did management and Government, particularly the ministry, fail to consider dialogue and instead considered using force to compel students and their benefactors to accept a fees increment, without due regard to the nature of this university?

For instance, the minister informed this House in his statement that comparatively, Makerere’s fees are lower. He gave us a table in his statement, comparing Makerere to Kenya and Rwanda universities, without giving a comparison of the environment in which they are operating. I find that a bit skewed. If he wanted a comparison, he would have given us one of Makerere, Mbarara and other public universities.

For instance, Madam Speaker, at Makerere University, a course per semester of tuition only for a Bachelor of Medicine is about Shs 1.8 million. At Mbarara University of Science and Technology, it is Shs 1.34 million. They are both public universities, for which the taxpayer subsidises their management. Why is this so yet there is no increment in some of these –? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the way forward, Shadow Minister of Education.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. While the Government is considering the options offered by the honourable minister, we find the options and way forward given inadequate.

One, we would like Parliament to interest itself in the way fees are arbitrarily changed in public institutions that the taxpayer subsidises. If we leave this to councils and administrators to adjust as they wish, then we are not helping the poor parents who are struggling with fees and other challenges in our communities.

Two, we would like Parliament to interest itself in the abuse of students’ rights by security agencies. We need to know who invited them. We have police, paramilitaries and the UPDF at Makerere abusing students. There are allegations of sexual abuse. Can these be investigated, Madam Speaker? We do not expect the same Government in denial to investigate them. Can Parliament –? (Member timed out.)

3.38
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, National Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I kindly request for a bit more time. I have a sore throat and yet I might have valuable information to offer the House.

THE SPEAKER: There are some Members who spoke and contributed on this issue yesterday; so I will not give those the opportunity. I will only give those who did not speak.

MS ADEKE: Madam Speaker, pardon my hoarse voice. I have a cold but I have some valuable information I could share with the House.

Last year around this time, I raised a point of national importance. There was still a strike at Makerere University. The Minister of Education and Sports came and gave us the same response that he read yesterday. Unfortunately, the situation escalated to a worse crisis this year.

There is so much tension at the university. I think that the House needs to be informed about how affairs are running at the university. There is a governance crisis right from the Ministry of Education and Sports but let me only speak about the university.

We have a vice chancellor who is suspending students on the basis of their comments on Facebook and Twitter. Makerere University is a centre of excellence, academic freedom and freedom of speech. If the vice chancellor can stalk students on their Facebook and Twitter accounts, follow how they are expressing themselves and use that as evidence to suspend and expel them, then we are in doubt as to whether this is a free country. 

Who is the vice chancellor? If Ugandans can go on social media and express themselves about the President, who does the vice chancellor think he is to start to gag students to that extent? (Applause) That is one of the causes of tension.

Those students want to express themselves but they have been gagged for a very long time. It is being worsened by the presence of the military. Students were made to roll on the tarmac; it is very painful. A girl called Mollie Sasirabo is still receiving medical attention yet she has to appear before the disciplinary committee tomorrow. 

Madam Speaker, if you would like calm to be restored at Makerere, halt the action first that the University Council is taking. The students’ body does not believe in –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: A minute for the young people.

Ms Adeke: The students’ body does not believe in the university council. Therefore, we beg you to take leadership of this process. Do not leave it in the hands of the council and neither the ministry. They are going to face harsh actions towards mitigating the crisis in Makerere. Thank you.
 
The Speaker: May I know whether the military is still there? 

Mr zaake: The military is still there –

The Speaker: Let us hear from the minister. Are they still there? 

THE MINISTEr of state for education and sports (Higher education) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): No. 

Mr zaake: Madam Speaker, I can confirm to you that the military police is still there – (Interjections) – they are even in uniform. (Interjections)

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, we have colleagues here who are students; I wish they could tell us the truth.

The Speaker: They may not have gone there today. I want authoritative information. 

Mr nambeshe: Madam Speaker, I have been to Makerere. Even last evening, I was interfacing with some of the lecturers who are afraid of going to Makerere. They said that if journalists who could identify themselves in uniform and their cameras had been brutalised, how about them? 

They also said that some of these officers that are now resurfacing at Makerere are Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) officers in Uganda Police Uniform. That is the information I would like to give. 

3.44
Ms jesca ababiku (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I am concerned about the regular strikes at Makerere University. Every year, out of the many universities, Makerere is known for strikes. We have lost our glory in East Africa and beyond. We had been known for being the academic capital of Uganda but we have lost it.

Yesterday, the minister listed other factors contributing to regular strikes in Makerere University. They should be investigated and action taken. If those acts are happening at the university, we need to compliment academic careers with morals. We cannot sacrifice our children to only get certificates without morals; we need better Ugandans.

I have an issue on which I would like to seek clarification. The minister said the policy, in relation to increment of school fees, is going to affect the new but not continuing students. My understanding is that the new students did not participate in the process of the policy making. Therefore, there is a gap and implementation will still be a problem.

The second concern is how we can justify the 15 per cent annual increment. In my view, this increment is majorly affecting the poor. The minister gave us a schedule of other Government programmes, for example, those on Government sponsorship - we know that many students who benefit from Government sponsorship are from rich families. They have better backgrounds and so, are able to benefit. We do to them a favour, which is different from the loan scheme. Our poor people who go for the loan scheme are tasked to pay yet the ones from rich families get the sponsorship with no refund. Therefore, the 15 per cent is too much increment annually. That is my observation.

3.47
Ms robina rwakoojo (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like us to ponder over this: have we ever considered why strikes by students or lecturers at Makerere –

The Speaker: Order, honourable members. This is an important debate.

Ms rwakoojo: Have we ever considered why strikes by students or lecturers at Makerere begin shortly before examinations are due to begin? Is there a fear for examinations? Have we considered whether employers take on Makerere University graduates as employees or are they now rejected for fear that they will lead strikes at their places of employment?

Can’t our Committee on Education and Sports benchmark, say in the East African Region and come up with relevant proposals regarding fees structures?

Another concern that I have is the hostel culture. When we were at university – I was in Mary Stuart Hall – we had custodians who had a role. We had entry and exit times, rules on visitors in the rooms and all that. Are we considering regulations for these hostels or is it the commercial aspect that we are looking at? All this affects the students’ behaviour. 

I condemn brutality against the students in all its forms. However, in the same vein, I condemn the looting of property of innocent neighbours to the university like those in Kikoni. Thank you. 

3.49
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problem in Makerere is driven by many factors. One of the primary ones is mal-administration and the suppression of students’ right to expression and freedom of speech. The right to freedom of expression is a fundamental right and I think Makerere University is making a big mistake in suppressing students. 

I am a proud former student of Makerere University and I have two degrees from that university. During our time as undergraduates, Makerere University was known as a place for intellectual discourse. We had discussion groups and we could discuss any topic freely. 

Today, the Prof. Nawangwe-led administration has turned Makerere into a primary school. Even in secondary school, there is an element of freedom. You cannot arrest a student for expressing his or her opinion; that is the only thing that students are entitled to. If you deny them this basic freedom, they will resort to violence. What we see today is an explosion of the pressure that has been building over a period of time. 

I think it is high time that we resolved that it is time for Nawangwe to step aside and allow for a proper re-alignment of administration in Makerere. It is not just about fees increment but the general malaise in the administration that is causing problems. 

I think one of the things that this House can do is to advise and come out with a strong resolution that Nawangwe should give way. (Applause) There should be an interim administration and re-alignment of the systems there. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have very important people. We have the golden girl, Halimah Nakaayi. She won the gold medal in the 800 metres race. We have the golden boy, Joshua Cheptegei who won the 10,000 metres race. We have Muhammed Nigo who won a bronze medal in Para Power. We have Winnie Nanyondo who also won a bronze medal. You are welcome. (Applause) They are here to listen to the other motion but let us finish with this one then we shall go to the motion on sports. 

3.52
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issues of Makerere University are much more than the increment of tuition fees. When you look at the issues being raised on social media and other sources of information, you will realise that there are management issues that need to be investigated to a logical conclusion. 

There are issues that have been raised in respect to the management of finances at the university and prime properties owned by the university. However, it appears that the increment of tuition was a catalyst of many issues that are at the university. 

In respect to tuition increment, in my opinion, it is normal to have tuition raised to cater for inflationary issues. In March every year, the Minister of Education and Sports issues university guidelines that give students an option to apply to various universities. Elsewhere, the Government has established regional universities and I have had a chance to visit Muni University that has 389 students. 

Therefore, to say that the strike is about the increment of tuition may not be plausible. Our parents have the opportunity to send their children to alternative universities if –(Interjections)– I have the Floor. We have options. We have about 40 universities and everybody is free to send their child elsewhere in case they cannot afford the increased tuition –(Interjections) 

Therefore, whereas there is need to investigate other forms of mal-administration, the increment of tuition is timely and needs –(Member timed out.)

3.55
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue is painful and it has annoyed all of us; the Government, members of Parliament and parents because these students are wasting their time. They are supposed to be preparing for exams but instead, they are on strike. What has actually annoyed us is the way the strike is being quelled; by use of excessive force, which I think all of us condemn. 

The honourable minister said that the 15 per cent increment is cumulative; cumulative from which year? How far is this accumulation going to be? What will happen next year? Are you increasing yearly or after every five years? Explain to us what this cumulative refers to. Why are you bringing this to poor first year students? If it is cumulative, why doesn’t it affect continuing students? You have to explain. 

Secondly, we have Government sponsored students who are paying tuition fees. How much do you pay per student on Government sponsorship? If Government cannot pay that money, where do you expect the parents to get money? If you are increasing fees, let it apply to all, even the Government students so that we have enough money. 

We have seen that the private students are the ones sustaining the university. Let it be across the board; let the Government sponsored students pay the same amount. If Government feels that it is easy, let them pay.

The minister made a lot of allegations that there were some strangers in the compound. They have CCTV cameras. He also said that there were cases of drug abuse. Can we investigate these issues? Otherwise, it is dangerous if our students are taking drugs to make them strike.

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge the students to demonstrate in a calm manner. They should not throw stones and hit the policemen because they are human beings too; they can retaliate. 

5.39
MS KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The opening of this semester for Makerere University was delayed by two weeks because there was an on-going strike by the teaching staff. 

Madam Speaker, whenever the university is about to sit exams, there is always a strike. I think these strikes call for a serious concern from the whole country because the standard of the university is going down. 

The disparity on the amount of money paid between the Government sponsored students and private sponsored students needs to be addressed. What I know is that there is nothing like a private citizen.

Madam Speaker, the private sponsored students would have qualified for government sponsorship but because Government could not take all of them, they were asked to pay money. The question I would like to ask is: Why should they pay more money than those that were sponsored by the Government? I think they should be paying the same figure.

It is the duty of the Government to sponsor these students. However, since the Government could not take on the big numbers, they decided that the students should pay. I, therefore, think that it should be a uniform figure since it is not about making profit from these students.

Madam Speaker, the cheapest course at Makerere University is about Shs 2.5 million. The table the minister provided yesterday only shows the tuition yet there is more money paid by students like the functional fees. If we are to ask the income per capita for an average Ugandan, it is about Shs 2 million or even less. Where do you expect the parents of these children, who are not earning sufficient money, to get that money from? Are we really providing any solution to the Uganda poor whose children are desirous of pursuing their studies at Makerere University?  

Madam Speaker, the argument that they have an option of going to other universities is not a given. The universities you are talking about –(Member timed out.)

4.01
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the way our brothers and sisters were treated by the military in Makerere University. 

Madam Speaker, all of us here could have had a chance to go through Makerere University. If you went to Makerere University, there were always strikes on small matters than the 15 per cent tuition increment. During that time, there was police but never have students been mistreated the way they were mistreated this time round.

This has been caused by the militarisation of the police. We have been talking about this matter but our police have continued being militarised and the response to matters that require police even shocks the President. The other day, the President was in the NRM Caucus shocked at how the police responded militarily over matters that require them.

If we are shocked by the way our police responded, I think we need to rethink how we are handling things. I would like to ask; did Prof. Nawangwe expect the students at university to clap hands when the tuition was increased by 15 per cent?  No. Any group of students in a country where there are some bits of freedom are bound to raise their discontent about the matter. Now see what responses came. The response was beating the students, breaking into their houses and manhandling them.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we must protect the right of freedom. The regime in this country claim they went to the bush to fight for freedom; I think this is the time to protect those freedoms and it is after 34 years. I think this is the time when this freedom must be protected to the highest possible manner - (Member timed out.)

4.05
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What is taking place in Makerere is very unfortunate. Makerere University was peaceful when there was no issue of the 15 per cent increment on tuition.   

Madam Speaker, when something pinches you and you feel the pain from the pinch, that is when you begin defending yourself. Increment of school fees at any moment - it is not only parents who pay for students. In fact, some students pay for themselves. I would like to, therefore, disagree with my colleagues who say that it is normal to have the 15 per cent tuition increment in Makerere.

The Government came up with the Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education to cater for the vulnerable families. Imagine government brought them to this level and now, they want to abandon them. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday I heard the minister say, in his statement, that the students who were striking were under the influence of drugs. I would like the minister to tell us how he knew that the students were under the influence of drugs in a demonstration like that. I really do not think it was influence of drugs. (Applause) For one to determine whether someone is under the influence of drugs, they must have been doing the same. If you have not been doing it –(Member timed out.)

4.07
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I would like to pose the following questions to the honourable minister: 

    1. The 15 per cent increment has been implemented for two academic years especially for the new entrants; would it be possible for the minister to share with this House whether the implementation of the 15 per cent in the two academic years relates to the welfare of the students? Is there any betterment arising from the increment?

    2. We keep hearing that the strikes at Makerere University have both internal and external factors. Honourable minister, don’t you think it is time for you to let us know what internal and external factors are leading to these strikes at Makerere University?

    3. There is a tested model which, in my opinion, has worked for secondary and primary schools, where there is an association for the parents. Each and every time students are striking at Makerere University, I keep asking myself-I am paying for three students; what is my role as a parent in all this? Don’t you think that there is need for us to amend that Act such that our roles - even students who pay for themselves are “parents”.  Convene a meeting and if there are proposals, we discuss as parents and agree and see which student will participate in a strike when the parents have sat in an association like the Parents Teachers Association (PTA) and agreed and are paying.

    4. Honourable members, this issue was raised but for those who have been keen and I know that this Parliament has four former guild Presidents of Makerere University; hon. Adeke, hon. Asuman, hon. Gerald Karunga and hon. Kibalya.

Personally, I have analysed the strikes at Makerere; the one for students and lecturers. Lecturers are about welfare, students are about fees but let me repeat for purposes of emphasis. Honourable minister, has the ministry ever done research to find out-(Member timed out.)

4.10
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What we are talking about at the moment is key to humanity and members of the academia. In the university, the students rank No.1 on the stakeholders’ grid but what is happening right now is that the students are not properly and sufficiently consulted.

Some student leaders sit on the council and have a big following; they should be able to listen and take down notes and consult their members. However, when they start the consultations, they say that they are trying to incite violence and they frustrate them; at times they are even expelled or suspended for inciting others and yet they must consult their colleagues because that is the biggest number.
	
They are not consulted because I sit on the Education committee of Parliament. For example, about two years ago, the policy on meals was suspended for those on Government sponsorship. 

When the students tried to consult, they were frustrated; they brought their petition to the committee complaining that they tried to consult with their colleagues but they were not given the opportunity. Therefore, even right now students are blocked and cannot sufficiently consult and when they try, they become the enemies of the people.

Something must be done because it is not only lecturers that make a university; without learners, we cannot have a university. We should also remember that we have learners who are yearning for education and come from poor families. 

Universal Primary Education started 22 years ago and 10 years later, Universal Secondary Education started and there was a turnover from 1.2 to 3.5 at the time. As we talk, today we have over 8 million learners and these are some of the people who are now in the universities.

Remember we have just 3,000 who are paid for by the Government; so, the majority are yearning for education and they come from very poor families. Something must be done so that all children enjoy quality education. Thank you.

4.14
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start from where hon. Rwabushaija ended. Everybody is aware that most of the students who go to Makerere University are from very poor families and Makerere University is a Government institution.

We are all aware of the Universal Primary Education, the Universal Secondary Education and at this level, when somebody is already in Makerere and the good thing there is a guild body.  It wouldn’t be right for the administration to sit down and decide without giving the student’s body an opportunity to have an input and their input is also very important because the student’s body represents everybody in the university.

Madam Speaker, the student’s strike was justified because we expect Government institutions to pay very little money or almost nothing. If UPE and USE are there, then what about university education - and most of these students have worked hard to reach that level.

An increment of even Shs 100,000 - you hear parents crying and they always call us to help them because they have nowhere to get it from. Like the honourable colleague said, these students try so much but their parents are not capable. Our income is not there - those people in the villages struggle so much and some do not even have goats to sell. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give a way forward that that 15 per cent be halted for now so that the university administration should first sit together with the Parliament’s Committee on Education and Sports, the representatives of the students’ body and come to an agreement.

There is no way we can say that we are promoting education if we cannot support students who are from poor families and are very bright.

Secondly, I pray that –(Member timed out.)

4.18
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to, first of all, add my voice to all the other Ugandans and members of Parliament to condemn violence against students. 

Some of us stand here today to speak to this country because we are products of Makerere University. We participated in demonstrations and advocated for our rights while we were in Makerere University. If we had been beaten at that time, would we be here today?

I think certain things are mishandled by reckless, irresponsible individuals who hold positions of responsibility and put Government under a lot of pressure for nothing. Sometimes, you end up defending what is not going to work. How do you go and start beating students and you want me, hon. Silwany, to stand here and defend what you are doing? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, what the army did in Makerere University was wrong. Beating students is uncalled for in this century, in this generation and in this time. I think all of us condemn violence against students.

Another concern is the tuition levels – the other day I was talking about the same thing – while you compare tuition with private and other regional institutions, Makerere is a public institution. It should be the cheapest because it offers education to the vulnerable and those who cannot afford.

If it were not for the scholarships at the university and Makerere being a Government institution, I would not be here. Hon. Basalirwa would not be here either; he could not afford to be in the university that time but it is because of that offer that he is here today as a Member of Parliament. Therefore, we should condemn this type of violence and then encourage negotiations.

I would like to support what hon. Obua said about negotiations among parents by forming a parents’ body. The parents should be involved, as well as the students. Then all the stakeholders should sit at a roundtable and agree on a way forward for Makerere University so that we sort out the issue of the university once and for all. 

We shall not be coming here every day to repeatedly discuss the issue of Makerere. We should have a lasting solution and sort out the problem of Makerere once and for all. If we are here but we are not able to solve issues of Makerere –(Member timed out.)

4.21
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to condemn the violence that was meted on the students at Makerere University. I speak as a parent and a benefactor but also as a Member of Parliament because when this 15 per cent increment is effected, in one way or the other, it will affect us, as members of Parliament. The parents will start calling for money from us. Therefore, you may think it is far from you because you have no child in Makerere but it will affect you, as a Member of Parliament. 

The violence in Makerere was archaic, barbaric and primitive; that in the 21st Century, you go at night, break into hostels and start beating up students and you are a people’s army? It was barbaric and primitive.

We should be talking about universal education now; we should be going there. Rather than the minister coming here to ask us to get money for universal education, he is here to justify - not just the increment but the beating. Honourable minister, it is a shame that in the 21st Century, we can come and condone beating our children.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I think the suspension and expulsion of students should be lifted because you cannot suspend people out of emotions because you are not happy with them. Parents have suffered to raise money from primary school to university level and then by just a stroke of a pen, you suspend students. Where do they go? We should really be humane. I am very disappointed that the minister is supporting such a barbaric act.

4.23
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The problems of Makerere are fairly known. I would like to make three proposals going forward.

If you want to do a service to Makerere, this Parliament and the Executive should call upon Government to take over the wage bill of the university. Currently, management contributes 40 per cent and the other 60 per cent is supposed to come from Government. Unfortunately, it is not fulfilled.

Government should take over full funding of what they call Government-sponsored students. That full funding, Madam Speaker, should be based on unit cost. If you ask the minister to provide this Parliament with the unit cost per student on the basis of Government figures, you will get shocked. The private students are actually subsidising Government students because Government does not meet its obligations. (Applause) When talking about Makerere, we must look at that. 

The other aspect is for Government to establish a separate scheme to be managed separately for private students. It is happening in other universities and it should happen for Makerere so that this confusion, where universities get money from private students to subsidise Government students, does not happen.

Madam Speaker, I listened to the minister saying that part of the problems at Makerere is external. These allegations are not new. When I was Guild President there, we used to have demonstrations and those allegations used to come. I remember the late hon. Mayombo coming to my office and claiming that I was being funded by hon. Cecilia Ogwal - whom I did not know by then; that hon. Aggrey Awori and Rwanyarare were funding me to cause strikes at Makerere. These are people I did not know. Even the allegation of drug abuse is not new.

Usually, Government and the university use it to divert the attention from serious discussions. So, I do not think it is an argument that should be sustained. (Applause)

Finally, the current administration at Makerere has gone down the annals of history as having the highest suspensions and expulsions. I have never seen it before. We have been student leaders. We were stubborn by any –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Give us a way forward in one minute.

MR BASALIRWA: Even when we booed the President in 2000 – and Ndugu Rugunda was there – we were never expelled. Article 42 is very clear, Madam Speaker. The Vice Chancellor sits in his office and unilaterally makes a decision. He is the complainant, judge, prosecutor and witness; he unilaterally decides to expel students. The minister should not be promoting such unconstitutional behaviour by the university administration. Therefore, the earlier it is revoked, the better.

The way forward, Madam Speaker, is that the university students must also be given opportunity to manage guild elections. As we speak, the university administration has come up with its own rules of managing guild elections. When I contested, hon. Otto was chairman of the electoral commission. He was succeeded by hon. Sseggona. We were managing our own electoral processes.

Now, the university decides how much aspirants should pay, when and how; which was never heard of. Therefore, the idea of interfering in internal democratic processes of students should also stop because it is part of the problem.  Thank you.

4.28
Ms Winfred kiiza (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I join my colleagues to condemn the manner in which our children, husbands and mothers of this nation were brutally handled by soldiers during the demonstration.

I am a proud alumnus of the Makerere University Human Rights and Peace Centre. I studied there unlike others and I know that this situation would have been controlled if some of the aspects of conflict resolution were brought on board.

The situation started with just a few students, 15 girls bringing their petition to the ministry. They were intercepted, brutalised. If only these 15 girls had been listened to, the situation would not have reached where it is now. (Applause)

Right now, the Guild President of Makerere University is nowhere to be seen and so, I would like the minister to tell the House where he is. The matter is being politicised. We would like to know, as Ugandans who are bothered about the human rights of our children; who are so bothered about the humanity of individuals, where the Guild President of Makerere is.

Makerere has, for many years, been known as a centre of excellence. We would not like our university to be known as a centre for torture. Our children go there to study and as many have spoken, the victims of the private sponsorship decision taken by the university are children of the poor. Many parents even sell land to pay tuition for their children. Others are still struggling with. If we don’t handle this situation, we are condemning these children to a state of helplessness, to the streets and a life of despair.
 
We are a Parliament but also parents. We are policy makers. I would like to suggest that we halt the increment of fees until we sit and talk about it.

Secondly, can we find out where the guild president is? I realise there is double taxation for the children and those on – the double taxation that I am talking about is based on the statistics and the information provided by hon. Asuman Basalirwa. It looks like the fees for the privately sponsored students is what covers up for the deficits of Government. The tuition for the private students should have been normal if there wasn’t a double payment for the Government sponsored students. That is why I am calling it double taxation.

Therefore, may our Government step up and cater for the students that are on Government sponsorship, majority of whom are children of those who can even afford the private scheme? Let us stop punishing the already poverty-stricken people. I pray that the ministry reconsiders punishing our children for raising their voice to what they think is injustice. That should be addressed and put right. Thank you.

4.32
Ms angelline osegge (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In all that we have seen and heard, to some level, you see a lot of dishonesty on the part of the leadership and the ministry.

The Bible says that the truth always sets people free. Until we admit the truth, which we know, we won’t help Makerere University. Bringing a defensive position that students are on drugs and whatsoever is just covering up the real problem.

I would like to urge the ministry to be honest with itself and the situation at Makerere and face it. We are parents and a parental approach to these students’ demands, I believe, would have solved a lot of issues.

All of us have been students before. Once you subject students to oppression because you want to show that you have power, they will also show you that they have power. If these students had been spoken to in a way they understand, I do not think it would have come to this end.

Many of us think that because Makerere University is a public university and so, helping the poor; it is the opposite. It is unfortunate that the way we do things in this country is skewed. We imagine that this is how things are supposed to be but it is actually not the case. Why don’t we consider a general policy for public institutions in this country? 

If Mbarara University is a public university and it is not paying so much, why can’t we decide that all public institutions – we give a cap for all courses. Why should Makerere be different? 

We have all expressed the idea that it is the rich who are benefiting from public sponsorship. Why not declare that every university student gets a loan? Let us scrap this Government sponsorship business to allow everybody go for a loan, which they will pay for later. That way, we will be able to support more students and probably even help to sort out some of these things.

Lastly, Makerere University is a cooking pot for leaders of this country. When you subject them to violence, that will determine what kind of leaders they are going to be; let us watch out.

4.35
Mr Herbert ariko (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we delve into the issue of Makerere University, we should look at the genesis of these issues. The 15 per cent increment has its basis on a report of a sub-committee of the guild representative council, which was largely constituted by student leaders. 

Makerere University is run by a university council. It is, therefore, curious that such a matter on the review of tuition is handled by a sub-committee of the guild representative council and the university council. 

The only issue is that Makerere University has other stakeholders. The composition of the university council in itself tells us they are business people. There is Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), the Ministry of Education and Sports, a university representative and students. Why do we subject a report of one aspect of the constituent college of the council to come up with such a report?

We do not have a lot of time but I would have wanted to highlight something to do with this report. The report, which forms the basis for this increment, talks about four terms of reference:
 
    1. To study the financial challenges of the university and their impact on the quality of services;
    2. To make proposals and recommendations based on the findings of (2.1) above; you should note that (2.1) is about financial challenges. Terms of reference (2) is based on the very first one.
    3. To consult other student leaders formally or informally on the way forward. You know that is largely redundant.
    4. To benchmark other universities in the region. 

Sincerely, this term of reference is very shallow for a university council to base its recommendation on. 

This report of this 10-man committee says that over the last three years, the university has failed to balance its expenditure and revenue account. Must the university, therefore, enormously shift the burden of meeting its revenue and expenditure on poor Ugandans? Is that the best way of managing affairs in this country? It is obviously wrong and curious. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have half minute to conclude.

MR ARIKO: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by raising one more matter. The advert that the university ran for purposes of people to apply for private sponsorship at the university displayed the tuition of the previous academic year. Imagine you get admitted and two months down the road, you are slapped with a 15 per cent increment. You are already late to go to any other university if you wanted to opt out. Why do we con poor Ugandan citizens? 

This Parliament must stand for its citizens, the poor Ugandans who deserve education like all of us got from that university. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.39
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think that the people running Makerere University are very unfair to Ugandans. The economy of this country is not doing very well and poverty is rampant. The students that have joined Makerere are former UPE and USE students. These are poor children and they do not have the money. Therefore, I cannot understand why Government cannot see that these are their own who cannot afford tuition at Makerere. 

Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate and I will keep referring to the way soldiers went and broke into the rooms of students. We are forgetting that we are members of the United Nations and the African Union, where Government has signed the Charter on Human Rights. The whole world is watching what is happening in this country and Government does not see. 

Why do you go to the extent of punishing parents who cannot afford? We have heard terrible stories of what is happening to our girls at Makerere. They have told us that they cannot afford tuition and so they go to the streets to make sure that they can pay up.

We would like the Government to take over the university and pay tuition for everybody. Let Government take over and give out loans. The students who are called Government-sponsored students are subsidised by the private ones. The lecturers at Makerere do not want to teach the Government students, they prefer the evening classes where they are getting money. You can see what is happening; this is very unfair to Ugandans and Government should take over and rescue the situation at Makerere University instead of punishing poor students and parents. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.42
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If the 15 per cent increment is collected from all students, it will come to Shs 4.6 billion. This is the money for which hon. JC Muyingo is using the Police and military to beat our children. For the next five years, it will come to about Shs 30 billion. We passed a budget here and increased the money for presidential donations from Shs 80 billion to Shs 240 billion. 

People will wonder. This is the biggest university in Uganda teaching 33,000 students and you are now beating them to finance a budget deficit of Shs 4.6 billion. This will be an economic miracle; financing a budget deficit by crushing students.  Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Prime Minister not to waste parliamentary time. Rather, by this time, he should be raising a supplementary budget to raise the Shs 4.6 billion for which students are being beaten. This country can afford this money. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, students are on strike. We should consider the response of the State and the militarisation of our lives. You want to use the military for every single problem and it has become a tool of suppression. You see taxis in the park quarrelling and fighting and the military is deployed. You should tell us whether the Police has collapsed. Are we back to Luweero triangle where you were using the military to solve every problem? 

Madam Speaker, in the central region, hon. JC Muyingo is a highly respected and extremely decent person. You should not be made to carry such documents like this in Parliament. There are people who should carry them but not you. We hold you highly in our region. 

Universities all over the world are different. When you go to the UK for example, you cannot compare Cambridge to other universities. The same applies to Oxford and Yale. Countries are built on elite universities and they really safeguard those universities –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I will start with what I think is prudent and can help solve the problem. I think this Parliament should demand, with immediate effect, that the suspension of students be halted and rescinded because that will help de-escalate the situation. If you continue to say that 29 or 11 students are suspended, the standoff will continue. Therefore, can we pass a resolution urging the ministry and the university council to rescind that decision? That will help solve this problem. 

The second resolution that we should pass is that the Vice Chancellor, who has proved to be high handed, steps aside - (Interjections) - it will not leave a vacuum because he has three substantive deputies. That will help de-escalate the situation so that tensions calm down. 

Thirdly, world over, it is imperative for any democracy and any developing country to finance an elite university. When you go to China, they have New Delhi. The size of the wallet of your parent cannot stop you from joining New Delhi. It is the size of your brain. In the UK, for you to go to Cambridge or Oxford, it is the size of your brain that will determine.

Therefore, as we sit in this Parliament, there would not be a Ruhakana Rugunda or a Speaker like the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga or many of us who come from very poor backgrounds. It is because the size of our brains determined who we are and public money was used to pay for our education. That is why we have a Speaker and Ndugu Rugunda. Even the President of this country is a product of this kind of affirmative action where we pool resources. It is high time that Government thought of a model on how to finance public universities.

Madam Speaker, the Government is celebrating the success of Universal Secondary Education (USE) but as they celebrate 20 years of USE, they should know that USE students are the poorest of the poor that have made it to the university. You cannot therefore stop them from attaining degrees.

The issue of agitation at the university is what you need –(Member timed out.)

4.48
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the other members of Parliament to condemn the brutality meted on Makerere University students. As we talk, 36 students were expelled from Makerere University as of Thursday. Even their guild president is under a military facility near Kisekka Market. 

The Bible says that when the children of Israel reached Canaan, God reminded them of their sufferings in Egypt. He told them, “Remember those days…” Today, we have a breed of very arrogant politicians and leaders who behave as if they have never been poor. They look at the 15 per cent increment as nothing since they are the one per cent that controls the resources of this country. We should, therefore, condemn them.

We should also condemn the use of the military in every situation in this country. When the military attacked Parliament, the judges ruled that an attack on an individual in Parliament does not warrant an attack on Parliament. When the military attacked fishermen and killed them on the lakes, we tried to make an alarm but nothing was done. Now, they have started attacking halls of residence of female students.

Madam Speaker, I feel bad when I see soldiers attacking female students in their halls of residence. Some of them were beaten and they were bleeding, yet people are taking it as usual business. We must condemn that kind of act, if we are to make this country a better place for everyone.

As I conclude, I would like to propose that the Vice Chancellor, Mr Nawangwe, resigns immediately since he has failed to control the situation at Makerere University. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still want assurance that the army has left the university before we conclude this debate. 

4.50
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to go straight to the recommendations.

My first recommendation is that the commander, who commandeered the torture, the beating of students and the raping of our girls should be investigated and reprimanded. That should be taken seriously.

Secondly, since the minister said some of the students were acting under the influence of drugs, I would like to request the minister to produce the names of those students who were acting under the influence of drugs. Otherwise, we do not support students who are using drugs at the university.

Thirdly, the minister yesterday said that there were non-students who were helping the demonstration at the university. Can the minister produce those non-students to the Ugandans? Otherwise, we do not want speculation and lies. The minister should give us the names of the non-students and where they are currently.

Fourthly, the minister should ensure that the suspension of the 36 students is lifted and they be recalled back to the university.

Finally, the students should go back to the lecture rooms immediately by Monday next month without fail. Let the normal class lessons operate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, Parliament condemned the brutality of the security forces on our children. This morning, I expected Government to have some sense of remorse and tender an apology to our children and the parents.

Madam Speaker, one of the reasons we are a Government and why we collect taxes is to take care of the poor. That is when the Government is relevant and legitimate. If you abscond from that responsibility, then we have a problem.

It is exactly 23 years since Universal Primary Education (UPE) was introduced. The education system drop-out is at 95 per cent for those who enrolled in primary one. We cannot even afford to finance the 5 per cent. I think that is not acceptable.

It is unfortunate that it is during the same season when we are saying we do not have money for the 5 per cent of our children who make it through thick and thin, yet we have money for areas unexplained. In the very week of the strike at the university, we are seeing money given to the President to go to people who do not deserve it - the Kusasira’s and Buchaman. These people have money. What message are we giving to the people? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to blame Parliament. I think we should be able to check the budget. You cannot lack money for 5 per cent of citizens who have managed to persevere, yet you have money to give to people who are not needed. I remember we used to talk about needy students when we were leaving Makerere and when we lost Okema and Onyango. In fact, we almost lost the Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, due to militarisation of political questions. Otherwise, intellectuals do engagement of policy. We should commend and salute them for not going to the bush. Do you want the young people to go to the bush?

This is unfortunate. I remember Maj. Gen. Otafiire’s lecture, a week before he resigned. He introduced us to the topic of diversionary obscurantism –(Member timed out.)

5.55
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the House to condemn what happened at Makerere. It is unthinkable and it must stop. I would like to ask the minister that if what is being stated as 15 per cent cumulative increment is what he meant, then it is unfair to Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I have tried to make some calculations based on the 15 per cent increment. Supposing a first-year student is paying pay Shs 2.3 million, the student who will come the following year will pay Shs 2.6 million. Again, the 15 per cent will be calculated on the Shs 2.6 million so that in the third year, a first-year student pays Shs 3 million. In the fourth year, they are supposed to calculate another 15 per cent on that Shs 3 million. Madam Speaker, that is how it is supposed to work.

This means that in the fifth year, a course which literally in the first year was Shs 2.3 million will then be Shs 4 million. Madam Speaker, the Government is locking out the poor people.  In fact, it is the privileged students who get Government sponsorship. The poor people struggle through thick and thin. Otherwise, it is everyone’s dream to study at Makerere University. We should therefore not use this kind of means to lock out people 

Madam Speaker, I am aware that the minister belongs to the NRM; NRM rode behind poor people to come to power; why are you locking them out of Government?

About two weeks ago, the same ministry issued a policy that all teachers from Primary level to whatever level will have to attain a degree. Now you are raising standards but you are locking out people, where do you want them to be? They want to get you out of power. 

Maybe the only way is to get you out of power so that they can get married with another person. Otherwise, change the policy and accommodate everybody. Listen to students. We know that education is a basic right and it is a standard to measure whether you are poor or not beside other things. We need to make education affordable to Ugandans.

I would like to request that let the 15 per cent increment be put aside and we inquire or Parliament should investigate this matter –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming the Makerere University students represented by hon. Nsereko and hon. Naggayi and the district councillors from Namutumba, represented by hon. Akamba and hon. Naigaga. Welcome. 

4.59
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of Makerere is not only there but also in our villages like Butaleja. My proposal is that the issue of fees increment be suspended with immediate effect.

I consulted some economists like hon. Nandala-Mafabi and they said that the growth rate of the country is around 6 per cent; inflation is around 5 per cent. If you are increasing do it around that. At most 10 per cent if you go beyond. How do you go to 15 per cent?

On the issue of Prof. Nawangwe resigning, I am not in for it as an individual. Some people may use it because they do not want other names and other people to hold those positions –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle.

MR WALUSWAKA: The issue of the military was very wrong and the President, who is the Commander-in-Chief, the Chairman of my party NRM, directed that the military should not be there and in case the military is there, as a senior member of NRM I have now directed them to leave.

Honourable minister of Internal Affairs, the Commander-in-Chief said that if you cannot handle the issue of Makerere, they will sack all the police and recruit others. 

The way hon. Basalirwa suggested, let there be a system because money is collected and it is used for other things and not for Makerere. I suggest that we use one admission unit to admit all university students such that a team sits to pick names either alphabetically or any other order and distribute to various universities. 

It would decongest the university because a Member said that Muni has only 380 students and moreover professors are there; instead of heaping Makerere.

THE SPEAKER: Are you coming to tell us whether the military have left because that is what I would like to hear.

MR OBIGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. At this moment I am giving information that the Commander-in-Chief’s directive was complied with on that very day but we thank the honourable Member for re-enforcing the directive. Definitely they are not there.

MR MUWANGA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The honourable minister of Internal Affairs has just been telling us that the directive of the Commander-in-Chief was complied with immediately but what comprises of Makerere University is not what is within the perimeters of Makerere.

Makerere University overtime has expanded to a large corridor that includes students’ hostels where most students stay. The military is well out of what we ordinarily know within Makerere campus but it is in the areas where students have hostels.

Majority of students reside in those hostels; they no longer stay on campus. It is in those hostels where they continue to brutalise people. 

We would like the minister to state what the withdrawal means. Is it just within the University or within the corridor where so many students reside? We would like him to commit that the withdrawal is complete from the university and hostels.

5.04
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I join colleagues to condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the highhanded response of the military in quelling the protest which was a peaceful demonstration in Makerere University. 

One parent - David Musiri’s father - while watching TV news saw his son being battered by the military at Makerere; he developed high blood pressure and collapsed dead. He was buried in Gayaza a few days ago. Government should be ashamed because they never accorded him a decent burial because this was a disaster.  

The military entered Lumumba Hall and found persons with disabilities. Alongside beating them up, even their gadgets like clutches were broken - even the white cane which is used by the blind was destroyed. This is the kind of deplorable state that they have brought this ivory tower to. 

I would like to salute the IGP, Martin Okoth Ochola. Three days ago, he issued a circular and it is important to note that he said that all those officers that will be found personally liable should be held responsible and incur compensation for any damage. 

The Head of State feigned ignorance about the presence of the military in Makerere University - and I would like to give him benefit of doubt but up to now, he has not cracked the whip on those that were responsible for deployment of the military in the university, who have brutalised, battered and molested students in Makerere University. It leaves a lot to be desired. Therefore, there is more to it than meets the eye.

Madam Speaker, in the minister’s statement, one would wonder why he is hiding behind drugs because he has a chain of schools that are actually a source –(Member timed out.)

5.07
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I was a student of Makerere University and even currently, I am doing a Master’s degree there. I stand in solidarity with the students who are being mishandled by the authorities.

Secondly, the Bible says, “Do unto others what you want them to do unto you.” That is according to Matthew 7:12. I do not know whether these students here have committed any crime; that they deserve to be tear-gassed in their rooms and beaten. On behalf of the people of Ngora, I condemn that type of treatment of our citizens, my colleagues and friends who are students – because I am also a student in that same university.

Thirdly, as leaders, we must be people who should listen - not people who simply jump and act. We should also be willing to listen to everybody, whether they have different opinions or not. That should be the benchmark if we would like to solve problems. 

I have a few proposals, Madam Speaker, on the way forward. 

    1. We must promote dialogue. Short of dialogue, we shall continue to have chaos in that university for a long time.
    2. This Parliament must suspend the fees increment policy with immediate effect, if there is going to be peace in that university.
    3. We must also think about suspending the forthcoming examinations, now that we are in an environment where “war” is taking place. It has been two weeks and exams are going to be there. We are going to call students to do exams and they are going to have course works that they will fail. When they fail, there will be a demand to pay more money. That is why in my opinion, as a Member of Parliament and a parent – because I have two students there – exams should be suspended.
    4. The other thing which is very serious is that we must investigate all those managers of Makerere who failed to manage this matter because they are responsible for causing this jam in this country.

As I conclude, sometimes we talk about common sense. Makerere is supposed to be a centre of excellence where knowledge is disseminated. Unfortunately, I do not see common sense in the management of that university. There are very many problems taking place in the university and you invite people who are dangerous –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we must also establish who actually deployed those soldiers. We must find out who deployed them. Someone ordered them; we must know who that one is.

5.10
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to condemn the brutality at Makerere University. However, we are only lucky in this Government that in public primary and secondary schools, students and even parents cannot strike. I spoke on this Floor when I demanded to know why the fees structure is increased almost every term in Government-aided schools, more so, the renowned day schools like Lubiri S.S, Mengo S.S, Jinja S.S and Mbale S.S, which used to help the children of poor dwellers in the towns. 

Now, when you see what is happening in Makerere, it is unimaginable. Some of us went there about 13 or 15 years ago. We were paying less than even half a million shillings but now, the fees have doubled. Why is it doubling? Their budget is exaggerated.

Look at the procurement procedure and the cost of units. Some of us, including the minister, own schools but you can see the difference in the cost of food and other utilities that are required at school. That should be looked into. They exaggerate the budget and at the end of the day, they always feel that there is a deficit in the budget. If that is the case, let us scrap the sponsored students and we cover the entire budget, so that the poor can also benefit.

When you look at the parents – these honourable colleagues are aware – almost every week, you get a parent saying, “Can you help and support me? My children are going for exams.” The reason is that many cannot afford but we need to be firm and say “No” to the increment. We can even get money elsewhere and support the university but after going through their budgets thoroughly well to remove the exaggerated figures on the cost of expenditure. I thank you.

5.13
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing this debate to take consideration of the people of Uganda. I rise here to condemn the brutality exhibited in Makerere University. The way it was done shows the level of backwardness instead of showing the level of transformation that we claim as a Government.

At this point in time, it is not correct to find that the army is the one managing everything. I recall there was a big debate here about the fish industry. That is where the soldiers are. Recently, in UNEB, the army was deployed. In the agricultural sector, that is where the army is. When we are debating a serious matter here, there is the majje issue. This is becoming cumbersome. We need to resolve the issue. I do not know whether we are going back to autocracy and now we are trying to reduce the space of civility.

I suggest that militarisation in institutions should be reduced or stopped. When the President says he is ‘shocked’, then we need to question the one who sent the army to brutalise the children at Makerere University. Therefore, that person should be investigated and brought to book because the President is the Commander-In-Chief. Through you, Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister should be able to bring a report on who instructed the army to go and brutalise our children.

Before we went on recess, you ordered the ministry to bring here a supplementary to support the poor, who would pay back under the loan scheme. I have learnt today, through the minister, who told me that there is no money. We have money to do other things but we do not have money to support the poor people. Madam Speaker, they are bringing another supplementary to support other rich people, leaving out the poor people of Uganda.

According to the President’s speech, 68 per cent are under subsistence living. How do we support those to come out of that situation if we do not want to leave them in that situation, when we cannot support the poor people from getting education? The Prime Minister we have here was the chairperson of the National University Students’ Union (NUSU) and was a vibrant student but I do not think he was rich.

However, today, he is superintending –(Member timed out.)

5.16
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the opportunity. Even when it is going to rain, you can easily tell that it is coming by just seeing the clouds or wind. Therefore, there is nothing that can come haphazardly without having checks and balances.

There is a communication gap, in this situation between the university council and the students. How do you expect someone who has been paying Shs 1.5 million, for example, to pay Shs 2,000,000 the next semester? Where will that money come from? That student will need to have clear explanations to the people who have been paying for them fees.

The students who went to the university council and did not agree with the resolution had an opportunity of going back and at least sensitise fellow students on how this would go. How would you expect these people to go back and tell their parents that tuition has been hiked without a clear explanation?

The students need time to be sensitised so that they go back and tell their people that, “Because of the new things that are coming up at the university, you parents need to help us and get this money.” 

However, the way things are being done is totally dangerous to the students. They had reasons to come and see whether their voices could be properly heard in order for them to get the clear capacity on how to go back to their people and tell them that there is a challenge at the university, “We need to get this money so that we can continue and finish our courses.”

Allow me to stop but we should consider the point I am going to say to you: the university council should also respect students. Let their voices be heard so that they can have the capacity to tell the people who are paying for them how they are going to handle the situation.  Thank you.

5.19
Ms Sarah Kityo (NRM, Youth Representative, Central):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also add my voice to the previous voices in condemning the violence against students in Makerere. 
Unlike some other Members of Parliament, I am a product of Uganda Christian University, Mukono. Some of the reasons I did not join Makerere were related to that kind of practice. It is a common issue these days that every year, they must riot and go through this kind of challenges.

My humble request is that you direct this matter to the Committee on Education and Sports because there seems to be so many issues that we do not know. We could give this committee a chance to listen to the students so that we get a lot of facts. According to what most members have been saying, it is like Makerere University is accessible by anyone. Even some goons can come out from wherever and get into Makerere. We may end up losing more lives than we have already lost.

Therefore, my request is that we first of all refer this matter to that committee for us to get more detailed information about what is happening.

Secondly, there are those students who are paying for themselves. It is not true that every student at Makerere is paid for by a parent. We keep on convincing young people of this country to join Makerere or join other institutions. We tell the school drop outs to go back and get degrees yet we do not support them when they get there.

Thirdly, this kind of increment should be stopped until the committee reports to Parliament.  Thank you.

5.21
Ms connie nakayenze (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of other members who have condemned the actions of the military against our children; it was quite barbaric.

The minister’s communication, which states that 15 per cent was a small percentage, beats my understanding. It can only be called small to people who can afford but to the poor of the poorest who sponsor themselves, it is quite a lot.

I have come to realise that it seems the money that is collected from private students is like a business for somebody at Makerere University. Where is the accountability for that money? Maybe, we would need an audit report to have something done. Otherwise, they are being overcharged - we were here one time fighting for the rights of the tenants - if there is any increment, let it not be more than 10 per cent. Otherwise, to the poor students, we are saying that 15 per cent is small and we go ahead to compare Uganda to other countries. Which poor student will go to other countries if they cannot afford it in their own country? That comparison was not fair.

It also beats my understanding to brand some students as Government and others private. I wonder where the private ones come from yet they are all Ugandans. This discrimination should stop. That is why we are having this kind of unrest. If all students at Makerere University were equally treated, I think this kind of unrest wouldn’t be there.

Therefore, I beg to suggest that there should be a deliberate policy that all students at Makerere be treated in the same way so that maybe it can end the strikes that are going on.

Madam Speaker, I also get perturbed by statements that indicate that continuing students will be exempted from this increment. What crime have the first years committed to be the ones to begin with this kind of injustice? They are all Ugandans and they should –(Member timed out.)

5.24
Mr ismael orot (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very important to observe that most of the prosperous people in this country came from poor families. You realise that even in their contribution to the country, because of that poor background, they tend not to be so corrupt. 

Therefore, when we look at the university situation, we can talk generally about public universities. There is a situation where a student is told towards examinations that there should be “zero balance” when the student is left with say, Shs 200,000 to complete fees. Administratively, it can be explained that the students sit for the examinations but that they clear such balances when coming for either the graduation or picking the transcript. 

For the case of our country, we are fond of praising the Asian tigers - Malaysia, Singapore, Iran and so forth - all that transformation we see in those countries was brought about by leaders giving great attention to education. 

Madam Speaker, you have been to Iran where universities are like primary schools. Government should come up with the policy of covering gaps for these students to complete their education successfully. If they do not, it will create a very big gap between the poor and the rich. 

In some situations, poor students are allowed work in certain areas in order to get small money to pay to the universities. However, once they are denied the opportunity like what is going on in Makerere, they get frustrated. In addition, we the leaders should be very selective when giving comments in situations like these. 

I read in newspapers of some leaders calling others opportunistic and so forth. In such situations, that is not good coming from the mouth of a leader. Leaders should speak words that bring peace and unity in such situations. 

We would like to observe that it is good that the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business is here. Cabinet should now –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 1 November 2016, the President invoked Section 26(2) of the University and other Tertiary Institutions Act and closed Makerere University. The reason for closing the university was to ensure safety of persons and their property.

The problems at Makerere University surround welfare of academic staff, the students and other staff of the university. This welfare is based on inadequate financial support that the university gets from Government. 

Madam Speaker, many of the ministers who sit in Cabinet today went to Makerere University: Rt Hon. Rugunda, Hon. Maj. Gen. Otafiire, hon. Muyingo, Hon. Muruli Mukasa, honourable Prof. Kamuntu and hon. Obiga Kania. I would like to know from them whether the life that they led in a public university then, which life was supported by Government, is the same life that students are facing in public universities in Uganda today. 

As you sit in Cabinet to take decisions that affect the education of young people in public universities in this country, you must recall where you came from. That way, we will make sure that we provide facilities and funds that are enough for universities to provide education without going through wars all the time. 

How do we run a public university, which is a private university at the same time? Are we looking at policies to deal with these two issues so that as much as the students are making contributions, they are still regarded as being in a public university? We should not treat them like students who are studying in a completely private university. 

This is why I am calling on Cabinet to come and look into this and provide enough money for these universities to run. When the university council sits and says, we have a financial gap, how are we going to solve this problem, instead of running to Government, the council is running to parents and saying, this is where we are going to recover the money from. Even the money that Government provides – (Member timed out.)

5.30
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I look at this strike and the fees increment, the semester started around August and as of now, students are about to sit their examinations. Why is this strike happening at this time?

In my opinion, there must be another problem other than this issue of fees. The fees increment might just be a spark or trigger. 

Like hon. Othieno, I was a student of that university and I have two degrees from there. I am in the process of studying for a third degree. I interact with lecturers and I know that Makerere University has become a political institution where you cannot freely express yourself. Any view expressed by a lecturer will be looked at suspiciously. It is not a free academic institution. 

First of all, you cannot expel a student because he has given a contrary view. The war in Makerere should be an intellectual war. If a student has given a contrary view, reason him or her out and give your own view. You cannot cowardly resort to sending away a student. That is unacceptable. In addition, there should be due process followed. 

Madam Speaker, 15 per cent may be very little money for other regions but this might not be the case in Uganda. For a student that is paying around Shs 1.3 million, 15 per cent may be an equivalent of around Shs 200,000. However, this is compounded; it is not a one off. This increment is unrealistic.
 
Looking at all these problems, we instituted a committee to investigate the issue of sexual harassment. However, in my opinion, there are bigger problems than that. There are managerial issues as well. At one moment you find that it is the lecturers on strike and at another time, it is the students. We need to go in and investigate this matter. 

My proposal is that we should constitute a committee - In fact, we already have the Committee on Education so it might not be important to come up with another committee. We could direct the Committee on Education to investigate –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to also condemn, in the strongest terms, the unprecedented brutality on the students of Makerere. It was uncalled for, unjustifiable, and it actually aggravated the situation. There is also no doubt that the situation has been badly handled and I empathise with people who are calling for heads to roll. 

This is just one of the strikes but there have been several strikes before and they have been related to poor feeding, lack of necessities in the university, poor working conditions and low wages for lecturers and administrative staff. Sometimes, because the university is in a huge deficit, it is not able to pay the salaries and allowances that they should. There is no doubt that all this is being caused by the university not being able to balance its revenue with expenditure. All previous committees that have been set up have all highlighted this problem. Unfortunately, their recommendations have not been implemented. 

We have a problem that often, the university is in deficit and this is mainly because the fees structure is not helpful to the university. It is very interesting to note that some of the fees paid in some secondary schools are higher than what is being paid at Makerere. 

Secondly, all other public institutions have had the opportunity to set their fees structure, which has not been possible in Makerere. Unless this problem is resolved along the lines that hon. Basalirwa was talking about, we are likely to see more strikes. 

I think the starting point is for the university to acknowledge the unit cost per student. This is because what is being paid per student is far less than what should be paid. The university has to gamble to creatively manage. That is why we have evening classes to try to –(Member timed out)

5.36
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What we are seeing in Makerere today is just a tip of an iceberg. It is a product of many issues.

What we are seeing in Makerere dates far back from 2001, 2002, 2003 and 2004, when I was still in Makerere. The issues at Makerere are political, tribal and economic.

Madam Speaker, I worked in Makerere University since 2001 up to 2009, both as a staff and a student. I was there when Prof. P J Ssebuwufu was the Vice Chancellor. I was there when Prof. Livingstone Luboobi was the Vice Chancellor. I was in Makerere University when Prof. Venansius Baryamureeba became the Vice Chancellor. I saw students during Prof. Baryamureeba time graduate with their transcripts and certificate but that has not happened again in Makerere.

Madam Speaker, I have followed even after when I left Makerere when Prof. Ssentamu Ddumba was the Vice chancellor. I was still following Makerere even during the time when they had no vice chancellor. Even now, I was still following them up when the former Dean of Faculty of Technology, Prof. Nawangwe became the Vice Chancellor.

The issues in Makerere University are very many. We need to institute a special select committee to go and investigate. What we are seeing now is a just a tip of the iceberg. We, therefore, need to institute a special select committee to go and investigate thoroughly issues in Makerere University. Otherwise, there are many personal interests in the university.

Madam Speaker, we need Shs 5 billion for the Higher Education Students Financing Board and Makerere has failed to produce accountability for the last three financial years, yet they are pushing their burden onto students. How can you increase tuition for 15 percent annually? It is funny.

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by proposing that you appoint a special select committee to go and dig this issue further. Thank you very much.

5.39
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by condemning unprecedented the brutality that was meted. A university of learning cannot be turned into a battle of shoots. Otherwise, there are proper ways of querying strikes when they occur. 

Madam Speaker, I think many members have contributed to this matter. We have realised that this issue of increment of the 15 per cent is very unpopular. As we talk, the whole country is watching and parents have no money and so, the solution is for us to look at government and what they can do to solve this problem.

Madam Speaker, I think this is something that the Government can address. Otherwise, some colleagues also already brought the idea of Shs 4 billion. I think this is something that Government can solve to bring peace at the university such that our students can continue with their normal process of learning.

I would like to touch on the issue of communicating decisions between the University Council and the students’ body. Those days when we were in Makerere, we had an institution called the Dean of Students. I do not know what the Dean of Students is doing right now.

I remember one day, someone we popularly called, Uncle George - the students of North Court were striking about sanitation issues. Uncle George was locked in the toilets for about 30 minutes; but he was able to have a feel of what was going on. He came out and addressed the students and the strike stopped. What is happening these days? We do not hear of a dialogue between the administration and the guild body. This is something the minister should interest himself to handle. He should see how the administration is having feedback with the students.

Madam Speaker, the issue of sending military to institutions of learning must stop. It should not also reoccur. This really takes our nation into a backward state –(Member timed out.)

5.44
MS HOPE MUKISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to condemn the brutality that was exhibited on our students at Makerere University. The brutality that everyone saw happening at Makerere University was ugly and it infringes on the rights of the students.

Madam Speaker, I would like to interest myself with the statement that the minister made here yesterday. The minister said that these students have not been affected by the fees increment and their action cannot be justified in any way. Sincerely speaking honourable minister, did you carry out enough research to come up with such a statement and say that these students have not been affected by this fess increment? Otherwise, the students are crying due to the fees increment. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that for us to help the students at Makerere University, we should stop politicising everything. Why should a none-political issue, become war, at a time when students are crying at the top of their voices?

Secondly, I would like to propose that the Government should conduct a stakeholders’ mapping to establish the interest and the powers of the stakeholders.

Thirdly, I join colleagues to condemn this brutality. I would like to also appeal that this 15 percent tuition increment be withdrawn with immediate effect. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is hon. Chekamondo –(Prof. Kamuntu rose_)

5.46
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Madam Speaker, the minister is always against me from the time we were in finance.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also take this opportunity to add my voice to that of my fellow colleague to condemn the acts in Makerere. It was very ugly and very hurting, especially to the parents and a real Ugandan.

I would like to ask the minister a question. Why is it that around October or November, there are always strikes in Makerere? Have you endeavoured to find out why strikes are always happening around November and October?

Honourable minister, when you look at the 15 per cent that you are saying is very small, are you aware that some of the students have sold all the land and everything at home that even Shs 1 added on the fees, is already a sickness to them. This is why they go on strike. Honourable minister, the 15 per cent tuition increment is not small.

Honourable minister, when the decision for increment was made, were the students involved in the decision at least you had the guild body? If not, then this was a mistake because at this level we must involve the student’s body if something is sensitive. 

Some of those students run out to look for small money, working to get additional money so that they can add on this. The worst of it is that - honourable minister, why have you introduced what I had not heard when I was in university? This “zero” balance. 

If I am a continuing student and my parent is not able to get the money at that time; why don’t we allow these students do the exam, keep the record as they come back the next year it will be the first thing they pay so that we do not have the pressure given to parents.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that 15 per cent be halted and be revisited for decision, research be done on why Makerere is on -(Member timed out)

5.48
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, thank you, very much indeed. Honourable members, some of us are graduates of Makerere and it has made us what we are so issues affecting Makerere affect us in a fundamental way.

Members, you need to also appreciate that the governance of universities including Makerere is very unique. A real university is governed in a unique manner different from companies and from the way Parliament is governed.
	
The core value of Makerere is to seek the truth, knowledge, extend frontiers of knowledge without consequences. It must develop the capacity of students to think objectively, rationally and make decisions.

Consequently, before you condemn or appreciate, it is absolutely important to know the truth. What is the underlying cause of strikes at Makerere University?

Unless you know the truth, for instance, the presence of police and army is not the cause. To condemn the presence of police and army without condemning the underlying cause of a strike is an abortion of justice.

Once you establish the underlying causes you will have solved the problem because unless that is done, you are condemning symptom and it is not curing the disease. You are condemning the army and the presence of the police without condemning what caused –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The majority of us here had the privilege to go through Makerere University and Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu is one of the beneficiaries of free education at Makerere University.

Being an economics professor, I thought he would concentrate basically on the economic indicators of this country but he is focusing on the presence of the security forces in the university, and saying that it is bad to condemn them and yet in your ruling yesterday it was very clear that Parliament is not condemning the presence of the security forces in the university but their conduct.

Is hon. Ephraim Kamuntu in order to derail this House and try to undermine the direction and guidance that you gave yesterday; saying that the conduct of the security forces in Makerere was the problem but not the their presence.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is out of order because no one complained about the presence; what we are complaining about is their conduct while there. He can say other things.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Let me put a question to the House. If there had been no strike at Makerere would the brutality you are talking about have happened, would the army have been present at the campus? Let them answer. I agree with the minister –(Interruption)

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, I find it so bad giving my minister order. We have been speaking here and the concern had been the conduct of the security forces and we have been reliably informed that it did not start as a strike. It was 15 female students who were going to present their petition to the Prime Minister peacefully moving. 

They were stopped and manhandled by the police that is why other students joined so it was the police that instigated students to start the strike.

Is it in order for the minister to turn around and say that we are condemning that students’ voices should not be heard and yet he is a beneficiary of that institution and we know that Makerere is the pillar of democracy and centre of excellence? It is ranked No.4 in Africa.

THE SPEAKER: Minister what do you have in mind?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. We should try as much as possible to get the truth that causes strikes at Makerere University. Unless we get the underlying causes of the strike at Makerere, condemning presence which is a consequence and not the cause is an abortion of justice. Thank you, very much.

5.53
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking you for giving us the opportunity to discuss this issue thoroughly because it is bipartisan. It is a matter that has affected all of us. Whoever watched what happened to our children in Makerere, whether you have given birth or not, would cry! This has touched each and every Ugandan; so I would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity. 

I would like also to say that for this unfortunate event involving girls – ugly as it is – allow me to congratulate women. For that girl, Siperia, and the group to stand up to be counted for the truth –(Applause)– it requires exceptional courage and boldness. We need to congratulate her.

Madam Speaker, it is difficult to educate children but it is more difficult to educate a girl-child. (Applause) If I have managed to bring up a child up to the university level and I hear that that girl-child of mine, whom I have struggled with for years, is being raped by men in uniform, it is heartbreaking. It is a matter we cannot take lightly.

Above all, history will record that this event has happened when the Minister of Education and Sports is a distinguished woman and a top leader in this country; when the Speaker of Parliament is a woman and when there are senior citizens like Ogwal in the leadership of this country. (Laughter) So, history will record that these children were brutalised when we were in leadership. Therefore, something must be seen to be done to save the face and our image.

I would like to say a few things. One, I am upset with my brother when he says he does not even know the trigger of this problem. You can condemn me because by virtue of my age, I do not read tweets and so on but definitely, hon. Kamuntu definitely should be able to know what has happened. If he does not, he can ask the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Speaker can maybe request the LOP to give him one of our researchers to brief him.

What I would like to say is that we made a technical mistake by allowing SFC to invade Parliament - the supreme organ in this country - wreak havoc and nothing was done. Nobody has been punished in this country for having invaded Parliament and brutalised Members of Parliament. That was a dangerous precedent which must be corrected.

Secondly, allow me – if I could borrow one or two minutes from the slot of the LOP – to thank the commission, through you. Right now, Parliament is actually holding a colloquium or seminar at Hotel Africana –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Borrow one minute from the LOP.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we are focusing on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the spirit of the 17 pillars of the SDGs is that no one should be left behind. Therefore, I insist that these ladies did not want to be left behind and we, Members of Parliament, are saying that women and children of the poor should not be left behind as far as education is concerned.

Allow me to share with Parliament a letter written to the chairman of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. This is a justification of Shs 74.79 billion given to State House for donations. Out of this donation, State House says that Shs 20 billion went towards paying fees.

Allow me to explain to you the justification that was given.

    1. Twenty students for universities abroad and that cost Shs 2.4 billion;
    2. Forty five students for specialised training and what-have-you – Shs 3.8 billion;
    3. Other universities in Uganda; 2,031 students, that is Shs 11.760 billion; 
    4. Eighty five students in other institutions – Shs 782 million;
    5. In secondary schools which have now become Universal Secondary Education schools – I am glad the Prime Minister is here – 707  students are being sponsored and the cost is Shs 1.695 billion;
    6. Primary schools which we know officially for Universal Primary Education are costing us Shs 188 billion.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my prayers are:

    1. The security personnel must withdraw from Makerere unconditionally, if we are to remain a Parliament; 
    2. We should leave nobody behind. The children of the poor must be educated and this money, which is being spent under State House, should be given to top up the 15 per cent these children are crying against.
    3. We must find where the Guild President is. I wish we could sit tomorrow on Friday so the minister comes with the Guild President in his hand because he was arrested from NBS TV live.
    4. The issue of governance must be addressed. On the governance issue, Government is paying money to Makerere University. We must know who spent that money and how. We need a forensic audit of the management of that university and we take appropriate action.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know, education is supposed to be accessible and affordable to all and it is a right. Article 30 of our Constitution says that education is a right; so we must see that we implement that to the dot.

What actually sparked the strike was a peaceful demonstration by young ladies. We ladies are here in Parliament. Last Thursday, I said all the ladies must rise up and condemn the act against Molly. This is very unfortunate. She has to be compensated and even the hospital bill must be met by Government. We should not leave her there. We should compensate her for the loss she incurred during this time that she was standing up for the rights of the vulnerable.

I have here a document from Makerere; actually, it is a petition on this very policy. The policy was passed fraudulently, according to students of Makerere because it was an ad hoc committee, which was set up. They were seven members who were supposed to take their report to the Guild Representative Council (GRC), which they did not do. Instead, they by-passed the GRC and took it to the university council. The council then started implementing without trying to see if this was right. 

This is a petition they submitted last year. It was for 30th January. I can lay it on the Table. This policy, which has caused us a lot of problems, was fraudulently passed to the Makerere University Council.

What is the work of the minister? You are supposed to follow up issues even when policies are passed, it should be passed to the dot. We are very unhappy when they say that the Commander-in-Chief asked, “Who sent the military there?” Who is above him to send there the military if not him? 

We are happy today that the Prime Minister is here so he will have to explain to us. Many students lost their property because the doors to the hostel and their rooms were broken. There was teargas and shooting. Who is going to compensate these students? 

You are the Leader of the Government Business. We cannot stomach this. Now, education is accessible and affordable by only a few. There are a lot of things, which have been already raised by my colleagues. I think you should take them on. It is important that may be we need to institute a special committee to go and investigate all this.

However, the vice chancellor should give way and let the investigation get on because he is a dictator. If he were not, he would listen to these students. He would not just sit in his office and suspend and dismiss students the way he likes without listening to them. This is very unfortunate. 

This is what you people term as “steady progress”.  Thank you for the “steady progress”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 45 members have contributed and there are a number of common areas, which we would like to narrow down. I would like to invite hon. Mpuuga to quickly move a motion then we shall see how to move on with the others. 

6.09
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Madam Speaker, having listened to colleagues debate this critical matter, I would like to move under Rule 58 (1)(k), a motion without notice, to house the views of members that have discussed and debated this matter thoroughly to resolve as Parliament as a way forward. I am moving as thus: 

“HAVING debated the report of the honourable Minister of Education and Sports on matters of the escalating situation at Makerere University related to fees and insecurity at the university;

AND HAVING considered all circumstances surrounding the strike at the university;

BEARING in mind that Makerere University is a public university to which all taxpayers subscribe;

CONSIDERING that the failure of Government to resolve the impasse at the university is causing more challenges;

AND HAVING listened to various reports from stakeholders complaining about abuse of students’ rights including alleged sexual abuse of students by men and women in uniform;

UNDERSTANDING the historical role of Parliament among others of ensuring the rule of law, order in the provision of services including equal access to services including education by all citizens in the land;

Let Parliament sitting on this 31 day of October 2019 resolve as follows:

    1. Direct the university management to rescind any suspensions of students and instead institute mechanisms to resolve the impasse at the university through civil and democratic means.
    2. Direct the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Internal Affairs to withdraw the military from the university and student hostels and direct the police to exercise restraint, observe human rights and protect the life of students and their property at the university. 
    3.  Direct Government to halt any fees increments at the university until a sustainable remedy to financing the university is established by all stakeholders.
    4. Investigate the allegation of sexual abuses by security men and women vested on female and male students at the university, and report to Parliament of these abuses in order to facilitate prosecution of the offenders.
    5. Direct Government to table a supplementary budgetary request and ease on the current suffering of students and their benefactors until a sustainable solution to financing the university is established.
    6. Investigate alleged mismanagement of the university and abdication of duty by the current management.
    7. Direct the Auditor-General to carry out a forensic audit on alleged financial mismanagement at the university with a view of establishing culpability and punish the offenders.” 

Madam Speaker, I so move.

THE SPEAKER: Regarding the first one on suspensions, we need to add expulsions. There were those who were suspended and others expelled so we need to add “expulsion” after the word “suspension” so that we capture both of them. 

6.13
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, I have an amendment. I concur with what hon. Mathias Mpuuga has mentioned. However, I would rather say that we need to first audit. 

Do you remember the 2003 Hyuha Report? We audited that university. There was a select committee and we found out that the management and financial issues were a big problem to the university.

Therefore, in line with the last point you mentioned, before we conclude and know the finance connotation of the university – you can imagine that Government is contributing Shs 22 billion. This institution is getting some facilities from Government. When you compare with other universities, they can work within the means and manage it.

There must be something fishy with management and finances, which we have not understood. The last point should be the first to deal with. The Auditor-General can do it quickly; let this Parliament pronounce and we get the best solution for that. This is what I can prefer.

6.15
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana):  What I would like to propose is that we can do everything but the moment the guild president is not produced, we would have not done anything. Let us instruct Government to produce the guild president and other leaders of Makerere University unconditionally.

6.16
BRIG. GEN. FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My amendment would be on the point of totally withdrawing from the hostels. My amendment would be that the army should be withdrawn from the strike in the university but not from the surrounding areas because you are going to get other security –(Interjections)- Protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Order!

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Speaker, in the recent past, there has been a high rate of crime rated deaths and the army has been operating together with police. (Interjections) Can you give me space to talk? 

Madam Speaker, that is why I am saying that the army should be withdrawn from the university but you cannot say that the army should be withdrawn from the hostels because they are all over Kikoni area and you know that area has a high rate of crime - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think our major concern is the military being in the hostels. They can be outside on the roads but not in the hostels, breaking doors.

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

6.18
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sentiments are being raised that the current Vice Chancellor is also an issue to be dealt with and members are proposing an investigation - an audit. I am of the view that a provision be put in the motion to the effect that the Vice Chancellor steps aside as these issues are being handled.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had a slightly different proposal. Originally, what I intended to do was to submit this to our Committee on Education and give them up to 13th November to give us a position. They will identify areas that need further action but regarding the Auditor-General, I will write immediately. That committee can tell us whether the Vice Chancellor should go. Let us start with our committee that will report on 13th November. Is the motion seconded? (Applause) It is seconded.

6.20
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, there are a number of students who have been injured and are in various hospitals. Their parents are finding it hard to foot the medical bills. I would like to amend that Government foots the medical bills of all these students who have been injured and are in various hospitals.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

6.21
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, this is in addition to what he has said. It has been reported that a number of students have lost their property or had their property damaged. They should be compensated. Thank you.

6.22
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is an issue of the cost. Makerere University is a public university, which means it is not there to make money. It is a university that is Government owned and it is Parliament to provide money for Makerere University to run. 

The issue at hand is the cost unit; what is the cost unit for a student in Makerere? If that cost unit is known, the Government will be asked, of the cost unit, what do you put in and what should each parent put in? 

I would like to suggest that the committee establishes a rough cost unit per student. Secondly, we have been giving out student loans but it is a nightmare. In fact, student loans are a hoax. If one cannot get 100 per cent sponsorship from Government, one should get a loan. How much should we provide in the loan scheme so that it is not necessary for one to apply? If one cannot get Government sponsorship, one should go for a loan and pay it at an appropriate time. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in that resolution we would like that committee that we are establishing to tell us how much money we should budget for student loans.

6.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the concerns that you have raised. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to entirely agree with you that this is a very serious matter that needs to be thoroughly investigated. There is quite a lot of misinformation and a lot of issues where Parliament is not well informed but in the interest of time, I will not take you through all that. This is why I support the idea that this goes to the Committee on Education. They will investigate, analyse and come back here for a final position. 

If there was time, I would have corrected many errors because people have got some things wrong. That investigation is what I am suggesting; that we send it to Committee on Education for scrutiny. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Of course you will be invited as a witness. Honourable members, I put the question that the motion, as amended, be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on Education is instructed to handle this expeditiously and report on 13th November. 

6.25
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I acknowledge your indulgence in the ruling and guidance that you have given and particularly the idea of having this matter well looked into by the committee.

Madam Speaker, the time that you have given is too short; 13th of November. If this work, for example, was undertaken by a special committee, not the Committee on Education and Sports, it would be fair. Why? It is because the Committee on Education and Sports has its traditional work and the days you have allocated would work well for the special committee.

Secondly, I have seen that –(Interruption)

MR MOSES KAHIMA: Madam Speaker, since you have already ruled on the matter, is it in order for the Member to debate on a matter, which has already be ruled on? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sure that Members of the Committee on Education and Sports are listening. By the end of this exercise on 13th, they will be able to tell us whether we need a select committee or not. For now, let us handle the urgent issues. However, I want a commitment from the Government that the expelled and suspended students will return to school, and the guild president will be produced.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, it is not true as it was alleged yesterday, that the guild president was kidnapped. I have got information from his colleagues that he is keeping away because of the much pressure he was being subjected to. 

Madam Speaker, before I came here, I asked for a way of reaching - (Interruptions) - to him but I was told that they would give me the address and the telephone contact by 4.00 p.m. Of course, I have been seated here and there was no way I could follow it up. Given time, I will come back with full details of the young man.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this morning I was discussing with the President the issue about the young man. He said he is not sure whether he has been abducted or not. The President said that if the young man needs security, he should let us know and the President will provide security, if he is hiding from some people on pressure. That is what he told me this morning.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, before we entered Parliament, I had a chat with my senior colleague and the same line was peddled that the guild president abducted himself. The allegation was that elements in opposition were hiding him away to cause anxiety and escalate the strike.

Honourable minister go today to the safe house operated by the military, near Kiseka Market. That is where the guild president is currently. He is in the hands of the military and safe house near Kiseka Market.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, this is our son. We are all interested and concerned about his security. We are going to do everything possible as the ministry to look for this young man. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us go to item three quickly.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PATIENTS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES BILL, 2019

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yesterday, Madam Speaker, you directed that Gen. Otafiire should bring documents relating to Njeru Stock Farm.

THE SPEAKER: It is item five.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have seen it. Madam Speaker, may I seek your indulgence? It is now coming to 7.00 p.m. and Gen. Otafiire is very good at running away. (Laughter) Otherwise, what we are going to go through will take us sometime. Why don’t we deal with item five and then back to the others? Otherwise, this is a hot issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, item three will take one minute.  I do not see the ministers for item 4(b) and (c).  Item 4(d) will be handled next week. Honourable members, after item three, we go straight to item five. Hon. Akamba.

6.32
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 127 (2) to move that the Bill entitled “The Patients’ Rights and Responsibilities Bill, 2019” be read the first time. I beg to move.
	
THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Do we have a Certificate of Financial Implication? 

MR AKAMBA: Madam Speaker, we duly applied for the Certificate of Financial Implication by a letter that was written to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 27 March 2019.  Madam Speaker, by 22 July 2019, I notified the Office of the Speaker that the 60 days stipulated under the Public Finance Management Act Section (76)(4) had expired.

Madam Speaker, I am moving under that section. The ministry declined to issue the Certificate of Financial Implication and the law allows me to proceed as though the minister issued the certificate.

6.34
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, the same matter came, and I had the privilege of stepping in for hon. Akamba who was on another parliamentary assignment. The ruling of the House was in favour that the Bill be brought as he has stated since it had expired. So, this House made a ruling on the basis that since it had expired, it should be considered as though it was issued.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is satisfied that the honourable member duly applied for a Certificate of Financial Implication several months ago. The House is also satisfied that the minister abdicated his responsibility to issue the certificate. We are now proceeding as if the certificate had been issued. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Health for perusal and report back. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

DOCUMENTS CONFIRMING TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF THE GOVERNMENT STOCK FARM AT NJERU TO HON. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE

6.36
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I must thank you for giving me this opportunity and for your effort to get this shady matter out of the shadows. I must also express thanks to hon. Nandala-Mafabi for his concern for me to be able to present these documents.

Whereas I am being attacked as a servant in Government, the matter is personal. I will, therefore, ask my lawyers to write a narrative to you and attach all the documents concerning this matter. 

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I could read the summary; otherwise, I am very glad to lay these two copies of the same documents on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Just read the heading, the date -

MAJ.GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, my lawyers address you as “Rt Honourable Speaker of Parliament, Kampala” 

“Ownership of land comprised of Kyaggwe, Block 295, Plots 280 and 283 at Bukaya near Njeru Stock Farm, Mukono District

Reference is made to the above captioned matter wherein we act for Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire, our client, and whose instructions we address you as hereunder.

Following your request to seek clarity and take all the necessary due diligence from our client in relation to land comprised in Block 295, Plots 280 and 283 at Bukaya, we wish to state that -

1. Our client is the current registered proprietor of land comprised in Block 295, Plots 280 and 283 at Bukaya near Njeru Stock Farm, Njeru Municipality, Mukono District. Copies of the certificates of title are herein attached…”-(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire is laying his document on the Table under rule 31 of our Rules of Procedure, rule 32 provides for the mode of laying these papers on the Table; specifically, rule 32 (1) provides that sufficient copies of the paper are supposed to be made and distributed to Members.

I have not seen any copy of the document and even my colleagues around here have not seen any. Therefore, I am wondering whether we are proceeding well as the General has not made copies of the document he is laying on the Table available to Members. This is in relation to section 32 (1) despite the fact that he is laying it under rule 31.

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is directed to produce sufficient copies for all Members. However, finish laying the documents on the Table.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The documents are many and the time was rather short. I will in due course produce sufficient copies for the honourable members. 

THE SPEAKER: Send them so that they can be uploaded on our iPads.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: I will send them for uploading on your iPads. 

“…2. Our client purchased the same land from the late Kato Fredrick Lukwajju and Christopher Lule who were administrators of the estate of the late Enoka Sebowa and Gusite Seruwo respectively. Copies of the sale agreements are hereto attached as C and D.

3. 	The late Enoka Sebowa and Gusite Seruwo were the first proprietors of the land formerly described as certificate No.5421, FC 15733, MRV 171, Folio 9 and certificate No.5421, FC 15734, MRV 192, Folio 1. The late Enoka Sebowa and Gusite Seruwo and/or their administrators never dealt with any authority or Government in relation to Block 295, Plot 3 and 4 at Bukaya. Copies of Her Majesty’s certificates of title are enclosed here marked as E and F.

4. 	The said land was the subject of a dispute between the late Ham Mukasa and the family of Enoka Sebowa, a matter which was resolved by the Buganda Lukiiko and consent judgement entered. Copies of the judgment of the Buganda Lukiiko and consent are hereto attached together with the English translation, marked G and G1, H and H1.

5. 	The search certificates of the cadastral in December 2008 and May 2012 all indicated that the late Enoka Sebowa and Gusite Seruwo were the proprietors of the said land. Copy of the cadastral report is hereto attached and marked I.

6. 	On the 18th day of August 2009, letters of administration of the property and credits of the estate of the late Enoka Sebowa were issued to Fredrick Kato Lukwajju by Her Ladyship Justice Irene Mulyangoja Kakooza. A copy of the letters of administration and correspondences are hereto attached and marked J. 

7. 	Before his demise in 2015, the late Fredrick Kato Lukwajju and Christopher Lule personally disposed of Block 295, Plots 3 and 4 at Bukaya and made a list of the various persons, for example, Mr Bugingo Wilfred, Lukabwe Livingstone, Kavuma Steven, Turi (U) Ltd, Vincent Kawunde, Mutabalwa Gabriel, Were Moses, Kabuza Isma, among others, to whom they had sold some parts of the same land, including me.

8. 	Prior to the registration of the late Fredrick Kato Lukwajju as proprietor of the said land, Ms Elizabeth Nanteza Nabetta had fraudulently registered herself as proprietor and court ordered the cancellation of her registration. Copy of the court order is hereby attached and marked K…” (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, I see the General with a booklet, which he is trying to read to us. We thought he was supposed to make a statement here – if he wanted – and we would have copies of his statement. I am trying to follow what he is reading but it is somehow very hard to connect what he is saying versus what was said yesterday. Is Maj. Gen (Rtd) Otafiire in order to confuse Parliament - (Laughter) – by reading things not related to what we discussed yesterday?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are only supposed to make a very short statement of explanation because even the Speaker does not have it. So, you can lay the documents on the Table and distribute copies to the Members and then we will study them and come back to you.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Much obliged. However, I was making reference to the documents I am going to lay on the Table, which are contained in this compendium. I am making reference and saying, “These are the documents I am going to…”-

THE SPEAKER: Do you have another copy? Can I have a look at it? However, this is a narration, hon. Otafiire. Tell us, “I have brought a copy of the title deed; it is here. I have brought a copy of this…” This is a very long narration.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: There are many documents, Madam Speaker, so I wanted to explain each document. They are all here –(Interjection)– I have given the Speaker all the documents; they are there in her file –(Interruption).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to raise a procedural issue. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire is entitled to present his papers here and under rule 32(3) of our Rules of Procedure, he is supposed to make a short statement about them.

However, the issue we are talking about is the Njeru Stock Farm, which was a Government stock farm. Therefore, the first document should have “This was Njeru Stock Farm, which was sold to Kavuma - as you said – and then Kavuma sold to Otafiire.” That is the sequence. 

Our interest is that there was a stock farm called Njeru Stock Farm; now, how does a minister in Government, who now pretends to be a private person, go and evict a stock farm and say there was a Lukiiko meeting? We are not interested in the Lukiiko meeting! (Laughter)

Therefore, is it procedurally right for hon. Otafiire to meander from the issue of the stock farm and take us to a Lukiiko meeting, which is not our interest? Our interest is from the stock farm to hon. Otafiire.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, why do we lay documents on the Table? We lay documents on the Table so that Members can access and scrutinise them. Therefore, the onus is on hon. Kahinda Otafiire. If he has laid the wrong documents on the Table –(Interjection)– You have given hon. Otafiire the chance to lay whatever documents he has on the Table, to pursue his case –(Interjections)– Wait a minute. This is not going to end here. 

I thought that the Speaker was going to subject the documents, which have been laid on the Table, to a committee to scrutinise. If they find out that hon. Otafiire has laid on the Table irrelevant documents, it will be up to him and he will be pinned down. If you have been given a chance to prove your case by laying documents on the Table, so if you lay the wrong ones, you are tying a rope around your neck.

Let the General lay whatever documents he has on the Table, then the relevant committee will peruse through these documents and he will bring a statement. I thought that with the chance given to him, it is up to him to prove his case. I do not think this is now the time for us to debate what he has laid on the Table because we do not have copies. Let him be given a chance to lay the documents on the Table and then we scrutinize them further.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday hon. Otafiire said that he wanted an opportunity to show that that is his land. So, I would have expected him to say, “I bought Njeru Stock Farm and this is the evidence, or I did this” and then we add this up. If Njeru Stock Farm is yours, we just want to know how you got it.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, with due respect, that is what I asked you to begin with. I said, “with your permission”. If I had been denied permission, I would have laid the documents on the Table and gone away. I would have made a short statement and that is it. I begged the Speaker’s indulgence to explain the documents I have brought. Do you want to look at the documents or do you want to tell me what I should tell Parliament?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to seek your indulgence –

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: If you know what is in here, you say it!

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Otafiire, who are you going to threaten? You can threaten others -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order, please!

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know why he is making noise. We are about to get him. We shall not accept this business of coming to make noise and I run away –(Interjection)– No, he can intimidate another person, not Nandala from the mountains; that is for sure. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Otafiire was presenting documents. I would like to concur with hon. Ruth Nankabirwa that let him continue to present whatever he is presenting. Let us give him an opportunity. When he finishes, then we shall ask for additional information, if we want. Otherwise, as we are here seated, we have documents against that gentleman; so we are not worried. Let him present what he has. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otafiire, complete your presentation.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Hon. Mafabi, your head is going to catch fire. (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is very clear from the intervention of the Government Chief Whip that the issue of land acquisition by the minister is an official matter. Therefore, I would like to remind Parliament about the question I have always brought up – mostly directed to the ministers who have served this Government - from the Eighth Parliament. I only wish somebody could trail it.

We warned the Government to give us a complete profile of the properties that belong to Government. Two, recently, in this Tenth Parliament, we have had four questions raised by different Members - I happen to be one of them - concerning ranches. They include Aswa Ranch, Maruzi Ranch, this ranch which hon. Otafiire did not know was already his, Masaka Ranch and so many others.

I would like to thank hon. Otafiire for coming up openly to say, “This one is mine.” Can the Government come to us with a policy on how the property of the people, in the form of Government ranches, is given to individuals? We need a policy position on that, so that if the Government is now giving away our property as donations or for sale, we should know.

Madam Speaker, this is a matter of policy; it is a very important matter. I am not talking about the politics of acquisition of land, not even land grabbing; I am talking about the complete stock of all the pieces of land in this country owned by Government. That is category one.

In category two, I want a complete list of all the ranches in Uganda - the so-called ranches, which used to belong to Government. I would like to have a profile of them brought to Parliament so that we know that we have a ranch belonging to Government in Maruzi, in Lango Sub-Region and other places. 

We must also know the circumstances under which an authority would give out that land, which belongs to Government. We have chopped up districts to the extent that villages are becoming districts. The district councils can give away a very valuable asset in the name of, “it is in our district”. This is a very touchy issue. 

I agree with the minister who said that the third world war is going to start over the issue of land. Can the Government come to us and clarify how these properties are being acquired by individuals?  Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable member, what you are saying is of course important. However, I think you should come out with a proper motion; name the ranches and then demand answers. Bring a motion with the full list and then we can demand. However, let us get back to the issue regarding hon. Otafiire.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have now forgotten where I was. (Laughter)

“…9. On the 29 May 2013, the late Fredrick Kato Lukwajju and Mr Christopher Lule (administrator of the estate of the late Gusite Seruwo) with Njeru Town Council and the district surveyor opened boundaries of the said land to ascertain and demarcate boundaries. Copies of the correspondences are attached.

10. 	The boundary opening exercise revealed that land was situated in Bukaya, part of which had been encroached on by Njeru Stock Farm, situated on Block 295, Plot 2 while other portions were irregularly granted to private persons on lease by Njeru Town Council. 

11. 	The late Kato Fredrick Lukwajju and Christopher Lule petitioned the office of His Excellency the President to intervene and compel the said stock farm to hand over vacant possession and register the land into their names.

12. 	The then Principal Private Secretary to the President, Ms Joy Kabatsi, now Minister of State for Animal Husbandry, in June 2011, in relying on the decision of Justice Aweri Opio in Misc. Cause No. 310/2010, authored a letter to the Ag. Commissioner for Land Registration, requesting to know why the court orders to effect transfer and registration into the names of Fredrick Kato Lukwajju and Christopher Lule had not been complied with. A copy of the letter is attached.

13. 	The late Fredrick Kato Lukwajju, together with some of the then town council executives, including Florence Namubiru, the vice mayor; Kasozi, the chairperson Model Farm Village; together with Maj. (Rtd) Sadam, Maj. Naddunga and Mr Senkaayi who were officials of the land desk in the President’s Office, among others, met with some of the squatters and the former model farms owners. The latter were duly informed that they should deal directly with the mailo owners on matters concerning the land. Copies of the photographs taken during that are attached.

14. 	That neither the late Fredrick Kato Lukwajju nor his predecessors in the title had ever dealt with the  Protectorate Government, the Uganda Government, any municipal council and any other Government organ or institution in respect to the said land. That all the purported subleases granted to Uganda Land Commission (the National Animal Genetic Resource and Information Centre) and some private persons by Njeru Town Council were granted irregularly and without any authority whatsoever and are therefore null and void.  

15. 	The said land had been subdivided into many plots and the various owners of those comprised in the former plot 3 and 4 have been dealing directly with the respective occupiers of bits of their land, and they have reached amicable settlement with the mailo land owners.

16. Those whose land was under the protection of Njeru Stock Farm petitioned the Executive Director of NAGRIC, Entebbe, the institution responsible for Njeru Stock Farm.

17. 	The executive director rightly clarified that Njeru Stock Farm, in its own capacity, did not hold any land title to the said land. Rather, it was the Uganda Land Commission, which kept the certificates of title to the land which NAGRIC uses. The executive director then referred the petitioning mailo land owners to the Chairperson, Uganda Land Commission, on matters concerning ownership of the said land.

18. 	That when the petitioners consulted the Chairperson, Uganda Land Commission, he clarified that Uganda Land Commission never allocates private land unless it or Government have an agreement conferring to it legal interests over such land. The said chairperson further refuted claims that part of the said land was being utilised or protected by Njeru Stock Farm as an institution. He asserted that any dealings in the said land were acts of Njeru Stock Farm staff members and the soldiers at the military detach at the farm. A copy of the letter from the petitioners’ lawyers is hereto attached.

19. 	The said chairperson, in a letter dated 15 November 2016, advised that all parties concerned carry out a joint survey to ascertain and demarcate the boundaries of their land to avoid issues of trespass and encroachment. The letter is attached.

20. 	That a joint boundary exercise was done with the participants of Njeru Town Council (then owners of plot 2) and others concerned.

21. 	That after the joint boundary opening exercise, the owners demarcated their respective plots as advised by the Chairperson, Uganda Land Commission. It was then discovered that most of the land in issue had been encroached upon by small subsistence farmers who had cultivated parts thereon on a seasonal basis upon erroneous allocation by some members of staff of Njeru Stock Farm, who purportedly protected the said land as part of Njeru Stock Farm. A copy is attached.

22. 	Upon demarcating and fencing off their land, the owners sought to utilise it but they were stopped by Njeru Stock Farm establishment with the help of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) stationed within the farm, claiming that the Inspector General of Government (IGG) had directed that no person uses that said land. 

23. 	That the IGG invited all the concerned to submit evidence of ownership of the land and upon conclusion of the investigation, the Deputy IGG reaffirmed in her response to NAGRIC that the said land was private mailo land owned by the late Lukwajju Fredrick Kato. Copies of the invitation and the report of the IGG on the said land are hereby attached as R and S respectively. 

24. 	That on 6 April 2018, the Office of the IGG wrote to the Executive Director of the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank (NAGRC & DB) informing NAGRC that the said land was lawfully vested back to the rightful landlords, being Fredrick Kato Lukwajju and Christopher Lule. A copy of the IGG’s report is attached. 

25. 	That the majority of the persons that purchased/acquired land from the late Kato Lukwajju have since transferred their land and taken possession of the same, except for those whose land is near Njeru Stock Farm, which has been encroached upon especially by the soldiers attached to the military at the detach, acting on the illegal and malicious orders of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), Buikwe. These have defied lawful permission from the district surveyor, in addition to arrogantly rubbishing genuine certificates of title to the land without any valid or lawful cause.

26. 	That the same matter was handled and addressed by the land probe commission chaired by Her Ladyship Justice Catherine Bamugemereire on 28 November 2018, wherein it clearly came out that the stock farm never had any legal claim over the said land and the executive director admitted to not owning any certificate of title. 

In specific reference to the matter of the houses and property demolished, the said property does not fall within our client’s land being Block 295, Plots 284 and 283 at Bukaya and the said claim is only meant to tarnish our clients’ good image and name.” Madam, I hereby submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Otafiire. You will be able to pass on the documents for uploading for the Members. I will study – 

7.09
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We would like to make an assumption that the land never belonged to Njeru Stock Farm. The question is: How did Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire know about that land? How did Justice Kavuma know about that land? How did Njeru Stock Farm come to be in existence?

Madam Speaker, I have documents here, which I would like to show you, regarding how Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire has used his office to acquire land. I have made enough copies and I will share them with the Prime Minister because the law says that you must have enough. 

How does hon. Otafiire get land? Hon. Otafiire uses his office as Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and usually writes to his colleague, the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development. On this day that I mention in one of the documents which I am going to supply, he got two pieces of land. He wrote to his colleague about the estate of the late H.H Daudi Chwa II and this is what he said:

“The beneficiaries of the estate of the late Ssekabaka Daudi Chwa II led by Prince Kimera Henry…” - I will not go far there - “… have petitioned my office on matters regarding the entire estate of the late Sir Daudi Chwa II. 

Specific concern that requires attention is that the land comprising Block 113, Plot 9, Plot 52, Plot 457, Plot 458 at Nantabulirirwa, Namanve, Mukono District…” – (Interjections) - I have given you a copy; I am not good at pronouncing Baganda names. (Laughter)- “…The said land was surveyed around 18 July 2016 under MM/2/9416 and deed prints were obtained by the beneficiaries of the estate.

However, the land titles for the above pieces of land have not been issued to date and this has affected the beneficiaries.

This is, therefore, to request you to ask the officer in charge of mapping and surveying to issue the official cadastral maps and printouts of the same. 

Your intervention in this matter will be highly appreciated.” 

Madam Speaker, in this deal, he was given 50 acres of land. I am going to present this to you tomorrow. 

On Njeru Stock Farm – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, maybe we are taking about two different pieces of land because this one is Block 295, plots 280 and 283 at Bukaya. The one of Sir Daudi Chwa is Block 113, plot 9, plot 52, plot 457 Nantabulirirwa, Namanve, Mukono. I do not know whether all these are part of the same estate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right. The reason I was raising that is because he has been involved in Kabaka’s land regarding all issues. He took this one and the other one. 
This is the next document I am giving you on that and I will bring a third one. 

This document is from the Chairperson, Commission of Inquiry, Kampala dated 13 February 2019: 

“Land Dispute at Njeru Stock Farm 

Following the directive in your letter dated 21 January 2019 to stop any development on the disputed land, on Friday, February 8 2019, the manager reported a group of people who came with armed army men to inspect the land. 

On 12 February 2019, they came back with a copy of a land title certificate in the names of Kahinda Otafiire, neither stamped nor signed as reported to me by the central farm manager, Njeru Stock Farm. Later in the evening, at 7.00pm, they started delivering building materials - sand, hard-core stones - guarded by army men. The matter was reported to Njeru Police Station, Ref 56/12/2019.

The purpose of this letter is to request your office to enter into the matter following the directive from the Commission of Inquiry. The copy is hereby attached.”

Madam Speaker, I am bringing this issue up because hon. Otafiire went with army men to invade the farm and yet they had been stopped by the Commission of Inquiry. Hon. Otafiire used a court judgment of Justice Kavuma because he is a beneficiary of the same land. Justice Kavuma has 50 acres there. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire brought in Kabatsi who was then the PPS, but she executed this after she had gone to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, because she is also a beneficiary of the same land.

Madam Speaker, they were saying that Njeru Stock Farm was not paying ground rent and they had got a lease. Since they were not paying grant rent, which Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire confirmed to me yesterday - You were around when he said for 30 years, Government had not paid ground rent. I said, “But you are Government; why didn’t you pay the ground rent?” He said, “I am now a private individual”. When they used that, that is when these people did the re-entry.  

Madam Speaker, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire wrote a letter to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which I am going to produce tomorrow - the letter delayed a little bit, but it is on the way. He wrote a letter saying “open these boundaries”, like he did previously, and it was confirmed that this would be given.

Madam Speaker, what I would like to ask Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire is: If he bought this land, why can’t he submit the receipt and the agreement, and show how he transferred the money? Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire has 120 acres there. If we simply costed the land at Shs 50 million per acre, it means the payment came to over Shs 6 billion. Madam Speaker, you cannot carry Shs 6 billion in the pocket. He must have made a bank transfer. 

I would like to request that as part of the documents he has submitted, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire should attach a document showing the transfer of money to the so-called people he bought the land from. Also, Justice Kavuma, who used his office, should attach the transfer of payments.

Madam Speaker, this stock farm was shared amongst individuals using offices. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire has abused his office. I believe that Parliament should take a quick –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, the documents available show that the land does not belong to the Government; it belongs to the mailo land owners. The mode of payment is willing buyer, willing seller. The seller is not complaining as well as the buyer - I am not complaining; I have got my property. 

What I am saying is that Government was wrongly imposed on my land and I want Government to quit those pieces of land that I purchased. It is willing seller, willing buyer. Mr Lukwajjo is not complaining neither am I complaining. What is your problem?

MS ADONG: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for giving me way. Madam Speaker, I know something little about Njeru Stock Farm. When I was a member of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries in the last Session of Parliament, we visited the farm. The land on which that farm is situated was private. Government entered into an agreement and Njeru Stock Farm was renting that land from a private individual. 

Our concern is how the minister came in. When the lease was expiring, it should have been the minister to protect the Government. He should not have worked with the landowners to refuse the stock farm from continuing to use the land. That is the little I can tell you. The details are with the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fishers.

When the committee visited the farm, the director was complaining that they were in conflict with the town council and the owner of the land. We actually saw some documents showing that the landowners were refusing to renew the lease of the stock farm, yet they had all the facilities. They were complaining that some parts were already being sold outside. It should have been Government to protect the institution. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know what words to use. If you are supposed to protect Government property, you are not supposed to connive with civilians to throw Government out. I do not understand the language we should use.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the papers have been laid on the Table. We need to look at them and then decide what to do next after studying them. We cannot do it today. I will give my ruling on Tuesday, on the way forward. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, since the matter is very important, I would like to ask Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire in front of this Parliament whether those are the only documents he has on that land. Is that all?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, like I told you, I am in court over the same matter. I have not brought some of the substance here because it will be sub judice. If you want, take me to court.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow us to examine the circumstances surrounding this matter. I will come back with the ruling on Tuesday. Thank you.
 
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING MS HALIMAH NAKAAYI AND MR JOSHUA CHEPTEGEI FOR THEIR OUTSTANDING PERFORMANCE AT THE IAAF ATHLETICS WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS, 2019

THE SPEAKER: We invited some young people here to thank them for bringing home gold medals. It is not a long motion. It is about the golden girl and golden boy. 

7.23
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Yes, and they are still up there. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am presenting a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating Ms Halimah Nakaayi and Mr Joshua Cheptegei for their outstanding performance at the Intentional Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) World Championships, 2019. It is moved under rules 55 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the International Association of Athletics Federations World Championships, 2019 took place at the Khalifa International Stadium in Doha on 30 September 2019;

AND WHEREAS Uganda was represented by a strong team of 22 athletes who were officially flagged off by the National Council of Sports (NCS), amongst them, Halimah Nakaayi and Joshua Cheptegei;

AWARE THAT Halimah Nakaayi emerged a victor in the women’s 800 meters final, clocking in at one minute and 58 seconds, winning a gold medal and taking the winner’s price;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Joshua Cheptegei beat a 21-man field to win the men’s 10,000 meters final, when he clocked in at 26 minutes and 48 seconds, the second fastest time in the world championships history, to win the gold medal; 

COGNISANT THAT Halimah Nakaayi and Joshua Cheptegei’s gold medals are Uganda’s first gold medals in their respective disciplines - the women’s 800 meters and the men’s 10,000 meters, and have greatly boosted Uganda’s world rankings;

FURTHER COGNISANT that Halimah Nakaayi and Joshua Cheptegei’s incredible performance has increased Uganda’s gold medals at the world championships history, joining Olympic champion, John Akii-Bua, who won a gold medal at Munich, Germany, in 1972, and also joining our own hon. Julius Acon Bua, who won for us a gold medal in the 1500-meter category at the World Junior Championships in Athletics in Lisbon, Portugal in 1994, steeplechaser Dorcus Inzikuru who won a gold medal in Helsinki in 2005, and Stephen Kiprotich, double gold medallist in the off-track marathon in the 2012 London summer Olympics and Moscow 2013 world championships.

APPRECIATING that Uganda finished ninth overall, elevating Uganda into the best performance ever in the history of the world athletics championships;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively applauds and congratulates Ms Halimah Nakaayi and Mr Joshua Cheptegei for the tremendous wins and for elevating Uganda’s ranking at the world athletics championships.

2. 	Government rewards Halimah Nakaayi and Joshua Cheptegei for their victories.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Justification.

MR ISAAC MULINDWA: I had hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Muyanja is also here. Permit me to add that this time the gold is from Lugazi Municipality and not Kapchorwa alone.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have no justification other than that?

MR ISAAC MULINDWA: The justification is that being a young lady and also looking at the history of Dorcus Inzikuru, who Government honoured by building for her a very good mansion, we would like to keep the same sequence to encourage other young ladies in the country. They can also aim high in their fields.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

7.27
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, when you look at Halimah Nakaayi’s background, she is a self-made lady of Mbogo clan. She comes from a very humble background. 

For her to reach that success, I support the motion that Government comes up and adds value to her, so that she can continue competing. She is still young, so she can compete many times until the age of 35 when they normally retire. Therefore, I support the motion. I am sure all colleagues are behind us to make sure that Government supports her. Thank you.

7.28
MR MUHAMMED MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for hon. Ssewanyana to second this motion. 

As a country, we owe too much to some of these athletes and sportspeople who not only excel at national level but also international level. Given our level of investment in sports and sports facilities, the talent development that we have in our country and all our institutions of learning, and the fact that all those facilities have obvious limitations, to see people work using their own endeavours and achieve to make Uganda proud, as an institution of Government we ought to congratulate and thank them so much.

When you look at the young people who are now participating in sports and athletics, they normally improvise; they work on no budget and compete at international level with athletes from countries where those facilities are well developed. However, out of the God given potential and talent, they are able to outcompete people from countries where these facilities are well developed. Therefore, I think we owe them too much.

As Parliament, we ought to recommend to Government to hold those talents in the highest esteem and ideally support them not only with facilities like houses but also a commitment as a country to continue developing sports facilities. We pay a lot of money to market Uganda and brand the country. We spend millions of dollars to do this, but when some of these young talents participate at international level, they hold the Ugandan flag so high and give us better branding than some of the lobbyists who we pay money to try and brand this country.

Therefore, a humble contribution, as suggested in the motion, like building a house or something for them to hold dear to, will only inspire millions of young people to take up the same sacrifice and use their talents to make Uganda proud. In that regard, I stand here to fully support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should not just give them houses and money; we should invest in their continued development. At her age, she should be able to be assisted to grow and continue winning medals. She should not be left on her own.

7.32
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of the sportspeople in this country. I stand to congratulate our sportspersons for winning. That night I saw Nakaayi running; at home, we were all shouting her name and we were jubilant. This is to give you assurance that your win was our win as a country. We are happy and proud of you and we congratulate you. In the same vein, the mover may have forgotten that one of us, hon. Acon, recently won a medal in the USA. We should also recognise our own talent in the House. 

Madam Speaker, you mentioned something which I think is important to us. Often, our sportspeople win a medal once and it ends there. We think that our gold medallists have an opportunity to defend their titles the second and third time. We would like to see Uganda beating Kenya and Ethiopia in athletics. This is a region which produces good runners and we should not be left behind.

We need to acknowledge the fact that most of these young people win and we congratulate them, but many of them win after their own effort. It is Government’s responsibility to identify, nurture, support, and facilitate talent. However, you leave somebody to first run barefooted and then you come to congratulate; we must shape up a little bit.

Uganda has a lot of talent. This kind of occasion should remind us to step up our efforts through the budget and sports arenas, to make sure that we identify, nurture and facilitate talent that will make us proud when they compete internationally. They should not feel left far behind because they think they have a small team supporting and cheering them. I think this is important.

Finally, on our high altitude sports centre, I think we are entitled, as Parliament, to get a report on this. How far has it gone? Where is it? Is it true that our sportspeople still practice outside the country in order to win for us? Can we get a report from the Minister of Education and Sports?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a commitment we made as Parliament and Government three or four years back, but it is still not coming up. So, where is it and how much is it? Can our sportspersons use it to develop their talent? Congratulations and thank you for making us proud. (Applause)

7.35
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the rest of the Ugandans in congratulating the wonderful performance by our athletes, the runners and the whole team. On behalf of the people of West Budama South who are also runners – (Laughter) – and on my own behalf as a sportsperson – By the way, for the record, my body is what has changed but the height was very helpful. At high school, I have a record and I have evidence to show. I was one of the fastest men from Tororo in 100 metres and 200 metres. (Laughter) I ask all my friends to ignore hon. Nandala-Mafabi who has never run even when it is raining.

Madam Speaker, this is all the opportunity I have to say this. We all know that nothing unites Ugandans and the world like sports. When we were all glued to the TV, nobody cared about what religion, race, district or background they were; we all identified ourselves as Ugandans.

I keep on wondering; we have a Ministry of Education and Sports but I think the reason sports is not getting adequate Government attention is because it is just a subsidiary. If we can recognise sports as one of the areas which can unite Uganda and help us identify ourselves as patriotic citizens of this country, we need to isolate a ministry of sports. The Prime Minister is here. We need to give it due attention and avoid seeing people running without shoes and then we invite them for – (Interjection) – Yes!

So many people like hon. Julius Acon – if he was here – would agree with me that when he was running in 1992, I was with him at Makerere sports field there. However, none of us had any sports shoes. Minister of Education and Sports, what is the role of sports in this Government? We see the minister enjoying and putting on jerseys to go and watch football. If that is all the minister has to do, we should look at the vote.

They are talking about the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA). Sport is not about football alone; there are various sports. What hon. Nandala-Mafabi can do is different from what honourable –(Interjection)– Can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: Allow the honourable member to speak, please.

MR OBOTH: I think when I am speaking from this side, he feels like he owns me. Madam Speaker, the point I am trying to make is: can we have a commitment from Government, not just a one-time thing that somebody is given a house? Who has not met Inzikuru lately? She keeps asking for fuel here and there. The moment that young lady carried the flag in the 3,000 metres steeplechase, she did for Uganda what no diplomat can do for this country. These are the highlights we get when our flag is number one.

Now, we are here today congratulating and paying tribute to people who have just made us proud. My concern and area of emphasis is that if there is need, we should have a ministry of sports - specifically sports and recreation. We need somebody to come up with a programme, not just to look at FUFA and then go and watch Uganda Cranes or take them to the President to host them for dinner. This is a tool that we can all use. 

All of us here know that sport is a tool for mobilisation. Mobilisation is for many things. Since we have the Prime Minister here and he is listening, we need a commitment. Can we make a recommendation that a fully-fledged ministry of sports and recreation be created so that we give adequate funding to sports, so that we are able to identify and motivate other sportsmen and women in this country?

Once again, we would like to congratulate them. I would like to join in congratulating all of them.

7.41
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member who moved the motion. I would like to join my colleagues to congratulate our heroine and hero for marketing Uganda beyond our boundaries. 

Indeed, it is not easy to nurture talent and take it as far as our fellow Ugandans have taken it, especially in a country like ours where you have to struggle on your own from childhood up to the level where you want to go. However, we would like to thank God who gave them the talent. If God had not put it in their blood, it would not be there. That is why we have to give glory to Him for giving them the talent.

Madam Speaker, we are talking about skilling Uganda. We are spending a lot of money on providing skills to people. However, these ones have a natural and inbuilt talent that God has given them. They only need someone to touch them a little and you will see them fly. Many athletes and sportspeople are earning a living from sports but ours are still struggling. It should be of interest to us as a country to see how our athletes and possibly the super sportsmen and super sportswomen can also start earning a living from the talent that God has given them.

Like many have mentioned, it is a shame to us and it hurts  that people like Dorcas Inzikuru, after we have built them homes, vanish into thin air. Just like you said, Madam Speaker, it is very important that we see them progress until they become old as others are learning from them. We should not just see them earn a gold medal and then the next year, they will not be in a position to even defend it. Let us find a way of helping our champions to excel and continue defending their gold and silver medals.

There has been a rumour - we would like to confirm it - that Inzikuru no longer even owns that home; that she is homeless even after receiving the house. It will be very important that in addition to the houses, we look for a way of sustaining these people and helping them to keep afloat and continue with sports. In this way, they will continue marketing our country and providing skills to the young ones to learn. 

Once again, I would like to congratulate Halimah and Joshua.  Thank you for making us proud and for raising the Ugandan flag high and telling the world that Ugandan women can also achieve, irrespective of the challenges that we have. You have demystified the notion that we are just women; we are women of a different material. You have made us proud as the women of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, your flag once again has been raised high after it was when you hosted the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Conference (CPC). They now lift it even higher by saying, “Here we come from the land of Kadaga to prove to the world that we are naturally gifted by the Almighty God.” Therefore, I would like to thank you, our sisters and brothers for taking us that far.  Thank you.

The Speaker: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there was a practice that when one gets a gold medal, he or she is supposed to get Shs 5,000,000 per month from the President. I would like to know where that budget is because after some time, they end up in my office saying, “We do not get it.” I hope that Halimah and Cheptegei will get it. Please check.

7.53
Ms mourine osoru (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating my fellow runners. I would like to thank them for the tremendous performance at the international level. Uganda is now being talked about because of them.

It is very hard when it comes to athletics. Even for the Members in this House, when we are looking for people to run for us during our own Parliamentary sports events, there are no Members to be seen.

I would like to say something about what hon. Winfred Kiiza has just said. I did not know that Dorcus Inzikuru was given a house by the Government. My sister Inzikuru who I know is - I do not know what word to use, but she keeps asking for little things. The Inzikuru I know is the one who trained us in running at Namboole. The Inzikuru I know is the one in whose name Government promised to construct a stadium in Arua some time back. 

I think our Government is not paying enough attention when it comes to sports. Today, when we fall sick and go to hospital, doctors advise us to do exercise. At the end of the day, when it comes to sports, the budget is not enough; it is always mixed up with education.

Madam Speaker, the runners are now before you. As they have come –(Interruption)

MR okot-ogong: Madam Speaker, in the past there used to be a practice that when one excels in sports, they automatically join the police to enable them to continue earning. 

I would like to give my sister information about Inzikuru. Personally, I picked Inzikuru and presented her to her own brother, hon. Baba, when he was the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. I pleaded with him and told him, “Here is our sister who has excelled but she has no job. In the past this used to happen; why don’t you allow Inzikuru to join the police so that she can continue earning some little money as she continues with her sports?” It seems that did not happen. My brother is here; maybe he can explain to us why that never happened. (Laughter)

Mr james baba: Madam Speaker, I am being forced to talk. It is true that hon. Okot-Ogong came to see me about Dorcus Inzikuru’s case in regard to enlisting her into the police force. First of all, there is a procedure for recruiting people into the Uganda Police Force. There are very stringent procedures. It even became a matter of investigation by Parliament when we recruited young boys and girls into the police force.

More importantly, Dorcus Inzikuru was not interested in joining the force. Her interests were somewhere else. How could I force her to join an institution she was not interested in? She personally told me, “Hon. Baba, that is not where my interest lies.  Thank you for the consideration but I would like the stadium to be built and a business in Arua so that I can continue with my life.” That was the support she was seeking, which was completely beyond my ability.

Now that I have the Floor, I would like to congratulate the gold medal winners. By the way, you are laughing but I used to be a runner myself. I wore the Uganda badge. I was the third fastest man in Uganda in 1965. I was in the Uganda team for the All Africa Games in Brazzaville. That record is there with the National Council of Sports. My coach was a triple gold medallist, Mal Whitfield, an American. He used to train us like hell. Mr Omollo and Mr Odeke were my contemporaries. So, I know a lot about sports.

I would like to congratulate this young man. The plea from this House is that sport is a very big weapon for promoting a country. Remember when Kiprotich won the Olympics in London, it was the last race of the Olympic Games and the whole world stood up to listen to the national anthem. What better publicity do you want?

Government must come out and reward athletes. The terrace centres must be built and several other centres. All schools should be facilitated to have sporting grounds, which is not happening yet the recruitment grounds for sports used to be in institutions – (Member timed out)

The Speaker: Hon. Osoru, please conclude.

Ms osoru:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Baba, I think you have encroached enough on my time. The time our runners were performing at the international level, we were with you in Serbia. We saw the Kenyan athletes wearing the Kenyan flag but running for USA. You can imagine countries like USA look for these athletes and pay them a lot of money yet ours are here struggling. Even when they go for training, the coaches expect something from them. When they do not have anything to give, as a coach who has a family and he or she needs to earn a living, they will abandon them.

Therefore, I think the Government should follow up these athletes. We should not leave them at this level. Let us follow them up and see how we can assist them, not only financially but also in their sports because sport does not end here. They are yet to bring more gold medals for this country. Thank you. 

7.54
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of my colleagues and congratulate our gallant son and daughter of this country for raising the Ugandan flag high. Congratulations and may God bless you. 

I know that Government may not be doing enough, but I would like to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President and the Speaker of this Parliament, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, and also Members of Parliament as we have been very supportive to sports. I know that Government has many activities to give money to. As Members of Parliament, let us come up with resolutions, in addition to those that have been passed before, on how we can handle sports activities in support of our daughters and sons. 

Madam Speaker, many Members have spoken about our daughter Inzikuru. There is something that I have learnt from Ugandans. When somebody has achieved the gold medals that we talk about, we come out with a lot of excitement. However, there are many unscrupulous people waiting for these young girls outside there, to confuse them. They take away their money and their houses after committing themselves to marry them and so many other things. Ugandans are very sharp and they want free things. One has to be very careful with them. 

The other piece of advice that I would like to give to the sportswomen and sportsmen is that they must learn how to invest. Your colleagues from other countries have really invested. What we do these days is to invest in land and housing estates. You can do so many things in Uganda here. The country is safe and you can do anything with your money. Learn how to invest your money instead of simply spending it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It has been over five hours and I would like to release the Hansard team. I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do adopt the motion as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.57 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 November 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

