Thursday, 1 September 2011

Parliament met at 10.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you for yesterday; at the time of closing, the chamber was almost full although it was fairly late. I am grateful for the stamina you have exhibited and we hope this will continue to enable us move this country forward. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

10.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement is being circulated but it requires correction of a few errors. So you will allow me to read my text, which I have corrected. 

I promised Parliament yesterday that I would come up with a written statement in regard to what is taking place in Pader District, regarding the training of youths in business skills. I am now glad to state as follows:

Enterprise Uganda Foundation Limited was assigned by UNDP to provide business skills and entrepreneurship training to women, youths and even men in Acholi sub-region under the Peace Building Fund project. The project aims at improving livelihoods and local economic recovery in the Acholi sub-region, through empowering households in upcountry communities. In this training, Enterprise Uganda is to cover all the seven districts of Acholi region namely: Gulu, Lamwo, Kitgum, Agago, Pader and Amuru. All these have to be covered by the end of December 2011.

In order to meet the deadline, neighbouring districts are being combined and training facilities selected to meet the number of signed up participants. The ongoing training, which ends on 02 September 2011, takes care of Agago and Pader districts. Discussions with the respective district LC V leaders agreed that 1,000 participants would be signed in from Pader and 800 from Agago. An excellent training facility from Archbishop Flynn Secondary School in Pader with the capacity to take 1,800 voluntary participants was selected. However, on reporting at the grounds on Saturday – before the training started - the local leaders had proceeded to sign in an extra 200 participants. In order not to cause confusion and disenfranchise those who had already reported, Enterprise Uganda decided to annex a tent to the training hall to take care of the extra sign ups.

Enterprise Uganda provides meals, training manuals and a certificate of completion at the end of the session. Those who come from far are provided with accommodation at the venue. A nominal fee of Shs 5,000 per participant is charged for the five-day session. The training is going on well and will be closing on Friday, 02 September 2011. Therefore, there is no cause for alarm. The remaining districts in Acholi will be taken care of in the remaining project period. That is the end of the statement. Thank you.

10.56
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two quick comments. 

I appreciate the Minister for bringing this explanation to the House. But, hon. Minister, I think you would help Enterprise Uganda if you clarified or helped them to develop and disseminate guidelines on how they do their work. There are a number of issues raised regarding how they do their work. Once the guidelines are disseminated, it will help all of us, who are stakeholders, appreciate - including the Shs 5,000 charge! My understanding of what people have been concerned about - including colleagues in the House - is that we have public funding available and then they are charging Shs 5,000. I think it is important that this is disseminated so that people appreciate the need to own their participation in the programme. 

It is also important that – I think Ugandans are educated; our attitude to work is terrible. In Nairobi, it is said that you can distinguish a Ugandan by the way he walks on the street. Ugandans walk as though they want to sleep. In fact, these days, hotels in Kampala prefer to employ a Kenyan rather than a Ugandan. So we do not want to dismiss the re-orientation that Enterprise Uganda is trying to give to the young people; it is something that is important and should be done. But just help them so that the relationship is understood.

The last thing is that Ugandans should be informed that while Enterprise Uganda has a contract with the Government, they also continue to undertake their other programmes. I do not think by giving the youths money, you close their operations totally and so there will be training that they will be conducting outside the funding by the Government. That also needs to be clarified. Otherwise, one day they will go to a place and they tell people to contribute Shs 30,000 and everybody might argue that, “Government already gave you money”. So, those clarifications need to be brought on board. Thank you.

10.59
MRS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for his statement. However, I am concerned about his comment that the training is going on very well. I am very sad to hear that he can make such a statement because I am in touch with my people in the district about the training, and I must say the people are suffering as far as feeding is concerned. 

Some information that I want to give the hon. Minister is that I am from Pader, staying in the town very close to this school, where the training is taking place and that the hall where more than 2,300 people are supposed to attend the training from has the capacity for 1,000. We can get down on the ground and verify. It has a capacity of 1,000 and yet the people attending this training are more than 2,300. 

I was there on the ground myself and the information I got yesterday is that, most of the youths register in the morning and then go to town to play cards and draft. Therefore, Enterprise Uganda is just wasting UNDP funds for nothing! The youths wait for the time for serving meals and then they return, and so they are there not gaining anything. Yesterday, a pregnant mother ended up delivering at the training venue. She was taken to one of the laboratories where she delivered. They are completely failing to manage the number of the participants that are there. 

And if we talk of skills training, as it is stated in this statement, 2,300 people – I have also been carrying out training. Skills’ training is supposed to be very interactive and participatory. What do we expect? How interactive and participatory is this training? I really believe that what I saw with own eyes is wasting money that could have helped in other ways. I thank you very much.

11.01
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The role of Parliament is to help see where the wrong is. I am a teacher by profession and I want to use my experience to help the Minister.

In education, you cannot pack 1,000 or 2,000 people and then you say you are teaching them. Whatever skill you have cannot work! So, I would like to inform the Minister that putting 2,000 people together and saying you are developing their skills is very hard, impossible; and it cannot be accomplished as we cannot have success.

Another thing, which I would like to inform you about, is that if Enterprise Uganda is supposed to help people, they should contact the leaders in those areas. My friends were saying that when Enterprise Uganda went and collected people, the MPs were not informed. 

Another piece of misinformation the Minister has is that Enterprise Uganda is charging Shs 5,000. The truth is that they charge Shs 50,000 per person. So we do not know whether this skills development should go with that attachment.

Lastly, I would like to inform you that we have reliable data that even people who would be benefitting are complaining because you find that from the time Enterprise Uganda was given the money, it has only been to Hoima and there was chaos. It has now again gone to the Northern part and there is also chaos. When will it reach Iganga District, which I represent? I think by the time it reaches Iganga District, they will say, “The project is closing”. 

We would like you to halt the Enterprise Uganda activities until such a time when we see that Enterprise Uganda is going to address issues of the youths countrywide. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was it. Hon. Minister, do you want to make a response? There is no further debate on this matter since we debated it yesterday.

11.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): I thank you very much for these good observations. Let me just quickly recap some of them but I will make a general statement later on.

I agree with the guidelines entirely. We will come back to this House with a statement giving the history of Enterprise Uganda: how it has developed, where it came from and where it is today. 

The funding of Enterprise Uganda is really done by UNDP for this specific case. The Government of Uganda gives part of the funding but much of the funding is really done by the international donors.

On limited facilities – I talked to Mr Ocici this morning and with all due respect to the hon. Member of Parliament from Pader, he tells me that there is no problem at all as people are generally speaking. So, the question now is: who is telling the truth? Since I have not been to the site myself, I cannot comment more than this. I am getting information from somebody who is on the ground that the allegation that the training is not participatory is not true. 

Depending on the training you would want to impart, in this particular case we are now clearly not training people for them to go and prepare a thesis. We are giving them basics of how to start a business, how to draw accounts, how to keep money, how to register a business. You could even handle 3,000 to 4,000 people provided you are well organised. The way they do it, I am told they are not lecturing but they are put into sessions or kinds of committees of 300 to 400 people and then they are taught what to do.

I am sorry if the MPs have not been consulted on this one but as you have heard from the statement, the local leaders were definitely consulted and they took part in even signing up those who would participate. 

The Shs 5,000 is for rural areas and Shs 50,000 for urban areas. 

I think it is not correct to put a halt to the work being done by Enterprise Uganda. I even have colleagues in this Parliament who have been beneficiaries. It is a pity one of them is not here –(Ms Kataike rose_)- huh, there she is! I will give you a chance, Madam, through the Speaker, to testify. There are people and Members of Parliament here who are beneficiaries. Their people have trained and they seem to be giving us a very positive report. So rather than putting a halt - let us go and refine the activities that are taking place so that our people are given a chance.

Lastly, I will be coming back on this Floor - or another minister from my ministry, to give a full account of this Enterprise Uganda so that the debate on whether they are doing a good job or not. We believe so far that they are doing a good job and we are seeking full support. Where mistakes are being made, and things are not being done according to our standards, we beg to be corrected and we shall definitely take appropriate action at the time that it is necessary. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much hon. Minister and also the Members for your contribution. Hon. Members, you will recall that yesterday I used my prerogative under rule 22 to allow a ministerial statement to be presented by the Minister of Education. 

While I was already seated here, I received a response addressed to me from UNATU and I think since we deferred debate on the issue of the statement by the minister until we come to the debate on the Social Services Committee report, I am now going to use the same prerogative to allow the response from UNATU to be read to this House so that when we come to debate, both sides are in the House. I think it would be fair for us to do that. I am, therefore, going to ask hon. Alice Alaso to read the statement from UNATU as it is. No amendments or additions but just the text. (Laughter) 

UNATU’S RESPONSE TO THE HON. MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS’ STATEMENT TO PARLIAMENT ON 31 AUGUST 2011

11.09
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the statement of the Uganda National Teachers Union (UNATU). It is a letter dated 31 August 2011, addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker and it reads: 

“This is to correct the different factual errors contained in the aforementioned report to the House on 31 August 2011.

Unfortunately, the teachers were defenceless and could not present to the House their stand on the state of negotiations with Government.

Here below is the fact sheet on the status of the ad hoc negotiations that have been going on between UNATU and Government:

1. One hundred percent salary increment for all teachers this Financial Year 2011/12: it should be clearly noted that on 28 July 2011, UNATU met with His Excellency, the President, at State House and presented a memorandum that clearly stated the various demands, which included 100 percent salary increment this financial year, which has been a basis for the negotiations with the inter-ministerial committee.

2. UNATU’s position on the state of negotiations with Government: UNATU is a member-driven organisation and agreements on aspects of negotiations are with the membership, and the General-Secretary only communicates what has been agreed by the membership after consultation. 

It is not right for the hon. Minister of Education and Sports to intentionally prejudice the House by giving information in her report page 3, item 9.0, stating that while at State House, it was evident that all parties were satisfied with the outcome of the negotiations.

UNATU has not been in agreement with Government’s proposal to postpone action on increment of teachers’ salaries this financial year. This stand has been maintained right up to and after the meeting with H.E the President on the 28 August 2011, which was chaired by the President himself and later the hon. Minister for the Presidency. 

This meeting was witnessed by about 130 teacher representatives countrywide, the hon. Ministers of State for Public Service, Education and Sports, permanent secretaries of Finance and Education and other technical officers from the ministries of Public Service and Finance.

Thus, following the state of the said negotiations, teachers resolved to continue with their industrial action until they receive satisfactory feedback over their demands for salary increment in the Financial Year 2011/12. 

This is what the general secretary communicated:
‘It is unfortunate that the honourable minister chooses to apply sanctions quoting an Act, which she herself reports will only be operationalised by the end of October 2011 - See table on page 3 - instead of moving fast to put in place a formal and institutionalised process as per the Act.

Hon. Speaker, Members of Parliament need to know that UNATU is trying to avert a situation that would otherwise have turned detrimental by pushing Government to operationalise a process that should have formal negotiations and agreements. Is there any evidence of agreement between UNATU and Government?’ 

Conclusion

In view of the above, we pray that Parliament discusses issues of the education sector basing on the verifiable and justifiable facts why Government is not in position to address the plight of the teachers, rather than allowing the discussion to be influenced by the outcome of ad hoc processes that are not supported by facts. Because we are, the nation is.

Teopista Birungi Mayanja
General-Secretary
UNATU.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. So we also defer debate on this matter. I ask that copies be made and circulated to Members just like the minister’s statement was. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I, therefore, would like to lay a copy of this letter on the Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can you have copies made for Members?

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we received a report from the committee chair yesterday and we received responses from the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs, and the Shadow Minister for Defence and Security. It is now a moment for general debate from the House, which I will limit to 30 minutes and each Member, will have two minutes to make a contribution.

11.16
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I go on to the report, I need to make one or two corrections. I have always been uncomfortable looking at this format of the report. You will agree with me that any publication should have the author clearly spelt out. 

As a graduate of Library and Information Science, it is my duty to guide this House that the format of this report is wrong; the author must be down. If you put the Office of the Clerk to Parliament, then you are implying that it is the Office of the Clerk authoring this. At least, I like the Opposition’s; they were putting the author there very clearly, although the report was vague. (Laughter)

I suggest that next time, if the Office of the Clerk must be on this report, then let it be just down under Parliament of Uganda in a smaller font then the chairman of the committee should be down here such that in future, the credit should go to that chairman of the committee.

Two, we are reading in the papers that the Prime Minister is having night meetings with a section of some NRM MPs and later on, he smuggled them to Rwakitura on the Mabira project. I am one of the new MPs and I have been put to task to explain whether I am part of that group, which is giving out Mabira -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is that part of this debate?

MR WAIRA: I am coming to the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it in the report? You are not allowed to divert from what is under discussion. You are ruled out of order, please sit.

11.18
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, there were plans to get the Army involved in the process of reconstructing the Uganda Railways. I am just trying to find out what happened since then because I was made to understand that during those days, a school had been constructed to impart the required skills to help in this process. So, I am trying to find out where we are on this subject of national importance? Thank you.

11.19
MR NASSER BASAJJABALABA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I want to address myself to page 20 of the report. The NEC as an organ of business for the UPDF has not performed well in the recent past except in some few aspects like the Tractor Hire Services. However, this Parliament in the past and in this financial year, allocated resources towards the Ministry of Defence, and I understand that there has been a lot of procurement done by the Ministry of Defence. However, the arm of business in this ministry has not been given an opportunity to participate in these tenders; not even to purchase anything. I wonder what the plan of the Ministry of Defence is in regard to NEC because currently it is neither in the Ministry of Defence nor in Finance. 

I want to put it to the minister that the committee recommends that they should appoint a board. The current structure does not address that, and there is no initiative of putting up any business venture apart from that Tractor Hire Services. I think it would be appropriate that future tenders, given out by the Ministry of Defence, consider NEC as an arm of business in the Ministry of Defence.

The second aspect is on the Immigration Directorate under Ministry of Internal Affairs. We have read in the newspapers in the past that people who are not supposed to hold diplomatic passports are holding them and they have been involved in so many things, including drug trafficking. So I think it would be appropriate for the minister to present to the House a list of those who hold diplomatic passports –(Member timed out_) 

11.22
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Due to time constraint, I will just raise issues for which I am seeking answers. On page 14, in the observations and recommendations, the committee talks about the purchase of the jets at a cost of Shs 1.5 trillion. What the committee calls an observation – of course, there is no recommendation on this particular item and I do not understand what the committee has observed apart from telling us that this purchase was made, and that we will need to make available an additional Shs 280 billion.

I trust the current Minister, Dr Kiyonga, he is a decent person, but we need to do some surgery on their expenditures; especially on this classified expenditure. I remember the Sixth Parliament made an inquiry and one of their findings was that, even simple items like two pick-ups had been tagged “classified expenditure”. 

I have no problem with Uganda getting prepared for any threat, but we should not be ransomed as a country by allowing individuals to siphon Government resources under the guise of classified expenditure –(Member timed out_)

11.24
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to dwell on one thing, which is on page 22. There the committee recommends that the Ministry of Defence should expedite its verification and payment of ex-servicemen. I would like to know from the Minister of Defence, how many times should these people be verified before they are paid?

I recall ten or so many years ago, these King’s African Riffles ex-servicemen were verified. Taxis ferried people day and night from Soroti to Bombo for these people to be verified. To date, I have neighbours who have about six months to live and they have never been paid. These old men sold bicycles, goats, and land to go for verification in Bombo but up to now they have not been paid. So, I would like to know how many times they need to be verified before they can be paid.

I see here that Shs 22.1 billion has been spent on that. There is a possibility these people’s records have been used for some other people to pocket that money, now you are telling us that Shs 22 billion has been paid? I am becoming sceptical about this because it is very long since they were verified and they have not been paid. So, please, help me so that I can help them; otherwise, it is overdue. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.26
MR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work well done. I want to raise three important issues. The first is on welfare of prisoners. Police officers and UPDF officers have a saying that when you pretend to employ somebody, the same person may pretend to work for you. 

In my municipality, there is a UPDF, prisons and police headquarter. However, when you go and see where these men of God are sleeping, you would wonder whether these men are looked after! I want to put it clearly to the ministries concerned that the health and welfare of our people in the police is at stake. Those people do a very wonderful job for us! If we want them to continue protecting us, in this era where everything has gone up in terms of cost, we have no option but to raise the salary of these people. 

Secondly, the prisons are very crowded in Mbarara and when a place is overcrowded, you cannot avoid some diseases; Tuberculosis is very common in the place where inmates are kept. Go to Mbarara Prison – I happened to be one of the doctors who were helping the prisoners and not at a cost because it was voluntary. The prisoners are very sick; all of them are coughing. And when you work on TB for so long, you also contract it, which means that prison warders are also at a risk of contracting TB. 

For that matter, I am of the view that prisons in the whole country be improved and inmates put in places that are worth –(Member timed out_)

11.29
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): I would like to thank the committee for the job well done and because of the time, I would like to address myself to an issue on page 31: on observations and recommendations of the Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters - National Identity Card Project/National Security Information system. 

Mr Speaker, I have two questions to ask in regard to the content of this page. One is about how the procurement of the service provider for this project was done. The second one is about the commitment made between Government and the service provider. 

I would like to request that the Minister of Internal Affairs brings to this House the agreements that were executed between the Government of Uganda and the service provider. I am saying this because the committee did not address itself to the background of this matter. This project had been earlier on handled by the Ministry of Finance and other government agencies, but was mishandled by that ministry although they had a very good project design. That is why it was later taken over by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which, however, does not have the capacity to handle it.

Thirdly, in the recommendations, I notice that Government is bound to lose money in this project. I would like to propose to the House that a committee of Parliament be set up to investigate the transactions of this project. I am saying this because Government is going to spend more than Shs 180 billion. I do not want to pre-empt the proceedings of the Committee of Parliament on Finance, but the National Planning Authority is burning for money for more or less the same thing. Also, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics is crying for money to do the same thing. 

Given this situation, I still wonder how integrated this project is; now that it is being executed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. So, as I said, the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs should table before Parliament, the agreements that were executed between Government and the service provider. And like I said before, let us have a committee set up to investigate the whole process. I thank you.

11.32
MS VICTORIA BUSINGYE RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern has been a concern of very many people for a very long time. Whereas one of the mandates of the police in this country is to provide a secure and peaceful environment for all Ugandans by keeping law and order and to ensure safety, custody and humane treatment of offenders, I am alarmed! I would like to inform this House that this is not being observed very well.

In my opinion, this is one of the causes of mob justice. Sometimes you find an offender being arrested and taken to police, but in very few minutes, that offender - who may be a man who has raped a child of say two or three years or even an old woman - will be back on the streets. In that situation, what do you expect the public to do? They will just take to helping themselves, and in so doing they break another law. I know that ignorance of the law is no defence but if the public is not informed, how do you expect them to behave? They need to be informed.

When some culprits are apprehended, they are released on bond after the relatives have paid some money. However, such money is not receipted. Yet to the best of my knowledge, when someone is being released, they are supposed to receive that money back. To what extent is this being observed? I am saying this because I have ever been a victim of such treatment.

On exhibits, I would like to say that they have become a monopoly. People are apprehended with their property, but such property is never returned 100 percent back to owners –(Member timed out_)

11.35
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three issues to talk about. First, I would like to point out that the defence expenditure in this country has really shot up. We are now doing Shs 2.99 billion and above, which is actually one-third of our GDP or even more. I thought Government should be committed to cutting down this expenditure, given the fact that the LRA and other rebel groups have been overrun. Why should we be spending such money on defence?

Anyway, most important, I would like to find out from the committee chairperson on whether he saw the jets. I am saying this because I need you to allay my fears that these old jets flying over Kampala were not bought, but just donated by Col Muammar Gaddafi. (Laughter) So, did you really see the new jets?

Secondly, I would like to inform the Minister of Defence that since early this year, there have been serious incursions of the rustlers into the Teso region. We are very concerned about them because they have particularly affected Katakwi and Amuria. This has led to the creation of a settlement (camp) in Katakwi District for the people crossing from the Karamoja region. I would like to inform you that this is something that has pained us for a long time. I want to also remind the minister that Katakwi and Amuria voted for NRM, so you must protect them.

Thirdly, let me talk about the ID project. I think the committee’s recommendations fell short of actually shifting the ID project to the ICT Ministry. The Ministry of Internal Affairs does not have the capacity to implement this project. That is why the project has been on this Floor since 2001 – I hope, Mr Speaker, you remember the scandals associated with it. The Ministry of Internal of Affairs is the user ministry and so, this project should be shifted to the National Information and Technology Authority of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.37
MR DEUSDEDIT OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Mr Speaker, I would like to address myself to the issue of the Anti-Stock Theft Units based in Otuke, Agago, Katakwi and Amuria. These units – I have been to them and spoken to the commanders in there – are poorly facilitated! May I now ask the minister concerned to take note and provide those units with transport? For example, in the whole of Agago and Otuke, there is only one vehicle available for staff in those units. I request the minister to at least provide some motorcycles to these units. I am saying this because I know that there are motorcycles that are lying around at the regional offices in Lira. Could the concerned minister take care of that?

Secondly, there was an important road that was constructed halfway, from Balalegi to somewhere in the middle of the road to Mwonyile. That road was supposed to run from Balalegi State Lodge up to Katakwi meant for use by the rapid reaction force to take care of the raiders and thieves, who come from Karamoja to raid the areas of Agago, Lango and Teso. But only one-third of the road has been done. The people of Otuke, Agago and the surrounding areas would like to know when this project will be completed.

Thirdly, let me raise the question of fire stations. I understand there is a police unit that deals with fire. But in the entire Northern Uganda, we have only one fire engine, which is based in Gulu. The whole of Lango sub-region does not have a fire brigade unit, and so there is no vehicle that takes care of such disasters when they occur. I am not aware of Soroti but we would like to know whether there are provisions being made to take care of these emergencies. Thank you so much.

11.40
MRS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a few issues. I would like to find out from the Minister of Internal Affairs about the construction of prison facilities in the new districts that were created by the President. We have a lot of crime going on but we don’t have prison facilities to take care of the offenders.

The other issue, which is a national issue, is about the accommodation of police. I always pass by those police barracks; these people seem to be living in a very poor and sorry condition: they do not have toilet facilities. If you pass Naguru, there are small structures that look like toilets. I don’t know whether they are toilets or pit latrines. And these are the people who are taking care of our security? 

Another very important issue is corruption within the police force. I don’t know what the ministry is doing about it. There is a lot of corruption going on especially among traffic policemen. They stop you along the way and squeeze something small out of you, whether you want it or not. 

The other issue I wanted to mention, which has already been mentioned by my colleague, hon. Jacinto, is about the anti-stock theft unit in Otuke that is poorly facilitated. These people are doing a lot of work to keep security along the border area of Otuke and Karamoja region, but they are not properly facilitated. They don’t have transport and they are also living in poor conditions. 

There is another issue, which we would want the ministry to take up, the issue of creating a police training school in Alir. We thought that would help us settle the issue of security along the border region. If there is training going on along that region in the border area, it would scare away the Karimojong who disturb us time and again. Thank you very much.

11.43
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. Indeed, I also want to commend the Ministry of Defence, particularly the UPDF for the efforts they are making to bring sanity to Karamoja. We have to sustain the disarmament programme in Karamoja, which has reduced cattle rustling to what we call petty thefts today. I am sure even our neighbours: Katakwi, Otuke, Bugisu are enjoying the peace that we are enjoying in Karamoja.

The cattle raids have reduced to petty theft but it is very difficult to catch these chicken thieves. So, I would still implore the UPDF to continue with the same efforts because we are equally suffering in the manyantas and villages because it is becoming hard to capture these thieves. In the morning they disappear into the bushes. So, we still implore the UPDF to continue with the same efforts to bring total sanity to the sub-region.

I have a concern over the UPDF land in Kotido that is housing the UPDF’s 406th Brigade. This land was acquired from the community of Nakapilimoru sub-county, eight years ago. Letters have been written to the Ministry of Defence and other relevant authorities but as of today, there is no indication of any response in terms of compensation to the families that owned this land. 

So, as a representative of the people of Kotido and particularly Nakapilimoru sub-county and the beneficiaries of this land, I demand an explanation from the Ministry of Defence as to why there is such a delay. Or, is it intentional that the beneficiaries leave this land and yet the brigade, which is on this land is benefiting from the peace and security we have in Kotido District? Thank you.

11.45
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Minister of Defence for the work well done in transforming the military institution. I have witnessed this in Kabamba and Mubende Barracks. However, I have got some few issues that I would wish to express. 

It is very good that they were given Shs 100 million plus to survey and open up the boundaries, but my concern is the way they are opening up their boundaries. In Mubende barracks, we have got a problem. They opened up their boundaries without the engagement of the local authorities and community. There is now a problem where there is a conflict of interest. Some people in that community say they have been on that land even before the barracks. When I was reading this report – it is very good that they came up with this operation. However, my concern is: what about those households that were being surrounded when they opened up the boundaries? I want to know the compensation strategies the UPDF has got for my people.

Secondly, when they open up boundaries, how have they involved district authorities, like the lands office, the office of the surveyors and the office of the cartographer? I wish to stop here. Thank you very much.

11.47
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and the observations, which have been made. 

My issue is about classified expenditure. I have been a critic of classified expenditure since I came to Parliament. For this matter, the classified expenditure in question is the utilisation of 1.394 trillion to purchase fighter jets. This is the first time we have seen the disclosure of classified expenditure, three years down the road since I came here! 

Otherwise, classified expenditure has continued to be too classified a secret that this Parliament has never known about it. Even when we are scrutinising the proposals of the budget, they put it in a language that you can ridicule, like entertainment and so on and they say colossal sums of money went to entertainment, games, et cetera. And when you ask them they say, “That is classified expenditure; it went to purchase certain weapons which we cannot disclose to you”. This time round they were smocked out and they had to tell us that they purchased jets.

However, why should this Parliament not know the supplier? This Parliament should be informed about the supplier. We should be in position to verify value for money. We should also be in position, as Parliament, to know the source of the threats to the security of this country. If this Parliament should not know, at least the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs should know -(Member timed out_)

11.49
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the Financial Year 2009/10, we appropriated Shs 34 billion to pay for the pensions and gratuity arrears of the ex-servicemen. I remember that in the last financial year, we again appropriated some money to pay off all the balances of arrears in pension and gratuity of ex-servicemen. 

On page 22, we are told by the committee that by July this year, over Shs 22.1 billion had been paid and yet we see that there are some ex-servicemen whose pension and gratuity are still pending. We would like to know how many ex-servicemen have not been paid their pension and gratuity and what happened to the money that we appropriated? We were aware that we had settled the issue of pension and gratuity arrears for the ex-servicemen. What is the way forward? We want to know what happened to the balance and why those people have not been paid.

The Kitante land was disposed of to an investor at a cost of Shs 3.0 billion without any valuation but later when the Chief Government Valuer took it up, the land was valued at Shs 20.2 billion. Who is this shark who fleeced us off? We should not leave the matter here. Those who were involved in disposing of the land ought to be in some “cooler”. The land was simply donated at Shs 3.0 billion and yet its market value is Shs 20 billion. We need answers to this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the last contribution. To the ministers I will give 35 minutes and you see how to use it.
 
11.52
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must start by making a general remark and appreciate the work of Parliament, particularly in their oversight role. This is the first time, as a minister, I am finding a committee, which is alert and really putting us on the spot. I must say that for me, I take it as a process of learning not as criticism or that you do not like us.
 
Hon. Hussein Kyanjo here has had very critical contributions, some of which are expressed in this statement here. We greatly appreciate because we are trying to improve our capacity to manage law and order in this country and all views are welcome. It will help us to create a force that will make our country stable, peaceful and harmonious, a country where different political views can be practiced without fear or favour.

There are a number of issues. I will touch on some and my colleague, hon. Baba, who is more articulate and diplomatic, will handle some of the areas. I am straight and say what I think without going around corners.

On the Immigration Department, there is still a lot of work that needs to be done. We need to remove some vices that greatly hindered that department such as have enabled people who are not supposed to hold diplomatic passports to do so. This has also allowed people without work permits to acquire them even when Ugandans are jobless.

A lot of our graduates are here without jobs but we get investors who come here but do not employ them. The code of investment is clear; an investor should come himself as the overall manager plus somebody to manage his finances, but the rest of the workers should be Ugandans. But that is not being followed. I am not here to defend Government, I am trying to tell you that the weaknesses we have on the ground are ours to solve.
 
In some places, people such as watchmen and gatemen are taken as expatriates. They apply for work permits as experts and we are unearthing them slowly. We shall clean the whole register to make sure that the right people are allowed in, to enable our children who are without jobs on the streets also to get them.

If the investors are genuine and they have come to help us and create jobs then they must create them. This is the way that I look at it objectively -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Internal affairs will take 20 minutes and defence 15 minutes.

MR ONEK: Let me quickly run through this. Overcrowded prisons; yes, there are too many prisoners for the small prisons that we have. There are two sides to this: do not create conditions for going to prison, or we expand the facility to accommodate more of you.

The prison must be a comfortable place to live in and that is my challenge. As a civil engineer, I see that the condition of our buildings is not worthy. They need to be redone and expanded. I am looking forward to your support to adjust our budget upwards so that we improve the conditions in the prisons after all; all of us here are potential clients for the prison. 

The poor living conditions of police and prison officers; it is true that we still have those colonial structures. Have we as Government set aside money to improve those conditions? You people appropriating the budget, why don’t you give us the money to improve the living conditions of our officers? Besides, these officers are really being underpaid. This is why I call them patriots; they render the service even with the meager resources that they have. So why don’t we clap for the police and the prisons officers? Thank them for patriotism for our country! 

Along with that, I am glad that the committee recommended that the pay of our security officers must be increased to match standards of living. I thank you for that.

Agreements with service providers: we recently had a meeting with the Ministry of ICT. The directive from His Excellency, the President, is that the ICT ministry is a secretariat for this national identity card programme because the national security information system, which includes the national identity card, is part of the overall national database and entire spectrum of database includes several things such as businesses. So, we are having a joint programme, which we chair but the secretariat is with the Ministry of ICT and not that of Internal Affairs.

We are working to enforce that because it was going slowly as everybody wanted to own the whole thing - two ministries; everybody wants it to be in their own place. We are saying, “No, this is a national item; it is not for the ministry alone”. So, we are working together with the ICT ministry to harmonise that to make sure that the data collected is also used for other information systems. 

Treatment of human rights offenders: the other day I was with the Chief Justice in this Justice Law and Order Sector seminar, and I told them that mob justice is being practised in Uganda today. Secondly, for our President to recommend that offenders of anything to do with sabotage be remanded for at least six months - those are all indications of a vote of no confidence in our judicial system because the point is that somebody arrested should be released after 48 hours. This could be a big criminal who could have committed something big and while investigations are going on, they are released. So, what will the public say? They will say, “Well, the law does not exist.” So, they take the law into their hands. These are the challenges that we have. 

Exhibits being misappropriated; all these police officers are human beings and we pick them from amongst ourselves. Which Ugandan is not corrupt today? Most of our people are corrupt. Most offices are and it is true. Go to any office, even a secretary will sell you papers. Don’t bury your head in the sand; look around, they are just from the society and reflect the true character of what environment we are in, which needs to be improved. 

For the Katakwi incursions, I have instructed the Inspector-General of Police to give me a report within the next one week. I want action to be taken to ensure there is peace. We will disarm those Karimojong who come in that area of Usuk and make sure that when leaving, they do not create insecurity for other citizens. So, that is being followed. The Otuke raid is part of it; we shall ensure that Otuke is also covered peacefully. 

That the fire brigade is not there; the budget you approved cannot even buy fire brigade equipment. Why don’t you increase the budget so that we can buy more trucks and put them in the regions? Personally, my house was burnt in Gulu and even the Police could not rescue it because there was no fire brigade. I am a victim of the lack of fire brigade equipment -(Interruption) 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for giving way. He has repeatedly attributed blame to Members of Parliament for not appropriating adequately. May I remind the minister that Article 93 of the Constitution does not allow a back bencher to move a motion or a Bill that has financial implications on the Consolidated Fund? The onus is on you, the Executive, to come up with a proposal and we back you up. But if you don’t come up with it, we are limited by Article 93. Why attribute blame to Parliament? 

MR ONEK: Thank you for that. I was once the Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee and after committee deliberations on the budget of the ministry, the chairman of the Budget Committee calls all the chairpersons of the various committees and they sit together and look at the merits and demerits of certain budgetary allocations, and decide that, “Let us cut this from gender and move it to water”. And those are the appropriations you could handle. The Parliament should do the re-allocations.

On the issue of construction of police facilities, we are trying to develop our police construction unit. We have got about 22 Hydraform machines and I have taken particular interest to see that upcountry police posts are constructed using this equipment and what we need are building materials to cause them to move ahead. 

On issues to do with corruption, it is everywhere; it is not only in the Police. Even in Parliament here -(Laughter)- so, let me give my colleague a chance to answer.   

12.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, let me also add to what my senior minister has said. I express my deep appreciation to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that exhaustively dealt with issues and we are extremely positive about their recommendations. I thank them, more particularly the ladies of that committee, who were outstanding. Two of them performed as lead counsels and their probing questions were really to the point, and I have great faith in the Members of the Ninth Parliament if this is the way they will go. I have yet to meet the others. I want to thank you for that support. 

Hon. Onek has elaborated on a number of the issues raised but let me add the following, given that we have very little time. We appreciate the concerns on the welfare of both the police and prison officers and even the prisoners themselves. As a ministry, we have tried our best to improve their welfare even before Government comes fully to complement them. Both the police and prisons have established SACCOs to support their income. We have established duty free shops for both units and in these shops, there are iron sheets and cement to help them begin constructing their retirement homes, and I think these will help them establish homes when they retire. 

Police bond is absolutely free. If anybody is being charged for police bond, please, report that to us.

Mob justice is a concern to us too and how are we addressing it? We have established community liaison officers to go educating the public about the need to respect the rule of law so that the course of law can be applied for people who infringe or cause problems to the public. 

Exhibits, which are tendered in court, can only be released on court orders and not on police instructions or directives. Only the court can order the release of exhibits and other property. 

We are looking into the issue of anti-stock theft units by provision of additional transport under the JLOS, and we are getting a lot of support and we also look forward to that. 

On fire trucks, these at the moment are being originally distributed and when we get more capacity, we will reach out to districts and major flash points of where fire occurrences have been rampant. 

Police and prison accommodation is a major issue and that is why we need the support of this House on the Public Private Partnership arrangement that we are trying to negotiate. We are going to get engaged with Members of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee to elaborate to them more about this arrangement; but the bottom line of this project is that, we are not ceding Government land to anybody forever. It is a lease arrangement we are trying to enter into, where the properties revert back to Government over some period of time. We will engage the committee and give them more details about this arrangement but our appeal is for your support. If we are to improve the wretched conditions of these barracks, prisons and the Police, this is the way to go. 

I was at the border, in Busia, over the weekend and I took time to go and visit the police barracks there. When my bodyguard was handing over his gun to the police station I said, “Let me see the barracks here.” I was shocked beyond shock at the conditions there. Really, I must do something while I am still holding this portfolio together with my senior colleagues. (Applause)

Corruption in the Police; it takes two: the giver and the receiver. Do not point fingers at the police only; point fingers at the givers as well! But it is an issue we are dealing with decisively. And I must say, since we came to the ministry, we think corruption has substantively reduced even among the traffic police. You now see a much smarter and much leaner traffic police without extended abdomens as they perform their duties. I am sure hon. Lukyamuzi can testify to this.

On the ID project, we are coordinating with all the sectors and the major data bank centre is going to be in the Ministry of ICT. We have set up a core team that is coordinating the implementation and roll out of this ID project. Because of security considerations, Government decided that the home of the ID project would be in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. But everybody is going to be involved. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. According to the agreement with the company handling the ID project, the IDs will expire in 2021. I wonder in which country citizenship also expires in 2021. The IDs worldwide are part of citizenship. So, can the hon. Minister clarify whether our citizenship will also elapse in 2021? (Laughter)

MR BABA: I do not know whether I got you correctly. Are you talking about the duration or the validity of the ID cards? At the moment, they have issued IDs for ten years’ validity. But this is just a start. It can be reviewed to be permanent. We are just starting with the first group that is going to be issued these cards, and the first lot of five million which we are going to start on will be issued cards for 10 years. If we think it should be extended to permanently, after consulting with this core team we are working with - ICT, immigration, police and bureau of statistics. Everybody is going to be consulted on this. But allow us to start with the starting period.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I did not have any intention to disturb the hon. Minister save that issues pertaining to citizenship are very important. When you are talking about citizenship and you are a citizen, you are a citizen until you die. You cannot afford to renew citizenship. What are you talking about? (Laughter)

MR ONEK: I agree with you my brother, Ken-Lukyamuzi. We are reviewing that it has to be permanent. But we must put a clause that should you renounce your citizenship then, those will be other provisions. But for the time being, the only ten year provision we are giving is for passports. Passports are for ten years, renewable. But I think we are going to review the national ID and make it permanent. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of citizenship versus the ID card, citizenship does not expire and the IN number on the card also does not expire. But the card expires for the proper running of the state and the mechanisms of checking individuals. Thank you. 

MR BABA: Thank you for that information but let us take a cue from what hon. Onek says that we are here to collaborate and learn from each other. We are not refusing to give the IDs permanently. We have told you we have started with ten years. If you think that is too short, we will definitely review it but in consultation with everybody else. We have to start from somewhere. For example, our passports are given to citizens but they are only valid for ten years. And these are citizens. Should we give them forever? Absolutely not! But we will take into consideration this matter and once we improve on the special features, which we are still working on - the biometrics and so on - we will review the issue of giving these IDs permanently. Thank you very much. 

I think with this, Mr Speaker, our sector is covered. I want to thank you, hon. Members, for your support and especially for the positive recommendations you have made on arrears, on wages, on shortfalls and institutional capacity building, for example, for the prisons that are some of the most productive departments of Government. The prisons department is feeding all the prisoners from their farms and if they are enabled they could even produce more and include supplying seeds and so forth. I thank you for your support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Minister of Defence. Fifteen minutes.

12.17
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to report that we had a very constructive engagement with the committee and I wish, therefore, to thank the committee for what I consider a very well written report. Of the 14 recommendations that the committee has made to the House, we, from the ministry, associate ourselves with 11 and we have some difficulty with three as I will elaborate later.

We take great exception to some serious insinuations that the hon. Shadow Minister for Defence and Security made, including falsehoods. So as I end this presentation, I will address the points that he delivered to this House. Since they are on the Hansard they cannot be left unchallenged.  

I would, in detailing my response, want to start with the issue of security threats to our country. We went out of our way, in respect for the committee, to extensively brief them about these threats. They asked questions, they made proposals and I thought we ended very well. So, what I will give the Members is really a summation without putting at risk the security of our country.

These threats include internal, regional and global aspects. On the internal aspects, we have information that in certain parts of this country, there are some people carrying out recruitment of young persons and taking them to Eastern DRC to join the ADF. We were fairly extensive to the committee in this respect. There are also some elements who are being tempted to try and take undemocratic paths to gain political power. But we are alert and we will do everything possible to ensure that they do not succeed.

So, there are internal threats and I cannot go beyond that but I have indicated to you that we were very extensive in briefing the committee.

On the regional aspects, I want to inform this House that although ADF got defeated in the main -(Ms Alaso rose_)- if you could hold on a bit and I first make the totality of the point then we can have the clarification.

The ADF, as we know, operated mainly in the Rwenzori sub-region and caused mayhem. The UPDF, working with the people, defeated the ADF. Some remnants, however, including their leader, went and hid in the forests in Eastern DRC. They have been, over the years, forcefully recruiting Congolese children and as I have said before, also some children from within Uganda.

As I speak, the ADF has built up a fairly strong force. Our colleagues, the armed forces of the DRC, have been making every effort to deal with them but they have not yet managed to eliminate that group that has built up. The ADF’s intention is to launch another attack against this country.

We also have the LRA. As was said before, they were defeated in the main but the leaders, including Kony, are still alive with his main commanders and have split their residual force into small groups, which keep hovering between the Central African Republic, DRC and sometimes into the South of the Sudan.

Besides ADF and LRA, there are other negative forces in the DRC, which may not necessarily be against Uganda but depending on how they would operate and emerge, they could also be a threat. You have the Interahamwe, which still exists and also some Congolese groups like the Mai Mai.

On the regional front, we are all aware of the situation in Somalia and the threats posed to this country by the Al-Shabaab. Globally speaking, all of us are aware of international terrorism and no state or country is spared from the threats of international terrorism.

With due respect, my colleague hon. Fungaroo did make the point about unemployment and its possible relationship to threatening the peace of the country or region. He is obviously right on that point, because all these groups that I have named try as much as possible to reach young people. They lure them; tell them lies that they are going to give them jobs only for these young people to find themselves in the bushes where they operate.

When they do not have jobs, the risk of their being lured becomes very high. It is for this reason, therefore, that we as leaders, knowing what threats face our country and what challenges we face, have to take into account the way we speak to the population and young people because if we issue unguarded statements, these young people could take it that we are encouraging them to go into rebellion.

Let me, having outlined the threats, say something about the levels of expenditure on defence unless at this point hon. Alaso would want get the clarification. Thank you.

The history of our country is quite clear. We have weathered so many insurgencies in our country. It is hardly five years, for example, since our brothers and sisters in Northern Uganda have finally returned home, having been in the camps for so many years.

So, the Army has been busy trying to stabilise this country. Whatever funds that Parliament has been giving the Army has been mainly spent on this effort to stabilise our country. That means that other aspects of facilitation and care of the Army have not moved as quickly as they should have. For example, all of us come from all over the country and see that we still have huts built with grass: the mama ingia pole in some parts of the barracks.

Some of the facilities in which we give health care to our troops are still far below the standards. Many colleagues, including hon. Fungaroo, have made this point. Now that we are calm as a country, in our view we need to focus on two things. Number one, ensure that we are adequately prepared so that not again should our country be destabilised. That means that we must adequately equip our forces and we must train and modernise our forces.

Secondly and equally important, we must now focus on the welfare of the forces, be it salaries, health care, education or where they live. In response to this, the Ministry of Defence has drawn out a fairly comprehensive defence sector infrastructure investment plan -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, it would be absurd for me to let the hon. Minister for Defence make sweeping statements, which he cannot justify. It is one thing to equip the forces of the nation for the security of everybody in the country. It is another to equip the same force to suppress the freedoms of the local population. Which one are you attributing your statement to?

DR KIYONGA: With your permission, Mr Speaker, I will proceed with my presentation and I think along the way, hon. Lukyamuzi will find his location in answer to his question.

We have drawn out a defence sector infrastructure investment plan for a period of five years, to give some minimum decency to our forces, children and troops. However, we have been unable, for two years now, to effectively implement this plan for lack of resources.

If we were to implement this plan, we would need, on an annual basis, Shs 60 billion for about five years and at the end of that period, we would have fairly low cost but decent housing, health care and education for our forces. In the search to get money, we have obviously been discussing within Government. The Ministry of Defence has been making proposals to the Ministry of Finance and one such initiative we took was to tell Government that we want to rationalise the land, which Government has given us to use. And by “rationalization” we meant that where there is land, which we do not think we need, as the Army, since Government cannot find other money, that piece of land should be sold and it helps to finance the infrastructure plans. Or where we think we need additional land, for example, for training purposes, or guarding national resources – recently, with the help of the Prime Minister’s Office and the people of Bunyoro, we acquired a piece of land close to our petroleum site. So that at all times, nobody is tempted to play around with that national resource.

It was under this understanding that in 2008, Cabinet took a decision on our request that the pieces of land that we have at Kisseka Hospital, Kitante and in Mbuya could be disposed of at premium prices so that we can support this investment plan. That was the background and the Cabinet agreed, although it emphasised that in disposing of any piece of land we have to comply with the law, that is, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act. So, I will be coming back to that issue of land because it has been raised in graphic terms both by the committee and some Members in the plenary who have spoken. 

Hon. Lulume Bayigga and one or two other Members have asked very good questions about this animal called “classified expenditure”, and they are wondering whether it means no accountability. I want to assure my brother, Dr Lulume that “classified” means that while we try to build our security, we do not at the same time create risks; it does not exclude accountability. 

What do I mean by saying that we do not want to create risks? The Bible says that it is only a fool who goes to war without ascertaining the strength of the opponent. This means that war is fought in secrecy; you have to be secretive about the capacity you have. If your opponent knows your capacity, then they are at advantage over you. So you cannot broadcast every time you buy - a tank or a plane et cetera. So it is very important that we acquire this equipment but it should not be of public knowledge. However, there must be accountability and indeed it is there -(Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I am giving you an additional three minutes to wind up.

DR KIYONGA: Okay, let me try, Mr Speaker. 

Because of knowing this sensitivity, when the Auditor-General comes to audit the books of the Ministry of Defence, he sets up a small committee of his staff; they go and carry out the audit and when they bring him the report, he carries it to the Speaker. The Speaker, on receipt of that report, works with the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, again to set up a small committee – within the Public Accounts Committee - in order to look at this report. So in that way, we are able to balance the interests of both security and accountability -(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is this: when you say that you would not like to expose your capabilities, we would assume that maybe regionally you could be having a threat and these capabilities could be known by maybe the East African Community member states and so on. However, what I know is that, this equipment does not just drop from the sky like rain; they are easy to identify. For instance, when you bought the fighter jets recently; I think they can be identified, including other weapons, apart from nuclear weapons. So, if you hide this information, would you like to tell us that the rest of the other countries can fail to know our military capabilities, especially where you buy these weapons from?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will use only 30 seconds. First, defence is managed in three levels: the strategic level, the operational level and the tactical level. What can justifiably be put as “classified” is the tactical level or your weapons, styles and approaches to work. But strategic issues like buying equipment from the same market - where many people go - cannot be a secret. 

Secondly, operation management, for example, of a budget like this – how much money you are getting from here – this cannot be a secret! So when you need money, you tell us the purpose. 

One difficulty I face as the Shadow Minister of Defence is that this “classified” thing blocks the shadow minister from understating the sector he is supervising. Yesterday the Prime Minister said here that as shadow minister, I am supposed to be knowledgeable. But how can I be knowledgeable when you close the door for me to know? (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: I thank my colleagues for those statements. I have explained the procedure we take. We can have different opinions on the issue but I have explained what we do.

I will now quickly go into the issue of AMISOM - our troops in Somalia. Again, this was a matter that was extensively discussed in the committee and I would like to report to the House that the committee appreciated the excellent work done by the UPDF and the Burundi forces. The committee also appreciated that the work done by the UPDF and their counterparts from Burundi has brought great honour and respect to Africa but particularly Uganda and Burundi. (Applause) In fact, I had expected the committee chairperson to move a motion to appreciate the excellent work that our troops have done in Somalia so that we can give them morale.

We have an agreement with the African Union - signed by the Minister of Defence on behalf of Government and the appropriate officer in Addis Ababa. Under this agreement, we receive the following payments: US $1,020 for each soldier who has been deployed in Somalia [HON. MEMBERS: “Per what?”] per month. That is a good question. Then within the agreement this is split as follows: US $828 goes to the soldier - it comes to the Government and the Government pays it to the soldier. Then US $200 is to meet the following expenses: preparing the soldier to be deployed. We do not just pick the soldier from his barracks and he goes to Somalia. He has to be prepared for that mission. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I give the hon. Minister strictly three minutes now. Please, observe that.

DR KIYONGA: I think we can discuss later because otherwise I will - I think the key point is that let us note the US $828 and then the US $200. 

When Parliament authorised the deployment of the troops to Somalia, Parliament said it strictly must be budget neutral. Meaning that apart from money which will be paid to us, we should not spend any additional money over and above the money we would earn from the mission.

Other administrative expenses, for example when the Chief of Defence Forces or the Commander of the Land Forces goes to visit those troops, have to be debited from this earning. That is the US $200 after paying the US $828 –(Mr Fungaroo rose_)- what point are you rising on? Please, let us finish the presentation. He was even in the committee where he had the opportunity to ask questions –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Please hon. Member, follow the decorum of the House. 

DR KIYONGA: There are areas of compensation. When we lose a soldier in action (his family) is compensated US $50,000. When a soldier is injured or maimed, he is paid a fraction of this US $50,000 depending on the extent of the injury.

We are also compensated for depreciation of our own equipment that we went with. So, we assess depreciation every month and the Government is compensated an equivalent amount of money. If we, for example, supplied medicine because the AU was not ready, then again we are compensated for such an undertaking. 

Finally, I would like to go to the points raised by my colleague, hon. Fungaroo. On page 3 [MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: “Procedure.”] hon. Fungaroo makes these statements and says in part, and I quote - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no procedural point, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. Minister, please conclude.

DR KIYONGA: That the statement we made contained a lot of contradictions, concealment of facts and figures and deceptions. I take great exception to this because the committee, to which he is a member, fully considered our statement. We were asked for areas which were not clear, we clarified them and in fact we had to go back home and produce a revised policy statement. So for a colleague, who was a member, to come here and make this assertion, we take exception to that. 

On paragraph five towards the end he says, “We members of the shadow cabinet and the entire Opposition political parties in this Parliament discovered a bigger and more serious problem, which if not arrested now, will have serious consequences on all the neighbouring countries of East and Central Africa.” Surely, I do not think that this is a statement that a responsible Member of this House, who is in the committee, should be allowed to make without substantiation. 

If you go to page 2, he says that the information we got on the money for AMISOM was not explained. Our policy statement has done that. The question we were asked was explained showing the money, which we expected, how much we got, and how much was not released. 

On page 3, hon. Fungaroo goes on to say that headquarters’ money can be used by the military wing anyhow, anytime and anywhere without any problem! It is really surprising that it comes from a Member of a committee because he never elucidated anything to show that point. 

He has said on the Floor of this House that there is a power struggle in the Ministry of Defence. I would like to inform hon. Members of Parliament that the defence sector, at the leadership level, is as harmonious as harmony could be. There is no single incidence of a power struggle in the ministry.

Lastly, because of the time constraints, about the supplementary questions that my colleagues asked, I can be able to go over them given another opportunity but I would like to thank the committee and to pray that our budget be passed and we be allowed to handle our land so that we can look after the soldiers. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much hon. Minister. Hon. Members, I am noting with concern the conduct of some of our very own Members. The rule is clear. When you want to make a contribution, you stand in your place. You do not get up and start running across the Floor to microphones before you are permitted. (Laughter) That is a very simple rule to follow. Rise where you are and the Speaker will recognise you and grant you the permission to speak. That is basic etiquette for a parliamentarian. (Applause) 

I take exception to the conduct of some of our honourable colleagues who just rise up and bullet for a microphone, without even recourse to what the Speaker has to say about what he is going to do. Please, strictly observe this and I will be enforcing this very strictly. For avoidance of doubt, I will not name the honourable. Mr Chairman, you have three minutes.

12.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Simon Mulongo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I will just run through a few issues, which were raised. I will first of all thank the honourable colleagues and the honourable ministers for their contributions. 

We take note of the concern by a Member about the format of the reports, but I also think that this needs to be cross checked with the Clerk and see how in future we can structure the format of the reports.

On the issue of classified expenditure, it is true that we did not have a chance to visit and verify the fighter jets at Entebbe, but it is part of our plan to do that. We are dealing with budget issues and the issue of accountability and issues of verification are part of the committee’s work throughout the session and, therefore, committee’s work throughout the session. So, we will do that and we shall be visiting a number of projects and programmes on the ground as we get by.

We did raise the issue in observation about the classified expenditure because it has been a hot matter on the Floor and also in the media. We had to make that observation because the fact is that, this expenditure was approved by this House so that it is explained that we did consider it as a matter of fact.
 
The question of the national ID project; we did actually probe into the procurement process and there are queries, which had been raised about the procurement. Indeed, we are very concerned about its operationalisation and our recommendations are captured as such.

The issue of land; who is responsible? We have actually categorically stated in our recommendation that we are going to investigate who is responsible for the contradictions about the land at Kitante. 

Allow me, Mr Speaker, before I move the motion about our budget estimates and our report to make two points and to comment on hon. Fungaroo’s presentation. 

Surely, as a committee, we have a number of reservations on a number of issues raised by the shadow minister because in any case, some of the issues raised are not of defence nature, although they have been raised to look like they are of defence nature. We hope next time that the shadow ministers give opportunity to a committee to consider these reports before they are presented to the House because then we do not have time to comment on them. 

Secondly, I would like to recognise and agree with the Minister of Defence about the performance of the UPDF in the AMISON. It is true that the UPDF in AMISOM have performed very well to the approval of both the local and international community. I wish at this juncture on behalf of the committee, to propose a motion that this House applauds and recognises the good performance of the UPDF contribution -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it in your report?

MR MULONGO: I am amending the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, could you propose for the adoption of your report, please?

MR MULONGO: Okay, thank you very much. I wish to thank my colleagues on the committee and to thank so much the Members of this House for their kind comments.

At this juncture, permit me to move under rule 177(2) that the House adopts the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee report, with amendments. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, amendment? 

12.53
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to propose an amendment to the committee report and I have discussed this amendment with the chairperson. He has indicated to me that he will concede and he has no strong objections to the amendment.
 
The amendment I propose is on page 32 of the report. An insertion after recommendation (d) to read as follows, “The Ministry of Internal Affairs shall ensure that the contractor for the national identity card project issues national identity cards without expiry dates to the citizens of Uganda.”

I passed this on to the chairperson of the committee early this morning. First of all, this motion is seconded by my colleague, hon. Ssekitoleko.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which page did you say?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Page 32.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What paragraph?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: An insertion after (d) -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After (d), you want to insert a new paragraph (e).

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: After (d).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you have discussed and there is agreement, do we need to justify this?

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ten years ago hon. Fox Odoi was not bald-headed. So, his feature in his identity card ten years back will show a young man with a lot of hair and, therefore, his identity will be doubted. The ten years does not mean that you will forfeit your citizenship. It means you will only be updating your document so that you appear real rather than when you are ten years old -(Interruption)

MR KAFEERO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to categorically inform the minister that biometrics do not change. That is a scientific feature that will stay the same all the time and they are permanent. Thank you so much.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity to seek this clarification from the hon. Minister, arising from the explanation he has given. One thing, which we wish to note, is that it has taken us quite a lot of struggle and time even to reach where we are. I remember before the last Parliament got dissolved, Members of Parliament were asked to go and take photographs and provide all the necessary information about themselves in order to get these cards. 

As I talk, they have not even got them, let alone this programme has not reached every part of this country. If it has started on a hard note, how sure are you that every after ten years or so, you will be able to update regularly throughout the country? I think these are issues that we need to be very objective about in terms of practicability. I do not think it is possible that after every ten years, you can be able to go around and get information from the increasing population, which you have failed to manage now. Tell us how you will do it if those of us who were here, we had our photographs taken but we have not got the cards? What are you talking about, hon. Minister?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, some of my family members are citizens of the US. The American system, which the European governments also use, is that the ID or passport can expire but you only submit for renewal. If you have any additional information then you can add but it is not that everything is cancelled and then the government is supposed to start afresh. I have done it for one of my family members and I do not want to disclose for purposes of security. (Laughter) It is classified because I did it when I was here. The lawyer just signed a document, I forwarded using post, I swore an affidavit and we got a new passport.

Secondly, in 2021, we are going to have elections. Last year, when we were told to approve a supplementary, we were asked that henceforth, the Electoral Commission would stop issuing voters’ cards and we should use the national ID. What this company and some people in Government are trying to do is that by 2021, when the ID expires, that will require Government to give them more money so that there is a fresh registration for voting. So they are already anticipating money in their pockets. That is why we must stop, this more to stop corruption in 2021 so that by 2021, we can still use the same ID for voting. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what is your strong objection to this?

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, I do not see any serious contradiction here. I fully agree with our brother who said that biometric features do not change. I also agree with hon. Ekanya who said that physical features could change and there should be renewal. What we are talking about are technical issues, which can be resolved as we implement this. We have the Ministry of ICT having the secretariat taking the lead of implementation and our ministry is monitoring. So, we do not see any contradiction and hon. Fox Odoi definitely wants to add something here, but let it be in tandem with the views that we have put here. But I do not think that after ten years, anybody’s citizenship will be relinquished. That can be done by the ICT Ministry. 

In fact, our intention is to create, at every sub-county, two people employed to update the demography of our people. That means they would be registering births and deaths and at the same time preparing and issuing ID cards. We shall have that infrastructure in place such that later we do not need any contractor. This contractor is only for a short time to get us established.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there are some who will get these IDs next year; there are others who will get them in five years. So by 2021, it will not be ten years for them. So what is the magic with this year 2021?

MR ONEK: From what my technical team are telling me, within two years from now, all our citizens will be having national identity cards. And if that is done, we shall then have systems that will continually function. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, there are no objections to the proposals by hon. Fox Odoi?

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, what hon. Onek is saying is that, at the ICT ministry, there is going to be the main data bank of everybody’s ID and nothing will change until - God forbid - he leaves this earth. It is just like your passport. When you have just applied, you are given an immigration number; you have a file and every time you want to renew, they refer to that file. Your details remain the same. That is the import of this ID card and so is your citizenship. 

Secondly, the features that you say are biometric - that is machine readable. You may move somewhere where there are no machines to read it, and so they can use the photograph on your ID card to identify you. So it is these features on the ID card, which will go on changing as the years go by.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ministers, there are some who will get these cards in 2020, what biometrics will have changed in nine months or one year? I am just wondering what the magic with the year 2021 is? There are some who will pick the IDs in 2020 or 2019 – 

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, the card is supposed to be renewed every ten years. If you get yours next year, you would count ten years from that time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then what is this year of 2021? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, this is how the system will operate, and I am confident because I designed that system or I played a part in its designing. We want your card to be renewed every ten years because this card will capture your residence, marital status and all those other details will be captured in the data bank. We feel that it is necessary that every ten years, your card should be renewed. We are not talking about 2021; we just said that every ten years, we want to have your card renewed so that if there is any change in any of your particulars, then they are captured. 

Secondly, this system is supposed to be operated right up to the sub-county level. So you do not need to move people for long distances for this information, and there is supposed to be an officer who regularly captures the information and feeding it into the database. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We still need to take a decision on this matter. Hon. Fox Odoi has made a proposal for an amendment. Can you state your amendment so that we can vote on it right away?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, I propose an amendment to page 32 of the report by inserting (e) after (d) to read as follows: “The Minister of Internal Affairs shall ensure that the contractor for the National Identity Card Project issues national identity cards without expiry date to citizens of Uganda.” 

The justification for this is regional and international best practices. You all know we belong to the East African region, and we are not the first country in this region to issue national identity cards. The Kenyans have national identity cards and there is no expiry date on their identity cards. The Rwandese have national identity cards popularly known as “Ndangamuntu”, they do not have expiry dates. Why then should our national identity cards bear expiry dates? 

The second argument is legal; you all know that citizenship is a creature of the Constitution. To be specific, Chapter 3, Articles 9 to19, citizenship is held in perpetuity, except when revoked by the law. Now the national identity card is for citizens of Uganda, why must we peg a requirement for renewal?

The third leg of my argument is economic. The Government of Uganda is currently spending in the region Shs 140 billion to issue national identity cards. If we require renewal after every ten years, this expenditure will be recurrent and we shall be spending about Shs 140 to print identity cards. That is what is hidden behind this process.

I would like to give you information. The Government of Uganda spends US $150,000 every year to print passports. They have a contract with the supplier of the equipment to pay for patent of US $150,000 recurrent, every year. We are here passing on another liability of Shs 146 billion every ten years to the citizens of Uganda. This is not acceptable. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My understanding is that the difference between a passport and a national – yes, hon. Minister.

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, I would like to concede and accept the amendment on the consideration that citizenship does not expire. It is only the citizens who expire. (Laughter) If there is need to improve any person’s data by adding more information, it can be done at the discretion of that person. Therefore, I support the amendment. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I also have an amendment, on the same issue. On page 31, the committee says, “The machines lay idle in spite of the impending expiry of the warranty.” See the second last sentence under paragraph 1.
 
On page 32, the report talks about the committee’s concern over the procrastination, the efficacy of the machines worth Euros 64.231 million which is at stake. This shows that the procurement process was not planned. If that is the case, then there were people who wanted “quick cuts” to get the procurement of the equipment with their “cut” and leave the machines to go to waste.

I would like to propose an amendment to paragraph (f) after paragraph (e) that was proposed by hon. Odoi, to say that, “The committee quickly investigates the process of procurement of this equipment and that the culprits involved in making this Euros 64.231 million - those who have occasioned the loss, be brought to book.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying the committee should investigate and take appropriate action?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Speaker, the committee should investigate and take appropriate action because it is very clear that there are culprits involved in this theft, but also to report to the House within 30 days in order for us to quickly deal with those culprits. I thank you.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement definitely calls for interest, but from the technical information I got from the ministry, it is said that this equipment was not only procured for the process of issuing the national identity cards, but also for updating the national voters’ register. So, they were also used for that purpose during the last elections. It was after that work that they were now moved to do this exercise. Right now, the process of issuing national identity cards is on. We are jointly working on it with the Ministry of ICT. 

But let me also take this opportunity to inform you that we are going to use the same machine with the same contractor. All this was created by technical issues that will be handled; the committee will be informed accordingly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the chairman of the committee?

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee accepts the proposed amendment. (Applause) One is that the ID expiry dates should be open. Secondly, I would like to inform you that we shall do a forensic audit of the procurement process and ensure that appropriate action is taken against the culprits.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that is done. Hon. Francis Epetait had another amendment. Can you move it now?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, my amendment concerns something on page 22 of the report. There is a paragraph in the middle that states: “The committee noted that in as much as there has been substantial progress in as far as settling the pension and gratuity arrears of the ex-servicemen is concerned, there are still some ex-servicemen whose pension and gratuity is still pending.” I would like to move an amendment to the last bit of the sentence to say: “There are still some unpaid ex-servicemen whose pension and gratuity should be cleared within three months.” That means we should delete the words “is still pending”.

The justification is that Parliament already appropriated money for clearing all the pending arrears for pension and gratuity for ex-servicemen, but to-date they have only paid Shs 22.1 billion yet we appropriated all the money. Many of those ex-servicemen who have not received their pension are really in very bad shape. They keep disturbing their Members of Parliament with enquiries on when they will be paid. That is the justification for this amendment. I beg to move.

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, the period of three months is too short. We could modify it to six months. This is because we also would like to be very realistic on this.

COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the House that the backlog of these cases we are clearing dates as far back as the 1960s. And for the information of the House, the present Government has done quite a lot in clearing this backlog.

To expect that the backlog, which has persisted since the 1960s can be cleared in just three months, I think, is in one way trying to force a very difficult situation. It is enough to recommend that it should be expeditious but to set a time limit of three months –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am taken aback by my good friend, Col Katirima’s submission. As somebody who might be an ex-serviceman tomorrow, I thought you would have great interest in having gratuity and pension paid to ex-servicemen as quickly as possible. Even before either the Ministry of Finance or Defence raises an objection, a representative of the UPDF says, “No, let us take our time”, I find it disturbing. Maybe he has reasons for it. 

Having said that, I think we can now talk about the time. The mover of the motion is talking about three months. The chairperson of the committee is suggesting six months. I think we should discuss and come to some timeframe but we need to take into consideration one issue about the people who served this country in very difficult circumstances. Some of them have been maimed as a result of service. To have a career as a soldier, you are not well paid and then you retire and you are not given your pension or gratuity, it is very bad! So, I request the Ministry of Defence to concede and give us a short time within which we can have these people paid. After all, Mr Speaker, we appropriated money for them. So, what is the problem? 

1.22
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): It is unfortunate that when I was on the Floor I did not have enough time to go into this. First, I want us to differentiate between pension and gratuity for ex-soldiers generally and the Shs 34 billion that was approved by this House as payment for ex-gratia. 

The Shs 34 billion that hon. Epetait is referring to was for ex-gratia and the background is that soldiers who served after 1971 and were disbanded in 1979 took Government to court saying they were still soldiers and they ought to be paid their arrears and be regarded as soldiers in active service. This case went up to the Supreme Court which eventually ruled that they were technically barred; they cannot claim pension or arrears. But the head of state, using his discretion, felt we should give them ex-gratia, a once for all minimal payment. That was the Shs 34 billion. 

Hon. Epetait is right that we have not paid all that money, reason being that when we set to pay, we had a reasonable estimate of how many people they were. When we went to the field, we actually found they were significantly more than we had estimated, which would call for more money. Even when we started paying, particularly the survivors, we ran into procedural problems with the Administrator-General. They had to take that route and these are scattered all over the country.

So, we had to go into negotiations with the Principal Judge so that special arrangements are made for either the chief magistrate or Magistrate Grade I out there in the field to swear affidavits of these people before they could bring their papers and get paid. That process caused a delay and the financial year was due to end. 

What we agreed with the Ministry of Public Service is that rather than return this money, since Public Service had arrears on other regular pensions, they borrowed that balance and we were promised that starting this financial year, that money would be reimbursed and then we go and complete payment. But as I have said, even when we are given that balance, we are on the way to Cabinet to get additional money because we found more people than we had anticipated. 

Therefore, in fixing the time scale, I would plead with hon. Epetait that let us be practical. Let us use the word, “expeditious” and urge our committee to follow this matter and keep the House informed. When we go to Cabinet, it will take a bit of time. We may or we may not find the money. If we close the gate and say “within six months”, this may not happen. The reality on the ground may not bear us out. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the proposal that we have made is in the interest of Government. Ex-servicemen have really suffered throughout the country; opening bank accounts, after selling their pigs and chicken; mortgaging pieces of land with a hope of being paid, only for the bank charges to swallow up whatever they will have deposited into their accounts without receiving the pay. Year in and year out, we have heard this argument from the Ministry of Defence.

The Minister of Defence updated the House that the verification exercise had been completed and that you were now in full gear in clearing the backlog. I do not see any reason why we should now start fearing to put a timeframe. I would go by what the committee chairperson has proposed that three months sounds a little short. Let us help our ex-servicemen to access their money. I would, therefore, go by the amendment that the chairperson has proposed of six months. 

Hon. Members, I beg for your support. (Applause)

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, the spirit of the proposed amendment is good and we would like to see the ex-servicemen rewarded accordingly. The problem we are facing is the issue of the period. It is practically important that we get the input from the ministers. It is very important because we were pressing and –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we then impose a review period by this House of six months and we see how far it has gone? Would that be appropriate? Hon. Epetait, the committee comes back to Parliament in six months to update Parliament on what progress has been made.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I just want to plead with our Members of Parliament to go and read the Auditor-General’s report. We initially made a contingent liability under Ministry of Defence of Shs 107 billion, partly for the money for pension, gratuity and ex-gratia. Eventually, it was taken off as arrears. If you went and checked with your records, this money was already approved and maybe even passed over and mismanaged. 

If it has not been mismanaged, again we will need the committee to look at the money that we have passed for payment of soldiers’ pension, gratuity and ex-gratia. The money is there, you will discover that this money already exists but some people may have mismanaged it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the way forward?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The way forward is that in the six months we will be carrying out a review of where the money was put. And if it is not in the system, we should put it there. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Leader of Opposition, for accepting my objection. If we are going to review, then we do not review after six months. We review after three and we confirm after six months.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I am trying to talk about is that we appropriated that money and if you check, you get the Shs 107 billion, which was a contingent liability in your accounts. I think it was taken over by Public Service. We review within two months and we should be able to pay our ex-servicemen within six months.

MR KATUNTU: I would like some clarification from you hon. Minister. From the earlier submission of the minister, I understood what he said to mean that money was received by Defence but somehow, he lent it out to the Public Service. You need to clarify who was borrowing or lending out.

It is common sense that when I am lending out money, I should know when I am being paid. May we have all those details saying, “We lent out this money and it was supposed to be paid within two months after the next financial year.” If money has already been appropriated and the beneficiaries are entitled to Shs 600,000 after a year, the Shs 600,000 will not be the same value. Hon. Dr Kiyonga why can’t you have pity on people who have served under your docket?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is a simple one. Where you have put the money or who has borrowed it is not of essence to us now; that can be found out by the committee. The last proposal that has been made is that review takes place after three months and then after six months, you should do something. That is what I want you to comment on such that we move forward.

DR KIYONGA: Our interest as Ministry of Defence is because they were former employees of the Ministry of Defence otherwise payment of pension, gratuity and ex-gratia is the work of the Ministry of Public Service. 

For us, we are following to make sure that these steps are being undertaken. What I want us to consider is whether this is a committee dealing with Public Service or Defence or both of them. In actual payment, it is the Ministry of Public and not the Ministry of Defence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They can handle the matter jointly; you can have a joint committee session to deal with that particular issue and then they resolve it. Is that ok? Can we now take a vote on the motion for the adoption of the report?

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to make two corrections. The first one is on page 61. We understated the figure of the budget of the Ministry of Defence when we said that it was Shs 947 billion. It should read as it is stated on page 11 that it should be Shs 957.992 billion. 

The second is about the Ministry of Internal Affairs on page 60. The budget provision of Shs 101,278,636,000 billion has been made. We actually erred as you can see on page 61, among the items that are not funded includes the Shs 3 billion. The question of construction of border posts actually require that Shs 3 billion, which is not provided for. I wish to make those corrections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion that the report of the committee be adopted as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, Mr Chairman, for guiding us through this process. It is now 1.35 p.m. We will suspend the proceedings to 2.30 and then continue. The spirit you have demonstrated should be kept up. The House is suspended until to 2.30 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 1.46 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 3.04 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members and welcome back from the break. We delayed - we should have started at 2.30 but when we left here, we went to receive a petition from the leadership and students of Makerere University. The Guild President, his cabinet and people from the Guild Representative Council had urgent issues and some other issues that they wanted this Parliament to have a look at and I think these are some issues, which I should draw the attention of the House to, given that we are going to discuss some of the matters in the plenary on the matters that are on the Order Paper.

Early in the morning, I received a notice for the reception of an urgent petition, which was given to me. The students came here at 7.30 in the morning and when we suspended Parliament, I went and found them waiting. It was a group of ten students dressed in their university gowns and the issue they were raising was the lecturers’ strike. They are making some requests that I was able to talk to them about and also discuss one or two things with them. 

I also invited the Chairman of the Committee on Social Services to come and be with me while I received this petition. I am sure some of the matters will be addressed in the course of the debate but it is certainly urgent. If you read the papers, what happened yesterday - and there are some rumours about some actions that have been taken by the Executive or something like that which they were communicating but which we cannot substantiate because they have not come to us formally. They are concerned that the continuation of the strike of the lecturers might cause more anxiety among the students, which could end up causing problems at the university. 

So, they are expecting that Parliament should find a way of bringing some harmonisation between the lecturers and the issues they are raising to the Government, so that activities at the university can carry on. I thought I should let the House know this because that is what we were doing just ten minutes ago. I thought I owed you an explanation as to why we delayed and that is why I am giving you this information. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, are you ready -

MR CHEMASWET: I think the Chairman of the Committee on Social Services is not around just because - (Interjections)- the spelling on the Order Paper is not right -(Interjections)- yes, the chairperson could be around but what is on the Order Paper is quite different. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What were you saying, hon. Member?

MR CHEMASWET: I am saying that what is on the Order Paper is not social services. So what is it, Mr Speaker? (Laughter) That is why the chairman was not around. He did not see social services on the Order Paper. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the editorial. Mr Chairman, are you ready to proceed? Yes, hon. Seninde.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. We are going to listen to a very important committee report but we have not received copies. I wonder how we shall proceed to discuss this report before we have copies in our hands; we want to follow. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have made several rulings on this point that when the chairman is making a presentation, you take notes and you make references on the basis of that -(Interjections)- the reason is simple. The reports are going to be coming soon. We will proceed. Take note and when you finally get a copy of the report, you will make specific references. We have ruled on this matter before. We know the situation we are dealing with, so let us not complicate it anymore. 

3.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving us this opportunity. The copies of the report are available and they should be distributed. They are no longer in my hands but in the hands of the Clerk to Parliament. 

I want to thank you for this opportunity and as I stand here as chair of the committee and you sit there as Speaker, I remember our old days when you used to be Speaker of Makerere and I was the chair of all chairmen. (Laughter) In the morning I was seeing hon. Fox Odoi speaking and at the time when he was Guild President, I was the minister of health. So, I was waiting for when he would become Speaker so that I can also become a minister. (Laughter)

This report - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have 25 minutes. (Laughter)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you. I would like to thank colleagues for the work they have done tirelessly. This report scrutinises the ministerial policy statement of two ministries, that of Health and that of Education. 

On page 1, we have given the methodology of how we handled the various sectors. We are handling a total of 30 Votes: nine Votes under the Ministry of Education and 21 under the Ministry of Health. This report highlights the sector performance for the year 2010/2011, the mandates of the ministries and affiliated institutions, key sector achievements for the previous financial year, pending and ongoing activities, financial performance for that period and constraints and challenges. 

The report further elaborates key plans, programmes for the year 2011/2012, unfunded priorities and programmes, budget proposals and also the status of the fulfillment of the committee recommendations of the last financial year.

The report further handles issues that were referred to the committee that had budgetary implications. For example, we had a petition of the teachers and we also had the petition of the civil society that was referred to us by you, Mr Speaker.

We also give recommendations and observations.

The report is divided into the two parts: that of education and health. From pages 3 to page 32 we raise issues that relate to education. From pages 33 to page 96 there are issues that relate to health. 

I will not go into the issues because of time but the performance of the sector, the activities, mandates and other issues are clearly elaborated in that report. 

I now go to the observations and recommendations of the committee. I will start with the Ministry of Education. On capitation grants under the primary section, the committee observes that capitation grants to primary schools had been increased from Shs 6,000 to Shs 7,000 but this falls below the Shs 10,000 that Parliament had recommended last financial year. The committee, therefore, recommends that the amount be increased to Shs 10,000 starting from next financial year.

The second issue is on the policy of automatic promotion. The committee observed that the policy of automatic promotion under UPE had the effect of compromising quality. However, the ministry was of the view that the quality issue was being addressed through implementation of various programmes, including “Books in the Hands of People” policy, continuous assessment of the remedial classes and continuous capacity building for the teachers.

The committee recommends that the ministry comes up with annual analysis on the impact of automatic promotion of pupils who would, otherwise, not be fit to move to the next level especially on the subsequent academic progress of such pupils.

The third issue is feeding in schools. In the last financial year committee report, the ministry was requested to consider feeding of children in schools. The committee observed that the ministry is working with several stakeholders to conduct studies on the matter of school feeding to inform government policy position.

The committee recommends that among the measures to address the quality of learning in primary schools, feeding should be taken seriously especially taking into account the fact that parents have failed to provide for food and there is a high level of food insecurity in many parts of the country.

The Ministry of Education and Sports should further establish the cost implication of school feeding for consideration by Government.

Girl Child Education

The committee observed that the rate of completion of primary seven by the girl child in 2009 stood at 34 percent compared to 74 percent for boys. The committee was informed that a lot of progress has been achieved through the several programmes including establishment of a gender desk, and others. The committee recommends that there is need for special intervention to help keep the girl child in school, including provision of sanitary towels.

The fifth issue was arising out of the petition on the welfare of teachers by the Uganda National Teachers’ Union. The committee observed that the grievances of teachers are legitimate and wishes to pronounce itself on each of the issues in the petition as follows.

Pay Rise for Teachers

The teachers’ union demanded a pay rise of 100 percent for all teachers, which would improve pay for the lowest paid teacher from Shs 260,000 to Shs 520,000. The committee was informed of the steps taken by Government to address the grievances of the teachers and welcomes the proposed enhancement of teachers’ salaries by 44 percent beginning next financial year.

The committee appreciated the fact that the total package of Shs 260,000 for a teacher is on the lower side but was mindful of the difficulties that may be faced by Government in enhancing the teachers’ pay by 100 percent.

The committee further noted that the ministry has allocated substantial resources to areas that are prone to wastage, abuse and diversion like workshops, entertainment, travel inland and abroad, fuel, vehicle maintenance and repairs, among others.

The committee was convinced that there should be a balance between expenditure on top administrators and frontline actors like the classroom teachers who are critical to the service user.

The committee, therefore, recommends a phased increase in the salaries of all teachers beginning with an increment of 20 percent this financial year. To achieve this, the committee proposes a re-allocation of Shs 29.9 billion from wasteful expenditures at the ministry headquarters to wages for teachers to partially cater for this provision.

The ministry should further find additional funds to realise the 20 percent enhancement. Additionally, the committee urges Government to achieve 100 percent enhancement of teachers’ salaries in the next three years.

Pay As You Earn

The teachers proposed an increase in the PAYE threshold from the current Shs 130,000 to Shs 230,000 to enable the lowest paid teacher have reasonable disposal income.

The committee noted that this has been a long standing matter in Parliament and accordingly, the relevant committee should squarely deal with it with a view of considering exempting teachers form PAYE.

Operationalisation of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA): the teachers, through their union, demanded for the operationalisation of the CBA. The agreement would provide a framework within which the teachers would negotiate with Government and other relevant institutions on issues relating to the working conditions of the teachers.

The committee recommends that the CBA be operationalised as a matter of urgency.

Science Teachers’ Allowances

The teachers were concerned with the exclusion of some science teachers in the salary enhancement for scientists. The Ministry of Public Service did not capture some of the science teachers on their list. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should liaise with the Ministry of Public Service to include all science teachers under this scheme.

Hard-to-reach (Area) Allowances

Concern was raised over the hard-to-reach (area) allowance because not all teachers in the areas that are designated as such were receiving the said allowance. Those in the hard-to-reach districts but stay within the municipalities and urban councils are excluded. In addition, other districts that are hard to reach are excluded from the list. 

The committee recommends a review of the criteria for determining hard to reach areas to give true reflection of the difficulties in accessing of certain places.

The last point under that petition was insensitivity at the ministry headquarters. The committee was concerned about the apparent insensitivity by the top administrators about the welfare of the lowest people in the rank and file of the working class, possibly because of the parasitic rewards accruing from diversions from areas such as allowances and cash.

The committee, therefore, will undertake an investigation to establish value for money spent by the ministry in these wasteful and non productive areas and report to Parliament in six months.

Secondary Level

Capitation Grants:
The capitation grants for secondary schools at the rate of Shs 41,000 for government schools and Shs 47,000 for private participating schools, are not only inadequate but also reach the schools late.

The committee recommends an upward revision of the grants and release of the funds in time preferably before the opening of the school term.

Gaps in Universal Primary Education and USE

The committee observes glaring gaps in UPE and USE and has reservations over the proposed roll out of USE to bring senior five on board this financial year.

There are concerns over quality, relevant infrastructure and declining standards in the schools. Additionally, the resources provided for the roll out of USE to cover senior five beginning this financial year are inadequate.

The committee recommends that the Government should take stock of the gaps in the UPE programme to avoid a repeat of similar problems in implementing universal A’ Level education. Additionally, consideration should also be made to avail substantial resources for the roll out of the programme. 

Under the current Government policy, every sub-county is meant to have a USE school. We observed that this has not been achieved, while in some cases, Government entered into a memorandum of understanding with private schools to provide universal education. We recommend that USE schools should be established in all sub-counties, including in those sub-counties where we have UPE participating private schools. 

The committee observed that not every county has a BTVET institution as the policy requires. Secondly, they lack the required equipment for learning purposes. The committee recommends that the process of availing BTVET institutions to every county be expedited, and more resources be provided to enhance skills training. 

The committee was also concerned that in some institutions students meet obstacles in accessing facilities and equipment for training. For example, in Jinja School of Laboratory Technicians, whereas practical work is essential for competence, all students have to pay to access laboratories and the hospital, Government sponsorship notwithstanding. And there were many other examples. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Education should, in consultation with other Government departments, harmonise the policy and accessibility of teaching facilities to students to overcome the suffering and harassment. For instance, a team should be set up to follow up Government institutions that have denied students access to laboratories and/or facilities or where those concerned do not offer their time for adequate teaching of students in health training institutions and/or hospitals, like the case of clinical officers. 

Payment of fees by the affected students should be regulated or even stopped. The Government should revise means of paying or increasing allowances of the doctors so that they can be motivated to teach the students. However, there should be an evaluation of the policy regarding the optimum placement of health training institutions in order to deal with the challenges arising out of the policy shift. 

Regarding the state of primary teachers’ colleges, the committee established that many institutions of higher learning are in a sorry state and that there is a glaring contrast between core and non-core primary teachers’ colleges with government selectively supporting the core PTCs to the disadvantage of the non-core PTCs. This has led to some non-core PTCs to operate in terrible conditions, like lack of water, transport and others. 

The committee recommends that Government should, as a matter of urgency, assess the status of all public institutions of higher learning and rehabilitate or renovate those in a sorry state, like NTC Unyama, Uganda Technical College Lira, Kabwangasi PTC and others. Additionally, non-Core Primary Teachers Colleges (PTCs) should be supported like their core counterparts.  

There was the issue of transport for colleges: the committee established that many public institutions, especially colleges of commerce and primary teachers’ colleges, lack transport in form of college buses. The committee recommends that Government should, as a matter of urgency, avail at least a college bus to all public institutions of higher learning, especially health training institutions, colleges of commerce and primary teachers’ colleges, which currently do not have.

The committee also established that the staff in the high institutions of higher learning, especially Law Development Centre and Makerere University, still have a problem with the way the National Insurance Corporation has handled their pensions. 

Additionally many institutions under the ministry are choking under peculiar strains. The resolution to the problem of the pension for LDC and Makerere University staff should be fast-tracked through dialogue meetings between the institutions’ staff and NIC. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should intervene in institutions with peculiar problems. And on this point, I lay before the House a letter, which was written by the Makerere University students. I am sure this matter – the Speaker has already commented on this. The committee will pick interest in the issues of Makerere and will be able to carry out an investigation and report to this House.

On unfulfilled pledges, the committee learnt that some institutions still have unfulfilled presidential pledges like college buses pledged by the President. These institutions include, among others, Kumi University, NTC Kabale and Kabwangasi PTC. The committee recommends that all past presidential pledges and government promises to institutions of higher learning be identified and cleared. Most of these are known at the grassroots but are not yet known at the top.

The committee established that there was a grievance about the non-implementation of the BTVET Act, leading to colleges of commerce being under continued supervision by Makerere University Business School. This has had several encumbrances, for instance, double payment of examination fees, double registration, delayed examination results, late delivery of examination papers and delayed processing of academic documents, among others. The committee recommends that the full operationalisation of all provisions of the BTVET Act should be fast-tracked.

On health training institutions, the committee received complaints from students in health training institutions like schools for nurses training, clinical officers and other allied health professionals who complained of corruption in interviews for students’ intake to the institutions. They alleged that some students with higher marks at A’ Level exams are left out in favour of those with lower marks. The committee recommends that the culture of interviewing students for enrolment to health training institutions, like schools for nurses training, clinical officers and other allied health workers should be reviewed in favour of a more credible approach.  

Mr Speaker, regarding skills development, the old-fashioned education system has contributed to churning out of a labour force, which cannot be absorbed, thus contributing to unemployment especially for the youths. Training institutions have glaringly not been informed of the required skills by labour markets contributing to the mismatch between supply and demand for labour. 

The youths entering the labour market lack the requisite skills for the available job opportunities. The country’s labour productivity is the lowest in East Africa due to inadequate skills that are relevant to the job market. Clearly, without a serious intervention, it is impossible to resolve the dilemma of about 390,000 labour market entrants annually with only 130,000 available jobs and a deficit of 260,000.

The committee recommends that there is need to overhaul the whole education system to match the products and the job market realities. Additionally, the Ministry of Education should work closely with that responsible for labour so that labour markets are used to effectively play the role of advising training institutions on the required skills. 

The committee further recommends that government should establish a strategy for job placement and apprenticeship to support all graduates from institutions of higher learning and job entrants.  Just like the case in other countries – where graduates are supported for about two years in order for them to get skills, experience on jobs and after that they can start their jobs. 

On National Council for Higher Education, the committee noted that the council receives only 40 percent of the required funds to execute its mandate. The gap has been partly addressed by a Shs 20,000 charge on each university student per year. The committee further observed that the council lacks the necessary equipment for verification of documents. The committee, therefore, recommends that funds should be availed to facilitate the council to procure the required equipment.

The committee will further investigate and assess the Shs 20,000 per student that was given to the council because many students are complaining and there were suspicions that this fee should be lowered instead of remaining at Shs 20,000. The committee will further assess that matter and be able to come back to the House.

On accreditation under the council for institutions of higher learning, the committee was concerned that the council lacks the capacity to accredit courses in institutions of higher learning in good time. Out of the 1,000 programmes currently running in the different universities, only 400 have been accredited. 

The committee recommends that the process of accrediting programmes be expedited. The council should resolve the dilemma of duplication of courses in the various institutions of higher learning because there are many courses that have been duplicated.

On the sports sector, the committee observed that there are plans to set up a high altitude training centre in Bukwo. However, the committee is concerned that there are plans to displace a primary school to build it elsewhere at a cost of Shs 400 million.

The committee recommends that both the school and training centre should co-exist. This will cut the costs of relocating the school and make the facility accessible to the pupils. 

Under Special Needs Education, the committee observed that there is limited funding extended to this sector and its left to churches, charities and NGOs.

We also observed that there was no provision for medication yet students with disabilities, especially the mentally impaired, have complications that require medication often. 

There was also need to handle the peculiar difficulties encountered in teaching these special needs children and, therefore, the normal 1:10 pupil ratio may not be applicable in this case. There were many other challenges in this area.

The committee, therefore, recommended that there should be deliberate measures to train more teachers in the area of special needs.

We also recommend that more special needs facilities should be established to increase accessibility and Government should have an increased presence in the privately owned special needs institutions, through the PPP arrangement -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Twenty minutes – 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. This report has many issues. Let try to sort out –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go to the critical issues.

DR LYOMOKI: I thank you. The committee made recommendations on Busitema University, Makerere University Business School, Uganda Management Institute (UMI) especially on the issue of the duplication of the Civil Service College and UMI. The others were Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Gulu University and acquisition of land. The details of these recommendations are contained in the report, which I will be laying on the Table immediately after I present this summarised version.

Health Sector

The committee observes the skewed allocations in the lower segment of the service delivery. Significant sums of money are spent in non-priority areas such as allowances, workshops, seminars and others.
 
Considering the human resources structure and available resources, the committee is of the view that money sent to this sector could be utilised to address priorities like recruitment and motivation at the lower delivery service units.

The committee, therefore, recommends emergency measures to address the crisis in gross understaffing and absenteeism facing the public health sector that is - in the view of this committee - impeding an effective response to critical health priorities in Uganda, including preventable maternal, new born and infant mortality.

The committee further noted that maternal and child mortality rates in Uganda are high, currently at 435 and 137 per 100,000 live births respectively – (Interruption)


MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much for allowing me. We are dealing with the Social Services Committee report, which is very important and has more than 100 pages. We are trying to follow up when he was reading observations and recommendations. I am very mindful about the limited time in which we have to conclude this work, but considering the importance of this sector – I know that you have given him 10 minutes and for that reason he is also moving very fast, making it a little difficult for us to follow. (Applause)

Isn’t it possible, Mr Speaker, (for him to slow down) with your assurance of giving him more time so that we can also be in position to follow what he is presenting and be in position to contribute to the report that he is making?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have given him 20 minutes but now you have taken three. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, proceed.

DR LYOMOKI: I thank you. The committee established that the staff stood at an average of 56 percent of agreed staffing norms at national level, but 53 percent at the district level and some of them had less than 30 percent.

According to available information, many health workers at specialist and other levels have left the country to neighbouring countries, because remuneration and working conditions that are better in those countries -(Interruption) 


MR KYANJO: I thank you. I want to build on the cry that was raised by my senior colleague, hon. Tashobya. We are discussing a very sensitive report. In your own communication, you indicated there was a burning issue at Makerere and when the chair was reading because of the pressure of time, he skipped Makerere as if it were not an issue. It is going to be extremely surprising if Members were capable of debating this same report which the chair has not been able to properly present to the House. 

I would beg for your indulgence, Mr Speaker that we move procedurally right. We know the pressure of time but we also know the necessity of accuracy in dealing with these issues. I that you allow the chair to go fairly systematically so that we can listen clearly to the report and then we could deal with the debating tomorrow rather than simply standing up to begin debating a report we have not been able to comprehend. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members – 

MR OBOTH: I thank you. I would like to seek your guidance on how some of us without copies may proceed especially that we all agree that it is very important that we get involved in the debate and follow the debate but we do not have copies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I said we have ruled on this matter very many times, that you take notes and discuss what has been presented. The reports will come and now you have got a copy but we have already taken time responding to this.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There was a deliberate attempt by the Parliamentary Commission to ensure that every Member of Parliament has access to a computer. Because of this, even as we wait for better opportunities, could be for laptops, the essence of this was for us to have communication both official and informal through the network. Why should a Member of Parliament wait for a hard copy of a report when the same report could have been sent to his computer and he could browse through a soft copy? May I, therefore, propose a procedural issue that, now that the reports are being concluded, in future once the report has been approved for circulation; let a soft copy be sent to the Members of Parliament so that Members can have access to the same report even without a hard copy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise again on a point of procedure. I would like to add my voice to my colleague, hon. Kyanjo. I would like to request, now that you have ruled that the chairman continues to read the report, let him present the report; we sleep over this and then debate tomorrow -(Interjections)- the reason I suggest this is that some Members have not got the report.

Secondly, the report is a big document and we need to go through it, we need to read it and we have just been given the report on the Floor. We need to read this report and ably discuss it tomorrow. Mr Speaker, I beg to request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have just lost 17 minutes doing nothing. Seventeen minutes of absolutely wasted parliamentary time. Can I ask the chairman to proceed and we cross the bridge when we reach it? I am not going to allow any more interruptions. Kindly, do not stand up.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was handling the issue of human resource -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we listen to the presentation in silence, please?

DR LYOMOKI: And, Mr Speaker, I had already noted the findings of the committee that the percentage of field posts is low. Many of the specialists have left the country because of remuneration issues and that it was further becoming very difficult to attract and retain medical workers in some areas due to very low levels of remuneration.

The committee further noted that despite the fact that the ministerial policy statement articulated that matter of very low percentage of positions filled in comparison to the staffing norms and that health care human resource recruitment and retention is important, no practical measures have been developed to achieve this. 

The committee also recognised, as earlier noted, that the budget includes efforts which have been made to increase equipment for health facilities as well as some investment in staff housing and other health facilities. However, the committee was of the view that without simultaneous efforts to increase the financial remuneration as well as the concentration of skilled, motivated and supervised health workers, these efforts to equip lower health facilities will most likely be wasted investments and additional white elephants. The sector should ultimately have to come up with innovative measures to attract, retain and motivate health workers.  

The committee, therefore, had a series of recommendations in that area.

The first one is that the committee calls upon the Ministry of Health to develop improved innovations aimed at attracting skilled and motivated human resource, ensuring their adequate distribution and specific reproductive interventions targeting the adolescents and to refocus the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6 by the year 2015.

The second recommendation under that area was that an adequate reallocation of funds to increase the absolute number, equitable deployment as well as the remuneration of priority and critical cadres of health workers should be undertaken. In this regard, the committee identified Shs 34 billion that had been allocated to areas that the committee observed were non-priority areas. So, part of the money was identified and the committee recommends that that amount be re-allocated to recruitment of 5,000 health workers of various categories, especially midwives.

The committee also noted that apart from recruitment, there will be need to retain and motivate that category of health workers and therefore, the committee recommended that an enhancement from this re-allocation be done specifically for health workers that are in general hospitals and lower units that is health centers II, III and IV.

The committee further recommended that in order for us to attract and retain the adequate number of health workers to be able to effectively impact on reducing maternal mortality, there was need for additional re-allocation from other sources to increase the level of funding necessary to Shs 75 billion. Seventy five billion is needed in order for us to retain critical health workers to impact on the current tragedy of losing sixteen mothers per day due to preventable issues.

The committee recommends that given the fact that the country is facing a crisis where 16 women are dying unnecessarily every day in child birth, the country should respond with appropriate sacrifices. 

The committee was of the view that these sacrifices, dedicated to address the health worker crisis, will focus on the shared goal of ensuring no pregnant mother has to make the ultimate sacrifice of losing her life while giving birth. The committee accordingly urges the House to source an additional Shs 41.304 billion from other sectors that have not yet acted on the directive of the Budget Speech for 2011/2012. 

Paradigm shift in Health Sector Strategic Plan: the committee noted that there is a need for a paradigm shift in the way the health sector strategic plans are made. The dysfunction of the health system is deep and appears to be worsening. In the past, we have had Health Sector Strategic Plans I, II and III; but all these, in the view of the committee, were based on the same template and are really a continuous strategic plan with small incremental changes.  

The committee was not surprised, therefore, that key health sector indicators and targets have not been satisfactorily achieved using these plans over the past 15 years. The committee, therefore, shall within six months explore the current issues affecting the performance of the health sector to redress the current urgent problems of unavailability of medicines, inadequate and poorly paid human resources, poor management, and inadequate and inequitable health financing in the short-term. Also, we aim to build a template for a better health system in terms of strategic policy approach for capacity development, appropriate human resource framework, appropriate financing and the most appropriate organization of the health system for good management in the long-term.

The committee also noted that there is inadequate allocation to the health sector when compared to the Abuja Declaration of 15 percent of the domestic resources in the national budget. The current allocation is at only ten percent. The committee, in view of the foregoing urges Government to increase the budgetary allocation to the health sector to at least 15 percent in line with the Abuja Declaration. 

The committee noted discrepancies in the budgetary resources of Shs 273.1 billion under donor funding for the rehabilitation and supply of medical equipment in the central region, and yet only Shs 54 billion was allocated to renovate Masaka and Mubende hospitals. On the balance, the ministry was silent and yet this money is part of the ten percent. There was a balance of Shs 219 billion that was lying unutilized and yet we were going to pass the budget. That would end up being ghost supply and someone would take that money. 
 
The committee recommends the allocation of the Shs 219 billion for the equipping, modification and redevelopment of regional referral hospitals and general hospitals on the national highways. 

The committee noted that the sector greatly relies on donor funding which constitutes 90 percent of the ministry headquarters’ budget this financial year. These resources are mainly applied in the procurement of medicines, equipment and health supplies. Additionally, little attention is paid to other critical aspects of the sector. In addition, significant resources are also spent in non-critical areas such as workshops, seminars, foreign travel, purchase of vehicles, vehicle repairs, among others. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should ensure prudent and efficient utilisation of these donor resources. The committee further recommends that the ministry should strengthen donor coordination efforts to ensure that donor resources are spent on national priorities. 

The Ministry of Health and other stakeholders should immediately review and re-focus the activities planned under GAVI and Global Fund projects in order to pursue reprogramming investments into increased recruitment and retention of priority professional health workers, in particular nurses and midwives. 

Mr Speaker, one of the most important issues that came up to the committee was the issue of a reproductive health roadmap. The committee noted the two components of the roadmap to be implemented during the financial year namely; the basic component and the supporting health systems, with a major focus on the human resources. The basic heath component is estimated to cost US $65,350,913. The plan has specific sub-components that will be implemented this financial year. 

The committee was concerned about the activities that had been designed for that programme and it accordingly re-focused the activities and came up with a new roadmap working in conjunction with the Ministry of Health. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that aware of the current maternal and child mortality rates, which are high, the available resources should be utilized efficiently, implementing priorities that will create impact, as already agreed between the committee and the ministry. This agreement is well documented and, therefore, the committee insists that there should be no variation on the ground because we already agreed on that. 

Additionally, in order to improve specifically on reproductive health indicators, the committee recommends the following measures:

Starting this financial year the Shs 24 billion funds specifically allocated to reproductive health should target the priorities agreed on between the committee and Ministry of Health for the supplies of family planning commodities, community outreach, maternal health and facilitation of the Village Health Teams (VHTs) and supply of emergency obstetric commodities. 

The Mama Kits Funds should be ring fenced and put in the NMS. For the Financial Year 2011/12, the committee has re-allocated resources amounting to Shs 25,195,350,000 from the Ministry of Health headquarters towards human resources recruitment and enhancement under the decentralized payroll under local governments. The committee noted that without additional strategies, that money, which was coming in was not enough to undertake those activities and yet without those activities this would be wasted money; the programme would end and there would be no impact. 

There are a couple of other recommendations but because of time, I am going to pick some and others are clearly elaborated in the report.

The committee also noted staff absenteeism, poor attitude towards work and other unethical behavior. In fact in some of the facilities, theatres have for instance been turned into dormitories or stores for food. 

The committee recommends the strengthening of professional councils and the use of other professional structures in order to enforce discipline in this unit. The committee further recommends additional measures like coming up with contracts or digital time-in and time-out clocks to monitor the availability of health workers. 

The committee also noted the report that was given to it by the Minister of Health asking for enhancement of salaries of health workers not only in the area of maternal child health, but generally. According to the information from the ministry, this had been taken to Ministry of Public Service for implementation for the next financial year. Therefore, the committee recommends that this should be implemented in the next financial year in the areas and levels of remuneration as proposed by the ministry. Those levels and the proposal are attached to this report. Please, look at them.

The committee observed that there were challenges that have been experienced due to the decentralisation of health units and personnel. Yes, the decentralisation policy is good intentioned but some of the issues or challenges that have come concern the retention of workers and others. The committee recommends that the decision on decentralisation should be fast-tracked with categories of health workers being re-centralised. 

The committee also pronounced itself on the land and infrastructure, which in some cases has been encroached on or taken over by people who are not the owners of these health units or private developers. The committee recommends that all health facilities should secure their land titles with their land units being fenced off.

The committee also noted that most health units have dilapidated buildings that have to be demolished. The committee, therefore, recommends, particularly for those areas that have units that have to be renovated, the structures to be taken on board when handling the issue of renovations of the various health facilities.

Mr Speaker, let me also report that the committee has a recommendation on the accessibility and utilisation of health services by persons with disabilities because of the absence of ramps, sign language services in some health centers, poor or inadequate care and lack of specific medication such as the medicines for epilepsy. The committee recommends that the Ministries of Health, Local Government and that of Gender should comply with the provisions of the Persons with Disability Act. We also recommend that all health units, starting with referral hospitals, should provide services for sign language and other issues that relate to persons with disabilities.

The committee also noted the issue of overwhelming accumulation of arrears for utilities like water and electricity in many government health facilities especially the regional referral hospitals. Some of these arrears date back to several years ago but they have not been cleared.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the ministry liaises with the ministry of finance so that payments for utilities are paid directly by that ministry as soon as they arise.

The committee also has a recommendation on the pending legislation like the one on health insurance, food safety and others. In that regard, the committee recommends that there should be expeditious handling of these laws to ensure smooth supervision, regulation and financing because some of them deal with finances. Many of these legislations had been proposed but are still in the pipeline. That is why we recommend that the pipeline bears results.

The committee had several recommendations on the institutions under the Ministry of Health, for example, the National Medical Stores (NMS). It was noted that there has been reasonable progress in the procurement and delivery of medical supplies to the health centers across the board compared to the past. This is due to the new policy where National Medical Stores gets 100 percent of its funds.

There are challenges that have been noted under NMS. The committee has proposed a series of recommendations in order to deal with those challenges. The intention is to improve on the efficiency of the delivery of medicines and other health drugs to the people. Since they are well and clearly written, Mr Speaker, I will not get into the specifics. 

Otherwise, there were a lot of recommendations that were made to deal with such challenges. Like I said, these recommendations are intended to make NMS more efficient. For example, there is a recommendation in regard to the Uganda Cancer Institute by way of moving Government to invest more in these specialised units so that we can save foreign exchange that is spent abroad on patients.

Mr Speaker, there is also a recommendation in regard to the Heart Institute, which has been improved and is doing very well. As a committee, we recommend that it is improved more.

For Mulago Hospital, the committee noted that on the non-tax revenue, a substantial amount was being collected at source. The committee also noted that service delivery at this hospital was being done by senior house officers, interns, nurses and midwives. The anomaly with this arrangement is that self-sponsored senior nursing officers lack accommodation. They are also not on the Government payroll, while the interns and midwives are inadequately motivated.

The committee notes that this could be one of the reasons for the existence of absenteeism and extortion of money from the patients. This is so because it was difficult to conceive how someone can work when they are not being paid.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health together with the management of Mulago Hospital finds a lasting solution to the problem of non-motivation of senior nursing officers and others, who do not appear on the payroll. One of the solutions was to use money that has been realised from the non-tax revenue or for the hospital to reallocate some of the funds that are being used on workshops and other activities that, in the view of the committee, are not very productive towards this arrangement.

The committee also recommends a special audit of all funds realised under non-tax revenue by the hospital in the last five years.

On the matter of procurement of equipment at Mulago Hospital, the committee observes that some of the equipment that are factory rejects are being procured by the personnel under dubious circumstances at inflated costs and have remained unused despite their urgent need. Value for money on equipment procured from funds approved in the last financial year could not be easily ascertained. 

When Mulago appeared with the list of what they had done, most of the lists were duplications; they were using different names on the same material. When the committee was supposed to visit Mulago - although we did not go – we got information that they had brought brand new things that were in the stores and put them in the casualty unit. They did not want Members of Parliament to find those brand new items in the stores. 

This has led to great loss of public funds and serious risk to the users. For instance, an information server, which was purchased by Mulago from India at a cost of US $480,000 in 2002, was found to cost only US $385,000 and it is not being used. It has not been switched on because of several reasons. There was a fluoroscope machine purchased at US $300,000. It has never been used on even a single patient but it lies in the assessment centre. 

The CT scan machine from China, which according to specifications was supposed to be original Philips from Netherlands, was inflated at US $800,000 instead of US $600,000. This CT scan machine was delivered in December 2001 but up to now, it does not work well and it has broken down many times. Doctors do not trust its results because it gives artifacts, creating a false impression of hemorrhages. The committee found it difficult to understand why the hospital continues to procure more equipment despite this scenario. There is a lot of rush to buy more and yet most of them are lying unused. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Nile Academy Atora Primary School, represented by hon. Betty Amongi, Member of Parliament Oyam. They have come to observe the proceedings. (Applause)

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, because of the scenario that I have just explained, the committee, therefore, recommends a forensic audit of equipment at the hospital, including the procurement processes and a report be tabled in this House. 

Another matter under Mulago was the issue of quality of services. Despite much investment in infrastructure and equipment, among others, the committee was concerned about an overwhelming public outcry and loss of confidence in services offered at Mulago. The situation has degenerated to crisis levels to the extent that in the labour ward, for instance, mothers give birth on the floor and along corridors, some even unattended to by a skilled health worker. You find mothers crying while midwifes are closed in a room and some other people assist the mother. Many patients continue complaining of being neglected or even being charged for services under the table. There are also many deaths occurring that could be avoided. 

The committee recommends a positive change in the operations at the hospital. In the meantime, the committee shall undertake an in-depth inquiry into the affairs and operations at this hospital and report to Parliament within three months. 

Concentration of Services at Mulago Hill

The committee noted the continued overconcentration of services at Mulago Hill. For instance, while Mulago complex has patient accommodation for obstetrics and gynecology, there is a proposal to build a women’s hospital at the same hill, which is very good. When we looked at the blueprint, we thought we were in a different country. While it is good to build a women’s hospital, the committee is of the view that there could be more value for money if the facility was located in another place, maybe even outside Kampala. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that in future, the Ministry of Health and other stakeholders should consider spreading out to other areas when considering such projects. There was also a recommendation on staff accommodation for health workers, which was in an appalling situation, therefore, leading to de-motivation. The committee recommends that accommodation should urgently be attended to in order to allow these health workers attain improvement in their welfare. 

There were also recommendations for Butabika and other regional referral hospitals. I will not go into the details. I just wanted to talk about the one of Mulago so that you have an idea of our recommendations. But overall, most of the referral hospitals were not performing their referral status. However, they had improved their infrastructure apart from two hospitals that had just come on board, that is, Mubende and Moroto Referral Hospitals. However, there were already programmes arranged for them to be renovated. 

As the committee noted, to provide health services, you need to have infrastructure, equipment and medicines and you also need personnel so that there is improved quality of service. Most of these health units had infrastructure, apart from the two. They had improvement in drug supply because of the new approach of the NMS. Apart from the challenges that we recommend to have resolved, they were grossly deficient in human resources. 

In some places, the specialists had left. Even in places where nurses where available 100 percent, they were doing work that they were not supposed to do. You would find a midwife acting as a medical officer. Then you would find a doctor acting as a specialist. There is only one doctor, so they refer cases to him. Most of them were either inefficient or they were handling duties that were above their capacity. So most of these referral hospitals were behaving like any other hospital.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you should prepare to finish. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you. The recommendation of the committee was to have those hospitals attended to so that their referral status functionality is restored.

Before I move on to the various allocations, with amendments, as clearly put in the report, I just need to comment on Makerere University, which I had skipped earlier.

At the moment, there is a conflict between staff of Makerere University and National Insurance Corporation. This matter has attracted the attention of Government. Since the beginning of their strike, students came in and started demanding that lecturers start lecturing. They were concerned as to why they should not be taught when they have paid.

Mr Speaker, this matter has been brought to your attention and we know that you will guide us on how best to handle this. It has two aspects; one side is that the lecturers went on strike and the students were becoming violent because of lack of lectures. Because of all these, Government has decided to close the university. 

The second issue pertains to the grievances that the students have brought and some of them relate to accountability and utilisation of the fees that they are paying. Things like poor infrastructure, lack of toilets and other issues. They also talked about the charges sanctioned by the Council for Higher Education saying that it is a lot of money.
 
I was invited to the meeting when the students were presenting this matter and I committed myself that the committee would take up these issues. We will undertake an inquiry into the affairs of the university. The students wanted a commission of inquiry which is really outside the mandate of this House. For us, we thought that as a committee, we can undertake an initial investigation that will lead us to a report and then have it tabled. Basing on the outcome of the report then we can decide on the next course of action. We can see whether the report is sufficient or whether we need more expert input.

Lastly, I thank the two Ministries of Health and Education for the co-operation they gave us when we were undertaking this report. We had some few clashes with the Ministry of Education but that of Health was 100 percent positive. We have new leadership at the Ministry of Health right from the minister to the PS and director general who look like people with a vision. The committee worked closely with them to make sure they can improve. There were few encumbrances that the committee will have to handle.
 
The procedure according to your ruling is that figures will not be read until we finish everything. I want to lay this report on the Table such that it can be handled and debated. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. That was a heavy one. I now give an opportunity to shadow ministers. We shall start with the one of education and then that of health will come later. You have ten minutes each.

4.30
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Franca Akello): Because we have a time crisis, I will not go into the details of my report but this is the Opposition’s response to the Ministry of Education and Sports. This office would have loved to have more time because there is a crisis in the Ministry of Education. We really needed time to discuss this but I believe that Members will have times to express themselves on the key issues that are coming up.
 
To start with, I know the copies will not be enough but do not worry because the problem is not mine. The office of the Leader of the Opposition has been able to print more copies than the 30 that the printery is providing.

I will begin by congratulating my colleague on the new ministerial appointment and I hope we will have a more honest policy to lift up this sector. 

The ministry, in accordance with the provisions of the Budget Act, prepared this ministerial policy statement following the prescribed format. We also observe that the format emphasises output as a basis for the medium term planning. We also note that little effort is made to make sure this output is put into serious practice. When you check on page 33 to 35 of the ministerial policy statement, the activities undertaken in the previous financial year have zero achievements. This is especially so on capital development. 

The other issue that comes up in the policy statement is the fact that this financial year, the allocation has actually been doubled. They have allocated Shs 1.416 billion, which is accounting for 14 percent of the budget resources. When you compare this to the previous one then you would expect service delivery to improve but in this case we are seeing a reduction in that and it is a disappointment.

In this country, all the good policies in place, including the affirmative action, which has lost focus, will not address the plight of the poor, to encourage national integration. This is demonstrated by the lack of national pro-poor and pro-people strategic policy direction. A student under the current USE programme can hardly compete with one from an established school with all the enabling facilities and yet they are subjected to the same examination. 

It is also common knowledge that children of the poor are the ones that are condemned in the UPE and USE schools while those of the rich attend palatial private schools, who also swallow up all the slots under the skewed government sponsorship in public universities, Mr Speaker. This is one of the key observations we are able to see as the Opposition and this is very unfair. 

In the area of science education, we also observed that the current Government attempt to promote science education is too inadequate for Uganda to realise meaningful progress in these areas. For example, making science subjects compulsory at O’ Level yet no serious efforts are put in place to construct science laboratories or equip libraries with science textbooks in all secondary schools, among other key interventions, is seen as a mockery to Ugandans by the Opposition.

Mr Speaker, after that statement, I was also trying to expand on this opinion, which is coming from our side. 

On page 5 paragraph 8, the sector allocated six percent of its resources, which is about Shs 88 billion for skills development and vocational education, which is called BTVET. It spells out the rules of the different stakeholders. This otherwise good law has not taken root as a budgetary allocation and facilities barely support the good intentions of creating jobs instead of seeking for jobs.

The plight of education in this country is very worrying. This year alone, the education sector has experienced many strikes ranging from teachers, students, pupils, to university lecturers and support staff and I believe this has been followed up – as per the communication of the chair as well. To make matters worse, nobody seems to care about these concerns especially of the teachers since even the President reluctantly says increasing teachers’ pay would destabilise the economy and subsequently engages them in dialogue or what we call talks, which we take as a measure meant to buy time. 

I would like all Members to remember that Shs 260,000 is not enough for the President’s breakfast –(Laughter)– but teachers are being told to carry this Shs 260,000 to their homes as salary for one month. As the Opposition, we are trying to pose questions: “Do we really think that this teacher has a wife or sometimes wives to take care of? Do we think that this teacher also has children to feed? Do we also think he has children to pay fees for?” When you respond to these questions, it becomes unworthy for the Ugandan teacher to simply carry Shs 260,000 home as salary. I think we need a better and sober approach to this issue and it is better we do it here because Parliament has the powers to improve the welfare of the teachers. (Applause)

We are also concerned about the commercialised education in this country. I will not repeat much of this because my shadow Minister of Finance talked at length about this issue; I will skip this in the interest of time. 

We in the Opposition recognise the physical education and sports sub-sector as a very crucial vessel for the integration and promotion of healthy living of Ugandans but this sector has increasingly received very little money. Year in and year out, this sector receives very little money. So, we want to request that we put more money into this area because the majority of the youths take interest in this area and you know that they constitute over 50 percent of the population of Uganda. 

There are a few recommendations on this policy statement that we made. Uganda is a signatory to a number of UN declarations including the UN Declaration on Human Rights. The Education Act 2008 makes UPE compulsory for all children of school going age. But according to the records we have and the reports that we have heard, about 25 percent of our children do not complete the UPE up to primary seven. So, this leaves a lot and we have so many factors. That is why as the Opposition, we would like to see every Ugandan child stay in school and enjoy their fundamental right to education. So, to ensure this, we propose that Government should address the above issues among the priorities, which issues I had outlined in the upper paragraph and I beg that Members will read this on their own. 

There is also an issue on the capitation grants. As a member of the committee, we discussed this issue at length and we have agreed on certain points but not all, that is why I had to put it also in our report. The amount currently stands at Shs 7,000 per child for a whole year. That is Shs 26 per day per child per term!

I wonder what Shs 26 per day per child does? In comparison with our neighbouring countries, we took a study as the Opposition and compared with our immediate neighbours like Kenya, who actually came and carried out a study on UPE from us because UPE in Uganda began in 1997 but Kenya began in 2003. But currently, an equivalent of Shs 40,000 is being given by the Kenyan Government per child per year, which is much more than what we give for the Ugandan child. Actually, the people who learned from us have overtaken us and I do not know where we are headed. The Opposition proposes that since we seemingly do not have enough resources, we are proposing a beginning point of Shs 15,000 per year. 

On teachers’ salaries, as observed in the overview above, primary school teachers should be appreciated for their contribution to society for shaping future leaders, including all of you here. Shs 260,000 paid to them per month, which is a daily out of pocket for most of you, cannot sustain a family for a whole month. So, we recommend a modest starting salary for at least Shs 550,000. Remember if the FDC or the Opposition were in power, this would be our starting salary –(Laughter)- we believe we could get resources because teachers are very important. We went ahead to compare with our neighbour Kenya where a primary school teacher earns a minimal salary equivalent of Shs 900,000 per month besides other allowances, and the Ugandan teacher is not asking for other allowances. They are simply asking for 100 percent increment, which would amount to Shs 560,000. 

So, in Kenya, besides Shs 900,000 a teacher gets housing allowance, health allowances, they also get commuter allowances and facilitation for hard-to-reach areas –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, can I be protected from the head of defence? I am so scared in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Minister of Defence is ordered to protect you. (Laughter)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

The Universal Secondary Education

Members, the challenges encountered by Government since the inception of UPE should have served as a springboard for the roll out of USE. However, with all the glaring deficits in the UPE programme, little, so far, has been learnt and this has occasioned the introduction of class shifts in schools purely for lack of classroom facilities. Surprisingly, there are some schools which have, as I speak, a teacher pupil-ratio of 1:300, which is very sad. This is very bad!

On capitation grants, we recommend that the Shs 47,000 given per child per term for the secondary schools is not enough. We recommend that it is raised to Shs 180,000 per student in the private schools and 140,000 in the government-aided schools.

Throughout the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Education and Sports, I never saw anything to do with lightning arresters or conductors and yet this has been a key, cross cutting issue this financial year. We, the Opposition, expected to see a responsible government come out with a budget to reinstall these lightning conductors or at least some activity as far as these lightning conductors are concerned. So, we categorically recommend that these lightning conductors be included in the budget for next financial year and it has to be taken seriously.

On higher education and skills development, we recommend that in the medium term, Government should operationalise the higher education loan scheme starting with the students from poor backgrounds. I know that the modalities are still being worked upon but we, in the Opposition, request that the process is hastened because there are so many poor children languishing at home who would otherwise benefit from this beautiful scheme. 

We also request that we redirect available resources from the skewed government tertiary sponsorship towards training and development of science teachers for secondary schools. 

We also request that we re-introduce pre-university youth programmes scaled up to two years with a comprehensive curriculum that includes attachments to industries or workplaces. This should be compulsory for all and it should not be a political brainwashing programme like it is usually the case for the Kyankwazi thing. (Applause) 

I want to conclude that the relationship between education and poverty in this country is very clear because educated people have higher income earning potential and are better able to improve the quality of their lives. Persons with at least the basic education are more likely to access a range of social services and to participate more actively in local and national governments through voting and community involvement. 

So, taking into consideration all this - the conclusion goes on and I do not want to read the whole of it. We are trying to emphasise the point on the importance of the education sector in this country. It is not only in this country but worldwide. You all know that without education, development cannot happen in any country. So, we request that we handle the sector with the seriousness it deserves.

To wind up, because I know I will not have an opportunity to make a comment on the statement made yesterday by my colleague, the hon. Minister, Jessica Alupo, with regard to the efforts to address the teachers’ grievances, we all share the challenges. We, in the Opposition, understand that we have challenges facing the country but the issues being raised by the teachers are very pertinent and we think the ministry should use more sober means. I want to call it more sober means because of the very last point of the honourable minister, in her concluding remarks where she said that, “Government, therefore, expects the teachers will report for duty when school is open on Monday, 05 September 2011, and if not will be left with no option but to apply sanctions as prescribed in the relevant regulations and Government standing orders”. 

We find this a very rude approach to the teachers’ problems in this country. (Applause) We find this a little more of a military approach to the teachers’ problems in this country. We expect even a military officer in this country cannot exhaust all his tools and moreover the teachers of this country have been humble. They have a good record. (Applause) Teachers have not laid down their tools. This has been the first time. So, I want to request that my colleague cools down. Let us all join hands together to see how best we can handle. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable shadow minister. Shadow Minister of Health, you have ten minutes.

4.53
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Michael Bayigga): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I beg for your indulgence. There have been some delays in the production of a written response –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, sorry for the interruption. This is a very important document for this Parliament and because I was not able to read it word for word, I beg to lay the Opposition response to the Education and Sports Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2011/2012 on the Table for the Hansard of this Parliament. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is accordingly captured. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: One Uganda, one people. (Laughter)

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank the chairman of the committee for enduring and presenting that report. May I now present the Opposition’s views and alternatives as regards the health policy in this country?

The main concern addressed by the Opposition is that the health sector resource allocation continues to receive abysmal funding coupled with non judicial financial management of the funds towards the support and strengthening of the health sector.

Critical to the existing state within the health sector are the issues relating to the following:

One is the insufficient budget allocation to match the dire need for health care, especially among the rural population and the urban poor.

Two, is the low levels of supervision, technical support and mentoring to ensure optimum service delivery and functioning of health units especially at lower local governments but also at the higher local governments.

Three, is the low reward and unchanging remuneration to health workers considering the crucial role they play and the regional and international salary competitiveness, which has resulted into brain drain to the rest of the world. The Ugandan doctor is the least paid in the East African region. The Kenyan doctor quadruples the salary of the Ugandan doctor and the Rwandan doctor triples the salary of the Ugandan doctor. Therefore, it cannot surprise anybody if at all there is brain drain towards where salaries are concentrated most.

The scanty staffing at health centre IIs, IIIs and IVs is very evident yet very many sub-counties lack even health facilities at health centre IIIs.

Low funds allocated to HIV/AIDS patients have led to the ARVs running out in various health centers, the general poverty and the scarcity of food, which has resulted in poor nutrition states of the patients on ARVs and expecting them to live a full life would be an over statement.

Five, with the maternal mortality rate of 435 per 100,000 births with the above-the-surface action of Government, the 2015 target of 131 per 100,000 births in tandem with the MDGs will not be achieved.

Lastly, it is absurd to find that the implementation of the installation of the solar panels on health centre IIIs and IVs is not in the hands of the Ministry of Health, which in the near future may create problems given that such facilities are needed all over the country.

As an overview, the Government of Uganda has continued to under fund the health sector, leaving the operations to run under huge budget deficits, which has resulted into poor service delivery, high maternal and infant mortality rates, deficiencies in access to critical drugs and run down health facilities and equipment.

The situation in regional referral hospitals is, therefore, characterised by overwhelming numbers of the sick, unimaginable doctor to patient ratio, lack of drugs, dysfunctional clinical equipment, queues for surgeries and other specialised care, among others. In short, Ugandans are greatly suffering. 

The budget projections on the health sector budget allocation reflect a high percentage allocation of resources to health systems development of over Shs 340 billion and meager resources to sector monitoring and quality assurance.

This is contradictory in itself in that with little or no monitoring, service delivery will continue to be poor at health centers. Improvements in service delivery can only be achieved with the strengthening of monitoring within the sector. For as long as the poorly paid health workers are aware that there are no repercussions for poor service delivery, the quality of health service will continue to deteriorate in this country.

The health sector funding is largely donor driven. For instance, this financial year, 90 percent of the health sector budgets at the ministry headquarters is donor funded thus the priorities may not necessarily be what comprise urgent national priorities. This, therefore, implies that interventions under this sector will continue not to address the health issues in the country.

Corruption has not spared the health sector and it is rampant not only at the highest level but also at district and sub-county levels yet programme heads continue to evade the long arm of the law because of maintaining highly placed Godfathers.

There are two action points that we want to give to this Parliament and to this country. The Opposition is proposing that there is need for an urgent health integrated study not only for hospitals like Mulago, but it should be a sector integrity study. It should touch not only the practitioners of medicine and surgery but it should also touch the administrators and all those stakeholders who are involved in service delivery in the health sector in this country.

The second action point is that we should carry out a comprehensive and participatory evaluation and review of the implementation of the Health Sector Strategic Plans I, II, and III as observed by the committee. There have been meager changes, if any, since the Health Sector Strategic Plans I, II and III were implemented. This means that the prescribed indicators, including improvement in quality of life, reduction of morbidity and mortality and the improvement of welfare of the health care providers among others, have not been realised. The review should access the conciseness of the philosophy, its comprehension by its key implementers, the commitment of Government to fund the plan and the cooperation of the various stakeholders who are involved in the implementation of these strategic plans.

There are a number of recommendations that we had in the last financial year and I would like to recap them so that we can memorise what we had to recommend and whether or not the health sector adopted them. Then we can speak with confidence that if at all we make other recommendations, the health sector can trap them and make use of them so that we do not waste time or have rituals in debating the Budget.

The Opposition raised concern over the 2010/2011 health sector resource allocation and this still continues to plague this sector:
(a) 	There was inadequate budget allocation as compared to the magnitude of health care needs.
(b) 	Inadequate and inappropriate facilitation, guidance and support supervision of local government health units, particularly district health offices and general hospitals.
(c)  	There was under-staffing of health facilities especially the lower facilities like health centre IVs, IIIs and IIs.
(d) 	There was corruption over which we recommended that Government takes stern action to reverse them. We observe with disappointment that nothing much has been achieved!

The Opposition has some responses and key recommendations to make:

To address the inadequate human resources for health, particularly the medical doctors, we recommend that these key officers, their distribution, posting and management must be re-centralised. If at all we continue with a decentralised system as it is without considering the fact that the local governments have failed to attract, retain and even to pay health workers, then we shall continue to have our patients suffer with the lower cadres in the lower health facilities where the people are most concentrated.

To overcome the referral of patients for care outside the country where Government loses colossal sums in foreign exchange, Government should make deliberate strategic investment in healthcare, not only to treat our own citizens but also to take over the regional health care market for economic reasons. It is shameful to find experts in healthcare coming from Uganda to the rest of the world where they are well paid, including countries with smaller economies like Rwanda.

We need to re-think the targeting for maternal and child health by targeting the staffing, equipping support supervision of health centre IIs and IIIs, where the majority of the people live; and to build partnerships with private health practitioners.

Mr Speaker, we made a tour of the Western region, particularly the Kigezi sub-region and these were the findings we made. 

Most of the patients are crowded in the regional referral hospitals leaving the lower health facilities without jobs. They crowd in the regional referral hospitals where they expect help yet there is a lot of help in lower level health centers IVs, IIIs and IIs but there is lack of health practitioners there.

Budget allocation to community health; the village health teams, which have been talked about – the concept is a mockery in Uganda. Where you get a chance to find village health teams, they do not work because of poor funding and prioritisation by Government and yet this is where the citizens live. Specific community health assignments should be detailed to village health teams to address sanitation, nutrition, antenatal care, attendance in health centers and community counselling on wellness and health-seeking behaviour. Where you have a chance to find village health teams, they will only be called if at all there are some mosquito nets or Coartem to distribute to the community but not necessarily for them to carry out these vital functions, which could move us from curative to preventive measures.

Uganda needs to adopt a long-term perspective for the health sector, which will lead to a transformation strategy from curative to preventive health care. It is only in Uganda where we allocate colossal sums of money in buying medicines with the National Medical Stores, troubling them to take medicines to all health centers and blaming them for not distributing well and so on; and yet we could invest in the prevention of the diseases from infecting people. That is where the gist of the matter is.

Lastly, we need to define what we regard as fundamentals for our healthcare. For example, a direct tax for all salaried citizens to supplement the health budget; tough laws to address community health and availability of food for all citizens and; the Government’s obligation to fund HIV/AIDS interventions, instead of shifting the burden to outside countries and humanitarian agencies.

In summary, without funding or significant increases commensurate with the Abuja Declaration and without an integrated survey carried out to ensure that the providers actually provide the healthcare as it should be, and the judicious expenditure of what is available, the health sector is going to continue to be a pain to the majority of our population, particularly those who live in rural areas. I beg to lay this summary on the Table awaiting a full report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, it is 5.10 p.m. We will open debate because this is a large sector and I am being very considerate. I see Members standing when the Speaker is speaking. (Laughter) We will close general debate at exactly 6.00 p.m. then I will invite responses from the ministers and then the chairperson. Each person will use two minutes.

5.12
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the good work done by the committee and the response made by the shadow ministers. As far as education is concerned, I echo the cry of teachers. The quality of education accessed by our children depends on the psychological and physical satisfaction of the teachers. From yesterday, the media have been informing us that as of now, Uganda is experiencing inflation at 21.4 percent. Our teachers are paid only Shs 260,000 and yet they go to the same market where Members of Parliament, ministers and executive directors of all these big corporations go. These are the same teachers whose children go to the same schools and universities on private sponsorship where most of us send our children. Are we honestly being fair to these people who earn less than US $100 per month? Mind you, these are people like us, who, apart from being parents, have families to take care of.

I think it is only proper that we put this into context when we are talking about the commitment to improve the welfare of our teachers. It is true the committee has made a proposal of gradual increment of 20 percent. But when you look at 20 percent of Shs 260,000, it comes to Shs 40,000 and something – Shs 52,000. Surely, is that worth coming up to say that you are looking into the fate of our teachers? My appeal to Government is that please, be considerate. Look around and see to it that the welfare of teachers is taken into account while emphasising the issue of the quality of education. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker -(Member timed out_)

5.15
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): I thank you. I stand to raise two issues. First, I would like to applaud the recommendations given by this committee and in particular say that I support the identification of wasteful and non productive areas in the health sector because that is where most of our money has been going. I have been in that ministry for a long time and I agree that that is where the money is going. That money must be shifted to productive areas. (Applause) 

The Budget Committee should sit down and re-organise the budgeting structure so that they put caveats or ceilings on these non productive areas starting this financial year. (Applause)

Secondly, I would like to applaud the paradigm shift. The Ministry of Health and the health sector in general has been lagging behind the current issues because they are depending on an old template. I was part of this template formation in the 1990s and I am surprised that in 2011, we are still using the same template, which was dictated to us by the World Bank. Let me tell you the World Bank told us to make a template based on the following issues:
1.	User fees;
2.	Privatisation;
3.	Deregulation;
4.	Minimum expenditure in the health sector because more expenditure would disorganise the economy.

I was part of this and I have the documents, which I can lay on the Table another time. I would like to applaud the recommendation that a new template be created for the Health Sector Strategic Plan and that this study, which is going to take six months, should remove the current strategic plan and create a new one so that we redeem the health sector from what it is today. (Member timed out_)

5.18
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): I wish to thank the committee for doing such tremendous work and also the Opposition for the responses. I specifically stand to address two issues. The first one is the nature and type of education we are providing for our children. If you look at the world, one of the biggest challenges we have in Uganda is provision of jobs for our children. Until now, we are providing education, which is giving theory to our children and the child leaves university when he can hardly do any practical thing with his or her hands. (Applause) We specifically need a paradigm shift in this area.

What worries me is that when you look at the recommendations about BTVET, education in Uganda looks at technical education as if technical education is for the failures; that when you fail to go to the university or fail to advance, then these are the people who must be condemned to technical education. This must change if we are going to industrialise this world. (Applause)

In 1991, when I was the Guild President of Makerere University, I went to Cyprus and Cyprus did not have a single university but they had technical schools. If you look at the products that we import from China, India and all these Asian countries, they are not made by graduates but by people who are trained in technical education. Mr Speaker and hon. Minister for Education, help us get a paradigm shift in this sector.

The second issue I want to address in the health sector is higher education for our doctors. If you go to Mulago and many of these medical schools, you find that the workload is being borne by the students who are doing postgraduate education. If students are doing postgraduate education and are not employed and they are paying their own tuition and yet they are bearing the workload in hospitals, then something must be done if we are going to change the nature and provision of education in this country. Either Government must re-centralise higher education so that somebody whose higher education is going to be paid for by the nation should be willing to sacrifice his time but he must also be bonded to work in distant areas.

If we took a roll call here and asked how many district authorities do not have even a single doctor in their health facilities, they are many. With this, then what type of health are we providing when we cannot even provide a single doctor? (Applause)- -(Member timed out_)

5.21
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): My issue is on the capitation grants given to schools. The money is little and does not get to the schools on time.

The other issue is about leaving the children in schools. We need to be practical because this policy may not work and if we are to carry it on, we must do it selectively. In Kabarole, where I come from, it is an insult to tell a person that you are going to feed his or her child because we have enough food. What we should be doing is that this money should be given to teachers to pay their salaries in a better way. Why am I saying that we should do it selectively? A place like Karamoja – when you say we are going to feed children, we accept. I think that is a policy that we need to revise. 

The other issue is about PTA and school management committees. As politicians, we have not given these people independence. I have seen a number of times when the school management committees and PTA take decisions and then politicians come and say, “It is not correct”. I will give a case in point. Say if a school latrine has collapsed and Government is not quick enough to give the funding and these committees sit and say they should have a provisional working kind of thing, the politicians will come and refuse and say that, “Government will provide”. In the short run and in their medium term, the schools do not move on well because of our political interference.

The other issue is about the student loan scheme, which is a welcome gesture but we need to really have it comprehensively studied because I have seen other programmes like Entandikwa that did not do well in this country. So if we are to do it, please let us be careful about it.

On the health sector, we are not doing well. The health system in this country has almost collapsed. I have seen page 70 of the report where 80 percent of the patients referred to Fort Portal Referral Hospital die. What are we doing? We need a system that is working. (Member timed out_)

5.24
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much. I also thank the committee and the shadow ministers for their presentations. Although I thank the Government for the effort they have put into trying to implement Universal Primary Education, I am very concerned about the challenges we are facing and are affecting this effort. 

The issue of salaries of teachers is something very crucial that we must put into consideration. The issue of 20 percent that the committee has recommended in the report – I am sorry I do not personally support 20 percent increment. I do appreciate the fact that the Government has got a challenge because this has got a financial implication but we must not rule out the fact that you cannot milk a cow you do not feed well.

We are promoting UPE as a foundation for our economic development. How are we going to succeed if we do not motivate the human resource that is helping us to achieve this? On the issue of delayed releases of UPE funds, I am concerned that much as this is little, at least it must be given on time. Funds are released late and this has affected the management of UPE schools. 

I also do appreciate that infrastructure has been put in UPE schools but we have a challenge. Who is responsible for the maintenance of this infrastructure? When toilets fill up, who is concerned to rebuild other toilets? This is a challenge we have seen in UPE schools, which are closing down because they do not have latrines. 

The issue of feeding is very vital. I want to give an example. The Committee on Social Services in the last Parliament visited Ghana. I want to tell you that Ghana, whose economy is not different from Uganda’s, provides two percent from its VAT and that amount of money goes to the education system to help in the feeding and maintenance of infrastructure.

I do not say we must feed the children here in Uganda or I do not say the Government should be forced but at least we must do something. The Act itself has got a loophole. It does not provide for sanctions when a parent fails to meet his or her obligation. I think this is one other thing we need to look into as a Parliament -(Member timed out_)

5.27
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring it to the attention of the august House that we have got the National Development Plan in which the foreword emphasises business approach. Now when it comes to education, we also want to see a business approach. When you look at the point which hon. Dombo put very well, from a business point of view that is the way to go.

I do not know the Ministry of Education and Sports in terms of business and what they really plan. We have seen other countries establishing sports academies and exporting skilled professionals who earn their countries high revenue. All these professional footballers earn their countries high revenue because they are paid very expensively in the world market. Why can’t we really establish these sports academies, which can produce talented people that we can export as Uganda and earn this needed foreign exchange? 

The same applies to Mulago in the health sector. When you go to Nairobi Hospital, you can see how they are minting money through health. When you go to India, the same but you see our Government spends very extensively on sending patients abroad. Why can’t we for heaven’s sake, have a business plan for Mulago and we upgrade Mulago to these international standards and we earn revenue? I am looking at making money because really if we are going to have the issues of teachers addressed, it is high time we began making these macro-investments, which can earn us revenue. 

That is what I was even earlier telling Dr Kiyonga that we need the UPDF to earn revenue from these missions. These countries should pay us for the work we are doing. Let us earn revenue from everything and let us have a business mind and then we will fix the problems of this country.

5.29
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since I have only two minutes I will be straightforward. First and foremost, I do agree with the committee and my shadow minister on the recommendations to enhance the welfare of the teachers and I am sure after this debate, these issues will be considered, I pray.

The state of core PTCs; it was mentioned in the report. The PTCs are where the primary teachers are manufactured but when we look at the state of affairs in these PTCS, the infrastructure, the staffing, transport and capitation of about Shs 1,800 per student per day, you will know what product we will be having on the market. I think the committee needs to look into that, together with the ministry. 

The closure of Makerere University is absurd. As I talk, students from Arua are already telling me how they are loitering around because some of them have been thrown out of the university. They do not actually know - the parents are calling. I am sure, Members, if you switch on your phones now, you will hear what is happening. I think the minister needs to come out clearly on what strategies exist to mediate in order to avert possible crises. 

Vote 163, Arua Referral Regional Hospital has been omitted. I do not see it in the report but at the end, it appears. It means your committee never considered the details of Arua Regional Referral Hospital as one of the most important items because Arua Regional Referral Hospital caters for the whole of West Nile region and across Sudan and Congo. You need to look into those details and if it is by omission, please avail those details.

Lastly, I would propose that in future, the order of presentation of these committee reports be considered. For instance, I would have preferred that the Committee on Social Services comes first so that as we debate other committee reports, we look into areas where we can cut some resources and re-allocate to deserving committees like this. This is my prayer and I thank you so much.

5.32
MS JOY ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would also like to appreciate the committee for the work well done and their proposal on the increment of teachers’ salaries. They even went to the extent of identifying the source. I thank you for that and I urge the ministry to also pick a leaf from that, learn something and push it to 50 percent. The teachers should not go begging and dragging their knees in the dust for salary increment; they really deserve it. The work they do compared to the salary they are earning - the work overwhelms the salary. I highly recommend that we should increase the teachers’ salaries. 

I want to move on to the issue of quality education. When you look at the inspection of schools, there is budget allocation for school inspection and we have school inspectors at the districts. When you move down to the schools, you realise that there are very few inspectors who reach schools. Many schools have stayed for so long without seeing the inspectors. How do we ensure quality education when the inspectors are not doing their work? 

Some schools do not even have female teachers. The committee report states that 34 percent of girl children complete primary seven compared to 74 percent of the boy children. How do we really encourage the girl child to remain in school when we do not have female teachers as staff in schools to encourage the girls? The Ministry of Education some years back initiated Girls Education Movement in Uganda (GEMU) supposed to be in form of clubs in all the schools and these clubs are to encourage the girls who drop out of school to return. 

I was reading the report from the Ministry of Education a few days ago. The report said that we have GEMU clubs in all the schools but if you go down to the schools, you will realise that the GEMUs are not in existence in most schools and the few schools where the GEMU clubs are, are those where NGOs like War Child Holland and UNICEF exist and these NGOs are not all over Uganda; they are mostly in Northern Uganda. 

So to ensure girl child retention at school, I urge the Minister of Education to make sure that the GEMU clubs do not only remain in –(Member timed out_)

5.36
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to talk about the recommendation that we need to have an overhaul of the education system to match the production and market. In my analysis, the primary factor to this is poor utilisation of the products we have. In human resource, what we produce depends on our abilities in recruitment and retention. 

Therefore, as we analyse the production vis-à-vis the market, let us make proper use of the people we have. If we cannot recruit people and retain them, then we are not going to make much progress. How much have we invested in the training of these people? Let us first prioritise the issue of recruitment and retention of our human resources.

Secondly, on the issue of the market, I feel we are not investing enough in vocational institutions. BTVET is giving financial resource even to the private sector, but do we care to know the quality of services being given to our people down there? It is quite wanting. The human resource in those institutions is not capable of training our people. Let Government establish vocational schools so that our people can get better schools and be able to provide employment for themselves.

On the health sector, the level of recruitment is too low. The money we provide as Government does not take into account the increase in the population. We seem to have this assumption that the population is constant, which is not the case. Last week, I was in the district and the situation was wanting. You get to a health centre and you find only one staff member. You get to a hospital unit and only one nurse is serving about 81 patients; what are we doing? We need to review the issue of our ceiling because the population is not constant.

On the issue of teachers, we should recognise that the teachers are human beings who render good services to us. We are all products of teachers –(Member timed out_)

5.39
DR FRANCIS EPATAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. For those who have the report, I refer you to pages 95 and 96. We have 13 regional referral hospitals in this country but I would like to find out the criteria being used in allocating development resources for these regional hospitals. 

I note with concern that some hospitals like Gulu Regional Referral Hospital is being given Shs 500 million as a development fund. Fort Portal is getting Shs 3.2 billion, Soroti Hospital is getting only Shs 700 million, Mubende and Moroto Regional Referral Hospitals are getting only Shs 150 million. May I get to know the criteria being used? As far as I know, all these hospitals are in bad shape.

Mr Speaker, on the education issues, I would like to remind the House that three years ago the minister of finance came here requesting for a loan for public service enhancement project. In that project, US $80 million was for the establishment of a public service college and the money was supposed to be passed through UMI. To date, the public service has let us down. So I ask Members that we put our foot down this time round and see to it that the money goes where it is supposed to be.

We have talked about the plight of the teachers. The approach the Ministry of Education is attempting to take is very deplorable. Please, read the mood of the House; do not lead us into the temptation of invoking Article 118. If you decide to start threatening the executive of UNATU and the members of the Uganda National Teachers Union, we shall take you on together with your team. And I pray hon. Members that we do not approve the budget for Education unless something has been done for the teachers in the country; we cannot keep playing around. (Applause)

This matter requires all of us to appreciate the teachers’ situation. What the teachers are asking for is very modest. Shs 500,000 is even on the lower side because if you break it down to meet day-to-day needs, surely our teachers are patriots and would even merit a pat on the back than threatening them with sanctions (Member timed out_)

5.42
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker; at long last you have seen me although I have been seeing you all along. (Laughter) I would like to thank the committee for raising very important issues. I would like to comment on feeding children. I am a teacher and I know that you cannot teach hungry children because they cannot concentrate. 

I am happy that Government has taken over UPE and USE but it is the duty of the parents to provide food for their children. If in the urban areas the children are charged to buy food, why not in the rural areas? All the food we eat in the towns comes from the rural areas. But the problem is that the partners are negligent and they do not want to provide food for their children. Government should allow teachers to charge some fees for food because if you leave it in the hands of the headmasters, they might over charge. But let us have a modest fee at which beans and posho can be provided for the children at school.

Secondly, on the issue of girl’s education, I am happy that the committee has recognised the importance of having girls in primary education. You know, girls leave school for three or five days a month depending on the time they spend in their menstrual period and the other students do not know what is happening to them. But even buying the pads is very expensive. So for us to help the poor girls to remain in school, we have to provide these pads; that is what we call gender budgeting. We should meet the needs of the girls for them to remain in the schools. 

We should also empower the women teachers to give proper education to the girls. Quite often, female teachers do not give enough education to the girls, yet we need to support our girls’ education.

It is Government policy to ensure that in each district there is at least a vocational school but in some districts, including Koboko, we don’t have any institution of such nature yet we have one that is privately owned. We wanted to hand it over to Government, but they refused. So, what criteria do you use in selecting institutions to be supported by Government?

On the issue of wages, I am happy that the minister has conceded that the salaries for teachers, medical staff and other staff are very low. As indicated by the minister, we have to increase salaries across the board not only for teachers. We should increase those for doctors, policemen and all the other civil servants so that they all get happy. Otherwise, if we increase salaries for only the teachers, what about the medical staff? The increment should be done across the board for five years and not only for three years.

5.45
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the Committee on Social Services for the work well done. Let me also join my colleagues in talking about the plight of the teachers in Uganda. All of us know very well that the Shs 260,000 is just pocket change. With the current economic trend, you cannot survive on it for even just a week.

So, for us to argue that teachers can survive on that Shs 260, 000, is just to lead them into temptation and as you know that is in the Lord’s Prayer. (Laughter) Even Shs 500,000 as minimum is even being modest. We should not take the teachers’ strike as a joke. I am saying this because these are inherent issues that affect them. As we talk about remuneration of teachers, we must also think about the remuneration of all the other civil servants across the board.

My issue number two is about girl child education. I have noticed that the rate of drop out of 34 percent as compared to 74 percent for the boys is very alarming. I am glad that the committee provided for the inclusion of the sanitary pads for the girl child. However, I would like to move that this Parliament pushes for zero taxation on sanitary pads so that as we wait for the Government provision, the girl child can still access these pads.

On health, I would like to move that Votes 114 and 115 for Uganda Heart and the Uganda Cancer Institutes respectively be made self accounting. I also move that we give them more money considering the type of services they are delivering to the people. 

In the Eighth Parliament, we got a write-up from the Uganda Heart Institute in which they stipulated what they needed to make it a state-of-the-art institute and part of Mulago Hospital. As I talk, there are a number of you, colleagues who keep travelling to many hospitals outside the country in places like India for heart checkups, which is more expensive compared to a situation where we can acquire the equipment and furnish that institute -(Member timed out_)

5.49
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for that good report. I further would like to thank the Opposition for their response. Uganda is a developing country and this means she has competing priorities. In the circumstances, we need to categorise those priorities. But to me, it seems that what we call priorities are actually not priorities. I am saying this because the two sectors, education and health should be the major priorities among others the very first one being education, followed by health and agriculture respectively.

I would like to ask Government to sit down and prioritise its activities again by putting our priorities straight so that we can be able to achieve development in totality. Yes, we keep talking about human resource development, but I know that it is these two sectors that will let us achieve human resource development. We need a human resource that is healthy and well developed right from primary to university levels. 

Having said that, I would like to thank the teachers for putting up a spirited fight for their rights -(Applause) I also would like to say that the struggle must continue because when you start a fight, you should not leave the battle field until you have achieved –(Applause)– what you want. I thank the committee for suggesting an increment of 20 percent but point out that this 20 percent is not enough. We need at least a 50 percent increment for our teachers or even more.

As I have said, the struggle should continue. I want to appeal to you, hon. Members, as people who have gone through the teachers’ hands and that if it were not for these teachers being in place, we wouldn’t be here. You know that some of our colleagues, Members of Parliament, have been thrown out of this House for lack of academic qualifications. So, we really need to come out and support the teachers. (Applause)

5.52
MS EVERLYN CHELANGAT TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. I have an issue to address on page 19 where the report talks of physical education and sports. This area earns Uganda a very good name and it has made all of us very proud. I appreciate the fact that the ministry has plans to set up a high altitude training centre in Bukwo District. 

Last year we celebrated “hero” Kipsiro’s victory, which made us very proud. About a month ago, Bukwo District celebrated the victory of athletes from that district who won gold in Brazil and other places. These included: Benjamin Ayeko who won gold in Brazil and Rebecca Cheptegei, who led the others in Burundi last week. And as I talk, we now have Ayeko doing something in Brazil, but these athletes work under very difficult conditions in the district. For example, they have to walk all the way to Sebei College, Tegeresi in Kapchorwa, which is about 84 Kilometres to do practice and by the time they reach that place, they are very exhausted.

Secondly, the water that these athletes drink is very dangerous to their health. We do not have safe water in Bukwo. In 2008, we lost about 34 people who died of a type of typhoid that perforated their intestines. This left us worried about the lives of our very good athletes. In the 2009/2010 Budget the minister of finance then said that there was going to be a water scheme in Bukwo District, but to date there is nothing. That is the very reason the hero, Kipsiro the double gold medalist, has continued to suffer from typhoid, a disease that can be prevented by constructing a graft flow scheme in Bukwo District since we have sources in the forest. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to thank the Ministry of Health for the construction of a district hospital in Bukwo. It is two weeks since it became functional and operational -(Member timed out_)

5.55
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you. I would like to thank the committee for their good report and I would like to associate myself with two critical recommendations, which they have made. 

One is on the payment of salaries to teachers. I am glad that the Government is also in agreement that teachers deserve an increase in their salaries. This was said by the honourable minister yesterday in her statement. I think what Government is not in agreement with is when to start this. I would like to propose that the chairperson of the committee accepts to amend his recommendation so that we don’t start with 20 percent but we start with 50 percent this year, 30 percent next year and 20 percent the following year. 

I would also like to recommend that the honourable minister for education kindly accepts to -(Interjections)- I will take the information. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. I give information as a member of the committee. As a Committee on Social Services, we tried to mobilise money from within the Budget and what we could raise constitutes about 20 percent but we hope that when we meet as a Budget Committee, if we can realise more resources from other committees, then that can be raised. But what the committee could raise constitutes 20 percent. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, hon. Member. The teacher we are talking about is actually not getting Shs 250,000. My understanding is that their salaries are taxed and they are actually getting less than Shs 180,000. These are the people who are teaching our children, finding it extremely difficult to educate their own children. In their desperation they have resorted to very difficult loans making their situation even more difficult. My appeal to the House is that we should not start this year with anything less than 50 percent. 

I also would like to comment on the health sector. The crisis, which the chairperson talked about in Mulago, is not just in Mulago Hospital. We have a problem of staffing and motivation of health staff. That is why I do not agree with the recommendation of the Shadow Minister for Health that we should again centralise health staff. The problem is not that the local governments are refusing or failing to pay these people. The money for the wages comes from the Consolidated Fund. The problem is inadequate funding of the health sector -(Member timed out_)

5.58
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Mr Speaker, as you may realise, what we are debating since morning cuts across. When you look at the Opposition and you look at those on the Government side, we are saying the same thing that teachers and other civil servants’ remuneration should be addressed. (Applause)

We are not differing on that. The question is: with what percentage and what time should the implementation start? The question is: should it cut across all sectors? This morning, hon. Kyanjo in his report also included the Police, the Army and the doctors and I am adding the nurses and midwives too. 

Honourable colleagues, this is the time. With political will, we should address this issue. Why am I saying so? We are in agreement in principle because we have debated the nitty-gritty. Some money has been identified within the education sector. Identify some money within the health sector; go to the natural resources escrow account; go to Defence and others. Let teachers be paid. (Applause)

And what would this mean to us? First of all we shall be in line with the Maputo Protocol and as the Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities I had raised this issue of addressing the welfare of our citizens. It shall help us if civil servants realise their human right of being looked after. It shall cut down on the riots. This Walk-to-Work, the Action for Change, will stop. (Applause) They will have no other issues to demonstrate against. They will be redundant. Let us agree that teachers have been doing their work wholeheartedly and we all support them. The Police are doing the same; the Army and Prisons too. So, why don’t we today say humbly to our Government – you are with us and we are together in this – can’t we give them between 20 and 50 percent immediately? (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a matter that I have seen has generated a lot of consensus and I am very happy that the consensus is still building. The time I had allotted for this debate has expired. 

6.02
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Makerere University remains the epitome of academic excellence, the pinnacle of academic research and the cardinal place of all academicians. (Laughter)

I had an opportunity of being a guild president at Makerere. We had a similar issue of increment of lecturers’ salaries. For the first time, in a very long time after President Amin’s regime, Makerere University was closed in 2006. We urged Government not to do it because it would create a very bad precedent. We prayed and we went to the extent of threatening to demonstrate naked to save Makerere University and the students who were there then. Our argument was that if this issue could be sorted, then it would be sorted for us who were students then, and for posterity. 

Unfortunately that was never done. It was temporarily solved. Today, I cannot competently stand here and say that I am a former Guild President of Makerere University because I am not sure whether it is going to remain anyway. The students are home and lecturers don’t know whether they will even return. 

It is very absurd that we keep talking about the issues of our teachers, of our medical practitioners, that touch the wellbeing and the progress of our country and we keep debating and debating and somehow Government does not take us seriously. It is very painful! 

Our humble prayer is that we should address this issue now. I am very sure that we can find monies for our lectures and teachers because they are critical to our nation. We should not pass the budget of education unless we have found salaries for our lecturers and teachers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What a speech to end the debate! I now invite the ministers to make their responses. I am giving them 25 minutes. 

6.06
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, the hon. Sam Lyomoki, together with the members of the committee, with whom we had very successful interactions, for the work that they have done. I would like to make responses to the issues that the committee chairperson raised. 

I would also request you, Mr Speaker, that due to the sensitivity of the matter under debate, you will allow my state ministers to fill in the gaps that I may not be able to sufficiently cover.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My ruling is that both Education and Health will take 25 minutes each.

MS ALUPO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, we have noted as a sector that the committee recommended the increase of capitation grants but due to financial constraints in the national budget, we were not able to increase the capitation grants.

On the issue of feeding children at school, we are saying that feeding is the responsibility of parents and that the policy will remain enforced. Because of other equally demanding areas, Government cannot afford to feed all the pupils in our schools.

Many of the issues that the chairman raised were adequately covered in my statement last evening, including the issue of Pay As You Earn and that of the collective bargaining agreement. This also includes the operationalisation of the scheme of service and that of Government paying additional allowances to science teachers. I had also sufficiently covered the issue of hard-to-reach areas. 

In regard to timely releases of capitation grants, the ministry of finance is already under a very stern directive to ensure that capitation grants are released directly to school accounts on time, for example, 15 days before the term begins. I made it clear that Shs 58.6 billion has been budgeted for to implement universal, post A’ Level education this financial year.

We also affirm Government policy to establish a USE school in every sub-county. Every financial year, new sub-counties are created but we will try to match the trend. Hon. Kyanjo knows that one of the reasons why those sub-counties are created is due to demand from some of the Members of Parliament, I am sure, including himself.

On the issue of skills-on training, Government policy is now to provide BTVET institutions in every district and we have a fully fledged BTVET master plan, which is due for presentation to Cabinet. It is entitled “Skills in Uganda”. We believe that it addresses the issue of unemployment in our country. What we ask our colleagues to do is to address the issue of attitudes in our children and parents. We should encourage and persuade parents to take children to BTVET institutions as we in the sector struggle to establish them across the country. How many of us have a child in a technical school after primary level? This is an issue that we think we should address collectively as a matter of national importance.

On the issue of the principals that are charging allowances from students illegally, we are saying that the principals and governing councils of institutions who have denied students access to labs and facilities will be called to order. The practice is absolutely unacceptable as it has been noted by Members.

In addition, the Ministry of Education and Sports will work with other ministries, like that of health, to harmonise policies in teaching, research, outreach and so forth.

Principals and governing councils who impose additional fees on Government sponsored students with the express authority of the minister or the permanent secretary will be required to stop the un-authorised charges and will have to submit accountability for the previous collections to the satisfaction of the Auditor-General. 

All NTCs and UTCs have secured donor funds starting this financial year. That means that there is going to be enhancement in as far as infrastructure and human resource for our teaching staff is concerned this financial year.

In addition, PTCs are being funded for development in a phased manner as we mobilise for external funding in the medium term. Health training colleges were availed with transport under the concluded EU programme. The other colleges will be provided for in the medium term as resources are secured. The ministry will intervene in institutions with peculiar problems beyond the capacity of their respective councils as it has been requested by the members of the committee.

In as far as the presidential pledges are concerned, what we are saying as a sector is that all presidential pledges have been programmed for in the medium term on an annual basis. The BTVET Act is to be fast-tracked, especially after Cabinet approval, and I have already alluded to the BTVET strategic plan. 

The process of curriculum review has been started for all sub-sectors in order to enable pupils and students to acquire competencies required by the employers and for self employment. I have already referred to this before. The reason we are putting strong emphasis on BTVET is to try to address the issue of unemployment. 

Deliberate measures are being put in place to construct teachers’ houses in all our educational institutions and as we speak, according to policy, all our educational institutions currently under construction have a component of teachers’ houses. It is one way that Government is trying to demonstrate its commitment to improving the welfare of our teachers. 

We accept the recommendation and the Senate and the Governing Council of Mbarara University and the National Council for Higher Education will be asked to arrange to drop Development Studies as a stand-alone degree programme in Mbarara University of Science and Technology. However, Development Studies may continue to be offered as a course unit because much as one may be a scientist, development studies is an important component that they need to undertake. 

MUBS will be established as another degree awarding institution, as recommended by the National Council for Higher Education and it will be called Makerere Metropolitan Business Institute when we finally bring the statutory instrument to Parliament. Hon. Katuntu knows that we are only waiting for the statutory instrument to be laid on the Table of this Parliament and then the establishment of the institute will take place.

On the issue of the money for the Service College to UMI, my response is that Cabinet will decide on this. 

Gulu University has enough resources within their current budgetary provisions to raise money to purchase land. We shall guide the council to appropriate funds for purchase of land in the next financial year. 

In light of the statement, that is what I can respond to but additionally, the chairperson made a recommendation on the salary increment for teachers. Salaries for teachers will not be increased this financial year. Government, as a policy, will no longer accept selective pay awards. Salaries will be increased by five percent, 20 percent and 15 percent for all the lowest paid teachers and all other public servants in the U8 and U7 scale starting with Financial Year 2012/2013. At an appropriate time, according to the Rules of Procedure of the House, I will request to make an amendment to the proposal that the committee made in light of the salary increment for teachers this financial year. 

I want to thank my shadow colleague, hon. Franca Akello, for her statement to the House and for the proposals and the recommendations that she has highlighted and as I said before, I have already covered many of the areas that she tried to expound on in her statement. I request my colleagues to come and give more light and fill in the gaps that I may not have adequately covered. 

Hon. Members of Parliament, including hon. Kassiano Wadri, raised the issue of quality education. Quality education can be enhanced –(Interjections)– what I am saying is that many Members of Parliament of course have recognised the importance of teachers and the cardinal role that teachers are playing in this country –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: I did not want to give this to the Minister but the order I am trying to seek from your leadership is this: is it in order for the Minister to underplay the payment of teachers when statistics show that in 2010, 58,668 pupils failed, in 2009, 57,301 pupils failed totally and in 2010, 31,969 pupils failed? Is she in order to undermine the payment of teachers and not even effect it when we are seeing a decline in the education standards and the failure are rates increasing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is more of information to you, hon. Minister and you have used up 20 minutes of the 25 I had given to the Government to respond. I don’t know what we are going to do about that because it is supposed to be for both health and education. So, I would like to ask the person going to respond on behalf of health to take the Floor [MR TINKASIIMIRE: “Motion”] we haven’t finished. We are still going back to adoption of the report. That is when you will move your motions. How do you move motions in the middle of speeches? 

6.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson and Members of the Social Services Committee of Parliament, first, for the interaction we had in the committee. This time round, it was in-depth because we had almost two weeks of consultations. I would like to thank the committee for the good observations made and especially for pointing out in their report that the sector is under-funded and that our share of the budget is only ten percent, including donor funding. This under-funding of course means that we end up employing less health workers than those needed. It also means the health workers are underpaid. 

I also would like to thank the committee for appreciating that the development budget for the regional referral hospitals has made remarkable improvement in as far as building and medical equipment infrastructure is concerned.

Before I go any further, lest I forget, I would like to respond to hon. Epetait’s concern about the basis for allocation of the development budget for the regional referral hospitals. Good enough, my colleague, hon. Epetait, has been in this House for quite some time and he very well recalls that when this policy started, we were allocating equally to all the regional referral hospitals. However, we would find that some of the regional referral hospitals have not utilised these funds to the satisfaction of Government, that is, some of them do not account for the funds they received and it is not until they account that they can get further funding. In other words, there is a penalty for those hospitals, which do not utilise the funds properly. That is why you will find that Gulu and Soroti Regional Referral Hospitals have got less than the rest. In the case of Moroto and Mubende, these two regional referral hospitals are very new in terms of that status and they are benefiting from the JICA project whereby infrastructure in terms of building and equipment is going to be put up at those regional referral hospitals. 

The good performance of Fort Portal in terms of accountability for the many projects they have had earns them the high allocation that they have this financial year. 

On general hospitals, it is true that the majority of them were built long ago and the buildings there are in poor shape. It is for that very reason that this House approved a loan from the World Bank to support rehabilitation and re-equipping of 17 of those general hospitals and two regional referral hospitals. This also includes a number of health centre IVs. So the rest of the general hospitals, which are not covered under this project, will be covered in the next phase.

It is also important to note that the Government of Uganda expends development funds to local governments, under PHC and it is up to the districts to determine their priorities. Some of the districts put some of these funds to the rehabilitation of the general hospitals. 

I would like to thank the committee for observing a marked improvement in the performance of the National Medical Stores. Where there are still shortfalls, the Ministry of Health will ensure that corrections are made. For example, the essential medicines and health supply kits for the health centers will be reviewed.

A number of issues were raised by other colleagues like the issue of the self-sponsored senior nursing officers at Mulago. If they are self-sponsored, it means they are not on the Government pay roll. But I want to comment that the majority of these are sponsored by either the faith based organisations where they serve or the private-for-profit hospitals where they serve and it would, therefore, not be in order for us to put them on the Government pay roll. I am aware that they do a lot of work in the hospitals. This, however, is part of their training. 

The plan we have especially for the medical officers in the local governments who intend to go for further studies is that these would be bonded. They would be deployed and this of course calls for re-centralisation as has been proposed by some colleagues. If they are recruited and deployed by the centre, it is very easy for us to own them and support them for further studies so that upon completion of their courses, they can still be employees of the Ministry of Health. What is happening currently is that when they leave the local governments for further studies, the local governments cannot replace them because they go with their salaries and when they do not replace them, that causes the vacuum we are always talking about. For the period they are away, service is denied our people and the majority of them on completion of their courses, do not go back to the local governments. 

The question of why put the women’s hospital at Mulago and not anywhere else; it is at Mulago where we still have land. Locating it somewhere else would mean Government looking for funds to buy land, which as you very well know these days, is not cheap. It is also important to note that if this hospital is located at Mulago, that is where we have specialists and of course you know the importance of specialists in a hospital.

I want to welcome the contribution by the Shadow Minister of Health. Government, he says, has not acted on the recommendations. This time round, I want to assure you that since you have put your recommendations in writing and given me a copy, we shall do the needful. (Laughter) That is why I was pressing for a copy. I now have a copy and we shall put your recommendations in action. (Applause)

Now the political leadership at the Ministry of Health is very open and receptive to ideas. So, ideas like those proposed by hon. Okuonzi are definitely very welcome. We will continue to interact and see how we can make changes for the better. There is new leadership at the Ministry of Health, as the chairperson has pointed out. However, he forgot to point out that even the Minister of State for Health who was retained is also part of the vision.

There are re-allocations proposed in the report of the committee. The spirit is definitely a good one - to cut down on wasteful, consumptive expenditures. However, I would have loved to be fully involved in these re-allocations and if the Chair could take this into account so that we go back in the committee, I would be very ready. We can sit down, look at the re-allocations proposed and then we see whether it is really possible.

I want to give an example. When we appeared before the committee, we proposed that we want to re-allocate from this programme and this Vote to that Vote and we were able to raise about Shs 3.4 billion -(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I have been attentively listening to the honourable minister speaking and I heard him say he wants to sit with the committee and they look at the budget. I thought that the committee is working on behalf of Parliament to do the work of appropriation for the ministry? Is he, therefore, procedurally right, at this stage, to ask again that the committee should go back and sit with them? How do we proceed? Is it the procedure that we should take?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the committee and we sat day and night including on Idd day on Tuesday. We met the Minister more than five times. For all the deductions and re-allocations we made, we sat together with the ministry officials and with the Minister and on the last day, we met, we wanted to specifically re-allocate money related to GAVI Funds and Global Funds. 

We had the agreement signed by the Government of Uganda and these donor agencies. All the procedures were followed to make sure that as a committee, we go through the legal framework so that the re-allocations are both within the legal framework of the agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and the donor funders and also that it does not affect development expenditure and other critical expenditure.

It is, therefore, unfortunate that the minister now stands up to say that they were not involved in the process of this re-allocation when they were fully involved. I think this is taking this Parliament for granted and you should desist from such behaviour as a Minister. It will make work and co-operation very difficult, Mr Minister, if you continue like that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a procedural point raised by hon. Tinkasiimire. Until we pronounce ourselves finally on the budgetary proposals in the Appropriation and Finance Bills, the doors should not be closed tightly or completely. Is that not the situation? Until we pass those Bills and handle the actual appropriation, both the Government and the committees should still be able to engage for the improvement of the whole budget. I think we should not close the door at this stage, it is still open.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is exactly what I was looking for because when we last met on Monday -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I have already ruled on that point. Make your final remarks and close.

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, that was one of my concluding remarks so if it is sorted out, then I am very happy. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to also thank the chair and the members of the committee and also colleagues for their comments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.41
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I just want to make one or two points clear on behalf of Government and especially to hon. Tinkasiimire who is speaking behind me. The teachers and other public servants deserve to have a pay rise and this is something that we fully subscribe to. There is no doubt about that. 

Two, I would like to thank the Committee on Social Services for this wonderful job done. They have identified monies that are in the Budget that could be better utilised and there is no doubt about that too. This Government has made a lot of noise in the past about workshops and seminars. These workshops and seminars are the creation of the bureaucracy both for good and not so good reasons.

It is, therefore, something that we must study very carefully. We cannot do away with them completely, definitely not as we need some. However, we must choose those workshops that add value to the delivery of service to our people.

I want to say this and I have already told Cabinet. I have and the Government of Uganda has a serious problem with our travel abroad. It is absolutely incredible! I am going to publish the figures of how much you, as Parliament, are using on your travel abroad, how much we in the Executive are using and it is something we must stop! We must cut our coat according to the cloth. That is very critical.

Therefore, it is important that once we are on the same page on these issues, we go back - hon. Tinkasiimire is whispering things, Mr Speaker. I wish you could tell him to whisper in a lower tone [HON. WADRI: “Bafuruki.”] you know, hon. Kassiano Wadri is talking about “Bafuruki”. I would like to know where he came from. (Laughter) If we really followed him up, I am not sure if he originates from Terego. I am very doubtful. The point I am making is that this is very important and the sooner we embark on what the committee has done on a government-wide level, the better for this country.

Today, the arguments raised by the committee, for example, about the health sector and education, are very good. I am glad that the health ministry also agreed with them about certain amounts – I have forgotten how much it is – but there is some money, which they had identified and the ministry had agreed. Now, they have identified more than what was agreed upon. The minister told me that some of this money needs to be looked at very closely. They gave me an example that they are proposing to cut down on fuel consumption in referral hospitals -(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Prime Minister, for giving way. As a member of the committee, I want to inform you that the very last statement you have made is not correct. For referral hospitals, we looked at the various budget lines; it is true there were wasteful lines like travel abroad and so forth and we cut some money from them but we said they should be invested within referral hospitals. So we did not remove any money from referral hospitals; we just removed from the wasteful expenditures but ploughed it back into the productive areas. (Applause)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to take you to the issue of Mulago National Referral Hospital; we found that it had money for travel inland! But we told them the hospital is here so which inland do they want to go instead of staying around and doing work. There was even a lot of money for travel abroad. They even had money to hire tents. All this money should have helped patients but it is being used in seminars and workshops. Since the Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business, I would be glad if these ministers and other officials gave him the true picture instead of – because we were trying to talk about service delivery. Let us give services to our people. (Laughter) There is no way people can spend money in hotels and we remain silent. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You can see hon. Members why I was praising the committee members for their vigilance. What they are saying does not contradict what I said or what I intended to say. If you look at Arua Regional Referral Hospital, they had budgeted Shs 76.7 million but now they have reduced it to Shs 44.1 million. I am not saying that the committee is wrong because I have not studied the report enough. I have not even had an opportunity to interact with the committee enough to know their reasoning. What I am saying, on the side of caution, taking a referral hospital as an example; is that I am not sure that in Arua where they have limited power supply, that you want to cut their fuel consumption because they depend on generators –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Prime Minister. I am a member of the committee and I am glad you recognised the work we have done. I would like to remind you that the energy minister was in this House about a month ago and he promised that there would be power in Arua by the end of the year. That is partly why we removed some of that fuel, knowing that Government had said there would be power.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank hon. Alaso for giving me that information and I think it makes my point. Yes, if that was the reason, it is very good. But why don’t you wait until they get power? Therefore, on the side of caution, as much as that proposed re-allocation was within their budget – for instance, for maternal healthcare – I think it is critical and they have already accepted it, anyway. All we have told them is that, “Let it remain within that sector but especially o increase amenities in the maternal healthcare centers in the countryside”. That is very critical and we support it. But where there is a bit of uncertainty, let us not act in a manner that may cause greater damage than we are trying to cure. 

Therefore, in order to achieve that, our proposal is what - I do not remember who made the proposal that the Speaker is talking about. Let us use this time for the committee members and the necessary ministry to sit down together and make sure there is consensus on these figures. We support the reduction of, for example, workshops and seminars and things like that. Well, look at them in greater detail so that you do not hurt the interests of our work by random slashing.

Mr Speaker, my other point is about teachers. I have already said in my opening remarks that as the Leader of Government Business, we have all the sympathy for a pay rise for teachers. But we also have sympathy for a pay rise for all other sectors. And it is critical; I met the Committee on Social Services [HON. MEMBERS: “No, you did not.”] Okay, representatives but not the whole committee. I thought when I speak here, it is Kinkizi West speaking; do you have any doubt? And yet I am speaking in representative capacity. So when I met your representatives, I had all the confidence that they had the committee’s mandate to speak to the Leader of Government Business –(Interjections)- so I made this point that, for instance, that committee alone has responsibility not only for teachers but for health workers as well. I am sure that the health workers are not adequately remunerated –(Interjections)- I am sure about that. It is, therefore, important that when you are talking about remuneration, we do not do what we call “cherry picking” which means selective pay rise; this today, that tomorrow -(Interruption)   

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I thank you, hon. Prime Minister. It is true that as a Committee on Social Services we did meet the Prime Minister and he actually explained to the committee the concerns he is putting forward. But regarding the issue of piecemeal increment in salaries, I wanted you to clarify on this because you give comparisons to medical workers and then to the Police. I remember at the meeting that you also asked about the Police and the Army who also earn almost the same amount with the teachers.

I would want this House to appreciate the challenges that the teachers go through. For example, the Police earn a similar amount but the Police have housing, they do not pay for power, water and so on –(Interjections)- but teachers do not have housing or power. That is why we want to think that this financial year, we should first start with the teachers and then we can proceed -(Applause)- that is our considered opinion. I want to thank you, hon. Prime Minister.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank my colleague, hon. Franca Akello, for that statement. I do not think we are really in disagreement and it still makes the point that selective treatment causes disharmony, generally speaking –(Interjections)– of course it does and there is no doubt about it. What we now want to achieve - if we have not announced it before, let me announce it now - that we intend in the next three years, we intend to achieve a compression ratio in the wage bill of the public workers of 1:10. In other words, the lowest paid worker should earn at least 10 percent of the highest paid worker. That is what we plan to achieve. At the moment, the ratio is one to – well it is very big and we want to stop this. We want to do this across the board, which is very important –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much. Well as I share the concern of the Government, we really want you to look at the current models and I want you to clarify to me the different models of development – whether you are applying a special model of development where you spread your interest or you apply a forecast model where you implement one item at a time. In this case, this Parliament and this country because we represent the entire country – are saying that a police officer has his or her child in a UPE school and that child is not getting a good education. Are you aware of that? 

This Parliament is saying that a soldier also has his or her child in a UPE school and they are not getting a good education. Are you aware of that? This Parliament is saying that a nurse has her child in a UPE school and they are not getting a good education. Therefore, if in this financial year you catered for an increment in the salaries of primary school teachers and then indirectly you would have catered for the interests of the soldiers, police officers, nurses and everybody. (Applause) Are you aware of this model? I want you to clarify. Are you aware that this model will have greater impact and solve all your problems?
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I really do not want to take that line because on my part, I appreciate the value of public workers. (Applause) There is no way a teacher can teach in a school if there is insecurity. (Applause) Ask the people in the North when they were in IDPs. We had built UPE schools but they were empty; no teacher was using them. So please, do not take me down that line because it is not a correct line. We would like to look at all public servants because in their various fields, they have some important contributions to make to the development of this country. Teachers are the most important and so are the soldiers, health workers, police -(Interjections)- all these are very important and there is no doubt about it. 

Let me finish making my point –(Interjections)- because I think the Speaker will not give us much more time –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not have it. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you do not have the time.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am not going to abuse the indulgence of the Speaker. Therefore -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Order!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am ruling you out of order. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The question we are therefore looking at is that one of pay rise. You know it is -(Interjections)– sorry I have to finish my presentation. The fundamental significance of a salary rise is that it is not a onetime payment but something that you cannot start and stop. It is something that once you start, should be continuous.

Secondly, when you start “cherry picking” – because you know these teachers, and may God bless them, have done a good job and under the NRM, we have been raising their salaries -(Interjections)– that is a fact and anybody who does not know it should come to me and I will give you the facts. The salary of teachers has been raised even when they were not on strike. What we are now saying is that in order not to incite other public sector workers to go on strike - because by going on strike, then one will get a salary rise – I do not know this hon. Member because he is very new –(Laughter)- we shall give a salary rise across the board starting from next year in the figures -(Interjections)– that we are giving. Oh yes, there is no doubt about that. 

However, the committee has identified some money and according to them, this is wasteful money and as I am proposing between now and when we pass the Appropriation Bill, the committee and vote holders should sit together closely and look at these figures. I am sure if you involved me, I would find that the committee is right that there is wasteful money. The question is: where should it go?

HON. MEMBERS: To the teachers.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, as a pay rise certainly but I think there are many ways. There are suggestions that this money could still go to the teachers now, even if it is not for a pay rise, which would then incite other strikes for a pay rise. It is possible and they should look at that and come with a proposal on it -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, really that is why for these reasons, we had studied and planned for next year. As I have said and the plan is that the teachers as well as other sector workers of the public sector, should get a pay rise and we achieve one to ten (1:10) compression ratio within three years. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, please wind up and I expect you to just move for adoption of the report because I know it is going to generate some debate again. Move your motion for adoption and we proceed. I will give you three minutes to wrap up and then move the motion.

7.06
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you very much, colleagues for the comments on the report. As a committee, we have noted the comments and most of them were appreciation and enhancement of the issue that we have identified. 

As a committee we met many times with the various vote holders and we have done a very serious analysis to come to this position where we have identified some money. In fact, we did not take all; we left some and said, “Okay, they can have it”. But in terms of, for instance, workshops and fuel, we looked at all these possibilities. For instance, in Mbale Hospital, there were claims that they have money for the generator. When you look at the administrator, he says money has been spent on fuel. When you go to where the generator is they say, “This generator has been dead for the last three years”. So, there is a lot of mismanagement of funds by people who end up accounting for it. They say they have gone for a workshop in Yumbe with the LCs; you go there, there has not been a workshop for the last five years. This has been an area for the bureaucrats to siphon government money for their own use. (Applause) 

So, it defeats our reasoning; for instance, you cannot say you do not have Shs 71 billion to make sure that mothers do not die. Since morning when we have been here for the last eight hours, four mothers have died because of foetology and other aspects. Then you say, you give those bureaucrats money to eat and yet you can save the lives of mothers. I think as Parliament, we must stand in the eyes of God to save those mothers. (Applause) Some of those mothers are looking at us; some of them saw us in the campaigns and they knew we were going to save them. We must save them. (Applause)

Why do you give, for instance, fuel with referral hospitals it is okay, we analysed that. Some of the referral hospitals never even refer patients. I have the experience that people come from other units to come to the referral hospital; there is no referral hospital that uses its ambulance to take a patient somewhere else. Most of this fuel is used by the heads of these institutions to do their own work. When all this is analysed and this information here, we are transparent and we shall be able to interact with the Government, the ministers and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister as he has said, and we agree. Colleagues I want us -(Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. I would like to inform the august House that the health situation in our health facilities is so bad. Just two weeks back, we were in Kalisizo District Health Hospital in Rakai District and the hospital did not have an incubator. We found a mother who had produced a child at seven months and this was a mother who was covering this baby with warmth clothes. The situation is so bad that we need to act very fast. This is the information I wanted to bring to the attention of Members as we talk about maternal health in our hospitals.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much. I have personally moved to almost all health units in this country and that was not additional information to what I have, including Mbale. So, I thank you colleague, for the enhancement.

The issue of teachers: of course we provided for the 20 percent but the money that we managed to identify of Shs 29 billion can only cater for five percent. In order for you to have enhancement of 20 percent, you need Shs 120 billion because the wage bill for teachers is 680,000; so for a ten percent enhancement, you need Shs 68 billion. That is why some of you have condemned us and asked: “Why 20 percent?” In terms of money it is Shs 120 billion. We have only identified Shs 29 billion; so that means we must continue with this interface to see how best to handle this matter. 

The committee has made it clearly. What we now need - and I am happy with the Government that our approach is acceptable - is to agree on how much money we should get and where it should go. So, I think, since we are continuing to debate this Budget, we can continue getting more money from other Votes and continue harmonising and finding out if for instance, increasing the salary of teachers will have a problem with the others, we can agree and say, “How do we handle all this” so that we can see how we balance. I think that the committee has raised an issue and dialogue has started. We still have a few days to conclude the Budget; so we can be able to harmonise and see how best to sort out this matter.

In terms of the issues that we have raised, the current allocation to health; first of all, we need more money and for us we have asked for the money to save the dying women for now but if you use the money you have to account -(Interruption)

MS NANTABA: I thank the honourable chairman for giving way. I also thank the committee for the work they have done to make sure that they can solicit for more money to contribute to our teachers. I also want to show you where you can get more money from.

In our report of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry, you can really identify some areas where money was allocated and that money is going to fall in the hands of thugs. (Laughter) On page 55 of our report, Trade, Tourism and Industry, someone played with words to come up with three projects that are going to fall under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For instance, these are presented as three projects, but at close look, it is one project and they have been allocated billions: 

There is, “Establishment of SACCOs in sub-counties”, that is project one, which was allocated Shs 10 billion. Number two is, “Increasing the capacity of SACCOs”, which was allocated Shs 4.9 billion; three, under the same project, “SACCOs Capacity Strengthening” –(Laughter)– and that was allocated Shs 9.6 billion. In total that is Shs 15 billion catering for one project but divided into three. 

Another project is what we call “private sector competitiveness”. This was given Shs 29 billion. Under the same project, there is “Support to investment and private sector development”. Someone is playing around with words and allocating billions to different sectors. Number three, under the same project is, “Investment and private sector development”, allocated Shs 9 billion. This is under our report for the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. I disagree with this and if we looked into this, we can find money for our teachers. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, this is another project here; it was divided into two: “Support to Uganda Investment Authority”, was allocated Shs 0.7 billion; and No.2 is “Competitive and Investment Climate Secretariat”, allocated Shs 1.2 billion. So, we can find money for our teachers if we all went back to our committees and sat down to look for the money. 

I, therefore, want to move a motion that all committees go back and revisit their budgets and find those loopholes where we can solicit more money for our teachers so that we can increase on the 20 percent and move closer to the 50 percent increment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are at a particular point in the progress of this debate. We were just about to receive a motion for adoption of this particular report. If the matter that is going to come will follow from that, it will be welcome. But for now, why don’t we focus on concluding this particular debate and finish with the amendments, if any, to the committee report and then we can move to the other matters, which may arise? 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This was the point that was made by our committee. In the past, we have been making recommendations without re-allocating money and the people who make the budget continue their business as usual. 

The committee went further to identify those monies that can be re-allocated. If you just say, “Move money from this sector to the other”, without specific intervention, those people will just ignore. So this Parliament must take political responsibility; we should not just come here to rubber stamp. We must be able to look through and correct the anomalies because that is our mandate. (Applause) 

Thank you, Mr Speaker for the support and thank you, hon. Members, for identifying with this process. Having said that, I move a motion that in accordance with rule 117, the report be adopted. 

7.21
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move an amendment saying: “Government having failed to provide a reasonable increment in the teachers’ remuneration and whereas teachers are paid a meager pay of around Shs 260,000 ….” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you need to propose where exactly this amendment is going so that we can deal with it specifically; because we are amending a report. Refer to the page and where you want it to go.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, my amendment is in line with the issues covered under paragraph 2.2(v)(i) on page 7 –(Interjections)- the subject is, “Pay rise for teachers” - if I may continue:

“Government, having failed to provide a reasonable increment of teacher’s remuneration; 

AND WHEREAS teachers are paid a meager pay of Shs 260,000 per month;

AND WHEREAS the cost of living has continued to rise with the current inflation being at 21.4 percent; 

AND WHEREAS the standard of education has continued to decline due to, among other things, poor pay for teachers;

NOW, THEREFORE, this House do resolve that the entire budget of Ministry of Education and Sports be stayed until Government raises the salaries of the teachers.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member that is not an amendment to the report. The motion is for the adoption of the committee report. That is the motion you are amending. So if the committee report has a part that you can amend, then that is the amendment that you should bring. But that does not amount to amending the report of the committee. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the committee has presented a report on two sectors and now the motion is that we adopt the entire report. But I am saying that part of this report be stayed because of the unresolved matters.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, my understanding of an amendment is, you find a provision that is stated by the committee; for example that the committee recommends that the salary increase for the teachers be postponed to next financial year - if there was such a recommendation - then you could come in to amend it. Why don’t you get a proper place and propose a proper amendment? You cannot move that we stay the Budget that is not an amendment.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the basis of my amendment is actually on page 8 where the committee says that, “The committee, therefore, recommends an increase in the salaries of all teachers beginning with an increment of 20 percent this financial year.” I would like to move an amendment to make an increment of 100 percent. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is the amendment I was asking you to move. Let me first hear from the chairman if he agrees to it or not before I ask you to justify.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to point out that if we do 100 percent increment this financial year, it means we have to secure Shs 600 billion, but I don’t think that is a realistic position. We realised that it would not be possible to have 100 percent increment for their salaries. In its initial recommendations, the committee had proposed 100 percent increment, but to be executed in the next three years starting with 20 percent, which I think is more reasonable than getting Shs 600 billion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you, please, justify your amendment?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I am glad that the chairperson of the committee was in Parliament at a time when we considered some very urgent and sensitive matter and money was found within a very short time – that time when we handled CHOGM.

The demand for teachers to have that 100 percent salary increment is even on the lower side. If you break it down to the cost of living today, item by item, you realise that even that 100 percent is being demanded by patriots. We have even identified – in fact all committees should work around the clock by reviewing areas where we can actually make savings. 

I agree with the statement from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that in every ministry there is wasteful expenditure on things like tea, travel abroad et cetera. Every department in each ministry has a slot for travel inland, abroad and many other wasteful expenditure. I would like to believe that if all committees got back to their desks and reviewed their sectoral allocations, we should be able to raise even more than Shs 600 billion to take care of the teachers’ salary increment. We need to do this immediately because schools are opening just next week, but with most teachers having very difficult times to maintain themselves in order to have the morale to deliver quality education. If we really want to have quality education in this country, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, there is need to urgently review these salaries in order to restore hope in our teachers. Thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I stand to move a further amendment on that proposal. The inflation, as already stated by our colleague, is already at 21.4 percent. So, an increment of 20 percent would still be far below the inflation rate. I would like to propose that we effect an increment of at least 50 percent for this financial year and the other 50 percent to be realised in the subsequent two financial years. I beg to move.

MS AKELLO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the reason a committee report is brought before the House is for Members to express their views on the concerns raised by the committee. Following the debate that we have had on this issue, I would like to say that I second the latter amendment, which I also believe is still in agreement with the former one moved by hon. Dr Francis Epetait. We only need to make adjustments so that we begin with 50 percent this financial year and the other 50 percent to be realised in the next financial year. I think that would be a better approach for us as Parliament to use instead of sending the teachers away with nothing. I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The motion moved by hon. Dr Epetait is a very serious one. From the figures given by the chairman of the committee, if we are to increase teachers’ salaries by 100 percent, we will need Shs 600 billion and 50 percent would require us to get Shs 300 billion. However, we are debating all this before we hear from the Government side. I think before Members come in to make useful contributions, can we hear from the responsible ministry and that of finance? Otherwise, for them to come in last will cause discomfort to people like me. I beg for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what I know is that the hon. Dr Epetait proposed an amendment of 100 percent increase to teachers’ salaries starting this financial year. But another Member moved an amendment of 50 percent for this financial year. In the circumstances, we are still processing what we can refer to the Government side.

My question to hon. Dr Epetait is: are you going with the 50 percent for this financial year or not, following that amendment and the submission from hon. Franca Akello from Agago? I am saying this because if you agree to that, it then becomes a substantive motion that we can refer to the Government side.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, my proposal to have 100 percent increment was based on figures. If a teacher spends –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the question is simple: are you agreeing to the 50 percent or not?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I am reluctant to go for the 50 percent because the increment would still remain meager.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proper procedure would be for us to pronounce ourselves on whether to have the 50 percent or 100 percent before we move forward. Isn’t that proper?

DR EPETAIT: That is okay.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My colleague, hon. Dr Epetait has moved an amendment proposing a 100 percent increment for teachers’ salaries. If we go at that rate, it means the classroom teacher will earn Shs 520,000, but which is to be taxed through the Pay As You Earn at 30 percent. In this case, the classroom teacher will take home a pay of Shs 374,000, which still, in the face of this biting and galloping inflation, will not adequately address the concerns that we are trying to sort out. Therefore, it is even worse to lower it to 50 percent. If we do that, it will mean that a teacher will get a gross salary of Shs 390,000 subject to taxation. That is above the threshold for Pay As You Earn. In which case, therefore, a teacher will take home approximately – which again does not address the issues concerned. 

So, I am in total support of the motion moved by hon. Dr Epetait that if we really want to address the concerns of our teachers, we should accept and go with the 100 percent pay increment. After all, if we are to open a can of worms, there is a lot of excessive expenditure in ministries out there and, Mr Speaker, as you said, our doors should still be left open for consultation, over these few days, so that we are able to come up with a realistic figure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is what has happened now. The committee has proposed 20 percent in the report. The amendment, which the other day I was trying to illustrate, the first rank amendment to that proposal is that it should be changed to 100 percent. They had proposed 20 percent but Dr Epetait is proposing 100 percent. And the honourable member is proposing an amendment to Dr Epetait’s amendment, which is now a second rank amendment, of 50 percent. 

We need to take a decision on the one that is furthest from the subject and we need to pronounce ourselves on the 50 percent. (Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_) Which one did you propose, Sir?

7.37
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, as I said in my presentation, I don’t know how –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I remember it. You said there should be no increase this financial year. That is what you proposed as the amendment. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: What I was saying is that the committee is proposing a percentage on the basis of a figure it had identified. How can Parliament propose a percentage on no basis? Where is the money? How can this House pass a resolution that you raise the pay without identifying the money? 

What I had proposed to do, on the Government side, following our presentation is that there is a good job done and they have identified the figure. We need to be sure about that figure and I am happy that the chairperson of the committee actually conceded; he supported it. In the time that we have now, because we still have the time, let the committee sit with the ministry, look at these figures, maybe they will identify even more money so that the final recommendation that we come up with is on the basis of what is possible. 

I have never heard of any House that passes a resolution for implementation when there is no basis or possibility of making such an implementation. It is not possible. 

My amendment had been to the effect that, I think at page 8, which was talking about a phased increase in the salaries of teachers. My recommendation, arising out of my presentation and the response of the chairperson of the committee, is –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him make his point and then you can clarify. I have not yet understood the point he is making. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: My point was that the sum of Shs 29.938 billion, which the committee has identified as wasteful expenditure should be re-examined together with the entire budget of the ministry by the committee and the ministry for the purpose of identifying a final sum, which should be re-allocated. I am sure nobody has a problem with that. The only problem that some colleagues may have is that they are saying, “Let this go to the teachers’ pay now”.  We don’t know how much it will be. Really, to pay a sum which is paltry, this 5 percent or even less, supposing this figure is not there?

MR YAGUMA: Thank you Rt Hon. Prime Minister for accepting this information. I am a Member of the Social Services committee. The recommendation of 20 percent was arrived at after very serious consideration. For instance, we had to form a sub-committee to go through the figures of the two ministries. Basing on what we had seen, we projected rightly, thinking that other sectors had the same problems. And indeed what we have just heard from the Ministry of Trade and Industry, you can see that there is money somewhere. (Applause) 

But to objectively reach at this, we need - and I stand to be guided, I don’t know the procedures, we need to sit down and look at the entire Budget. The Budget Committee can look at the entire Budget. We are here to give free advice so that we come out with a figure and when we say we are proposing 100 percent, we are sure of where we are going to get the money from. It could even be more than this. I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for yielding the Floor. If I got you correct, you are not objectionable, in principle, to the pay rise this financial year. Having said that, it seems you are also agreeable that the committee, together with the minister, should have these few days to harmonise the figures and see where it is possible, to cut and raise the funds. 

Secondly, given the information we have heard from the hon. Member sitting on the committee of trade, it seems there could be some other sectors where funds could be saved to meet this problem. But on matters of finance, it might be very difficult for us to pronounce ourselves, right now, without looking at the exact figures we are talking about and where you are cutting. (Ms Opendi rose_) Hon. Minister, why don’t you allow me make to my point?

If I were to get you correctly, may I suggest that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister seeks an adjournment on this particular issue? We shouldn’t pronounce ourselves - the ministry of education, together with finance, plus the Budget and Social Services Committees, can go and look at the figures. They should bring back figures and then we can make an informed decision about the availability of money other than pronouncing ourselves when the money is not there. We can stay this report until they have sat together with the committee, looked at the figures and came back here.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: In essence that is what we are saying. Let us not rush this thing and end up making a very fundamental error. Let us look at it as critically and comprehensively as possible. In the discussions the President had with the representatives of the teachers, he set up a committee and it identified a total of more than Shs 50 billion after the ring fenced areas. Now, maybe those people did not do a thorough job. What the President had said is, “Look at the entire budget, if there is any money -

MS OPENDI: I have been “bleeding”; we are talking about the teachers’ pay. While I have heard the concerns of the Members, I want to request this House like the woman representative for Kayunga did. I heard her identifying some things in the ministry of trade. Let us lead by example as Members of Parliament, can we look at our budget also and see some wasteful expenditure and also cut? What is wrong with that? If we are doing it for other ministries what is wrong with doing it on ourselves? That is the information that I wanted to give.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: It appears to me that consensus is being generated around that point. I think hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire has done a good job already; he should not be involved in this one. Let us look at it because this was the idea. We have ring fenced areas like security, electricity and other infrastructure things. If you put aside those, the rest should be looked at including Parliament. Let us look at them and then all those concerned should be involved so that we can generate consensus on this. That is all we are asking, Mr Speaker.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I am getting lost, if the Committee of Social Services is to harmonise with the ministry, which is in regard to the priorities of that sector, the honourable colleague raised issues in the ministry of trade where a report had already been adopted. When I heard a colleague read issues from the trade and tourism report, I was wondering whether our report for the committee had leaked. What this means is that there is too much duplication in some of these sectors. When she read that Uganda Investment Authority will receive money from Ministry of Trade, which is a subvention under the ministry of finance; there is money for it; SACCOs are under ministry of finance. Don’t we really need to review some of these budget priorities? I do not know at what stage that can be done. Can we do it in the Budget Committee or now? We should not stifle the timelines of the Budget process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me guide. As we speak now, we have adopted reports of ten committees; we are remaining with reports of three committees. What we have not adopted are the actual figures and amount of money to be allocated? There is a mechanism for doing that. What we have done in the ten committee reports is to adopt them as they presented them. Once that is done, it gives us the opportunity to move to the next level and deal with the figurers more carefully; line by line, item by item, Vote by Vote and then you begin to pronounce yourself on the actual figures. That is why the committee reports are curtain raisers to inform the Members and alert them that, “Once you go to the figures, look out for these things so that we see how to finally deal with them”.

If I can guide further, therefore, that does not preclude us a House from moving to that level by finishing with the committee reports. Let us finish with the committee report. The issue of recommendations being made by the committees will now be put to the test when figures are brought and laid on the Table. For example if the committee has proposed that they increase by 20 percent, you cannot increase it if you do not find it in the actual figures. I am guiding that we adopt reports from Social Services, Natural Resources, and Finance and then come to that particular area where we now have to deal with the figures. Wouldn’t that be the proper way to handle the situation? At this stage we have adopted ten reports; we have not pronounced ourselves on any figures. That gives us now -

MR WADRI: The guidance I am seeking from you, after hearing from you that we are going to adopt in appropriation of this Budget, is as follows: whereas we are left with three reports as put on the Order Paper, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that while we consider the suggestion that was made by hon. Abdu Katuntu that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, together with the relevant sectoral chairpersons, interest themselves to guide us? That way, while we wait to dispose of these committee reports, they should keep doing some work to identify possible areas from all the sectors from where we can be able to realise money so that when we reach that stage of appropriation, we are kept informed by the work that they have already done before so that our work becomes easier. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely that is why earlier I said that pronouncing ourselves on the committee reports does not preclude us from engaging again, to identify specific areas. The fact that we are pronouncing ourselves on committee reports does not at this stage stop the ministers, the Government and the committees from interacting to actually zero down on the actual figures that should go for appropriation because as of now, you can see that matters are being raised from Trade and we have already pronounced ourselves on the issue of the report of the Committee on Trade and Industry. But that does not stop the process of going back and reviewing some of those things to see possible areas of re-allocation. 

Initially, this is what I thought was going to happen and I had interested the Chairperson of the Budget Committee in that procedure. After the committees have finalised with their reports, there should be an opportunity for the Budget Committee to look at the actual figures. But then when we looked at the Budget Act as it is, we found that that would present a situation that was not foreseen by the Act. Section 7 says “There shall be presented to Parliament by the Budget Committee the recommendations submitted to the Speaker under section 6(3)…” and that is at the stage of the preliminary indicative figures and the MTEF considerations, which is earlier in the year. 

So, that is where we got the challenge because initially, my view was that after the committees have sat, this matter would go to the Budget Committee and the committee would still harmonise all these things because I remember that is how we did it when I was in the Seventh Parliament. I was a committee chairman and I recall after finishing all our things, we went back to the Budget Committee and agreed on the figures and details of overall things that were done. So, that is the challenge that I am confronted with when I looked at Section 7; there is no provision in the rules or in the Act for the reports of the committee to again be looked at by the Budget Committee. Let us think through this properly. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe in what you are telling us and I think the situation we are faced with is quite new. But I wonder: could it have been something that was envisaged in the rules? If you look at rule 147(c) where then the Budget Committee was mandated to carry out such other functions relating to the national Budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament or any law? I wonder whether we can explore the provisions of that rule and the discretion of the Chair and so that you assign the Budget Committee this particular task for purposes of moving the House forward.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Quite frankly, I looked at that provision. The question is: at what stage do I do that? That is why I was trying to make this thing move quickly so that we have a period ahead that is still available for us to deal with this thing. I intended actually to use that provision so that we could move forward and refer this matter to a more comprehensive committee that looks at the entire picture before we make any pronouncement on the issues. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to allay the fears of selective payment of salaries in Government. It has ever been applied and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we have an issue that we need to resolve. Let us deal with that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think the issue of going to reconcile the figures should be done by the Budget Committee. There should be a committee to harmonise the whole position and that should be the Budget Committee because all chairpersons are part and parcel of the Budget Committee. The principle is to pass reports like we said but we should create the problem so that the Budget Committee finds a solution and in the case of the teachers, we should create a problem for them to go and identify the money. So, even if you want us to pass the report, let us create the problem. We need them to look for such amounts of money and then go and do it. That is what we should do. 

I thank the Prime Minister; he is very positive, of late. I want to propose -(Interjections)– yes, this is serious because if we could identify Shs 142 billion to pay one person in a short time, why not the teachers? We got money for Basajjabalaba in a short period and we paid him Shs 142 billion. So, we should get money for the teachers. On my side, we agree with the Shadow Minister for Agriculture, but for now, I want to say that we will take the 50 percent increment for the teachers this year. I also agree with the recommendation of the committee of a tax waiver of the Pay As You Earn. I thank you. 

8.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, what is coming out clearly is that there is need to raise the pay as a result of the cost of living and the cost of living is for both the teachers and the other civil servants. The challenge we have, which we are shying away from, is where do we get this money from to deal with the problem? 

The composition of the Budget Committee is all chairpersons of the standing and sessional committees. Rule 147 (3) states “The functions of the Budget Committee shall be to -
a)	Consider preliminary estimates and macroeconomic plans and programmes and submit recommendation to the Speaker;
b)	Consider the National Budget and compile recommendations and refer them to relevant committees…” 

Mr Speaker, the challenge we have is to mobilise resources that we need to table here and decide how to deploy them. This is the right committee and I think you had ruled wisely. As we continue to pass this, let the Budget Committee sit with the chairpersons of other committees and identify where we can get these resources and then we can see how we can harmonise. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely. You see, rule 147 is premised on Section 7 of the Budget Act and that deals with the indicative figures, which we deal with in March at the beginning of the year. That is what forms what goes in the ministerial policy statement. So, now let us - no I was just following up to wrap up what you have just said. 

What my view was and still is, was that if we finish with the committee reports - that is why I am very interested in finishing with the committee reports so that we use what they call the incidental clause, the general powers given under rule 147. We can then send these matters back to the Budget Committee and all the committee chairpersons will be there with all those figures that the honourable member has raised from trade and elsewhere and they put these things together. That is what will carry us forward when we are going to discuss the appropriation matters because then you will be able to see whether what you are proposing is true or whether it is possible or not. 

You will be able to see it from there because you would have generated whatever number of billions that the honourable member raised - maybe there is another sector where there are wasteful things - because it is very clear from the President’s State of the Nation Address, which I remember that there should be reduction on foreign trips, reduction on purchase of new vehicles and things like those. That is what we will go and deal with in the Budget Committee and say, “Have you allocated these things to the purchase of new vehicles? If so; why?” Because that does not conform to the State of the Nation Address and that does not even conform to the Budget Speech itself. The framework is proposed on what should be done and what should guide the specific items in the Budget. Then you will be able to do this as chairpersons at the Budget Committee level and then move forward from that while we go for appropriation. That is what I thought would have been the proper procedure so. That it is why - 

Hon. Members, some of you were saying we were rushing through this Budget but we even sat and agreed to pull out the important and specific issues that you think are crucial and that is what you bring to Parliament. If you can see, we have spent hours going through the bulky reports. We went through the report on trade - the entire report. I think trade was debated on its own when there was no other committee report. We had time to deal with that but that matter did not come up. Why? -(Interjections)- No. The point is, it never came up from the committee. It did not come up from the committee so it was difficult for the House to be guided. So, on the basis of this, can I now guide, therefore, that we need to close this matter?

This is how I propose we should close it –(Interjections)- can I propose then you can guide? Because I am proposing; I am not ruling yet. I am just proposing the way forward. The way forward is that we finish with the committee reports to allow us time for the chairpersons of the committees to sit in the Budget Committee and deal with all those issues that have been raised before we go for appropriation matters. That would be the proper way to do it. (Hon. Member’s rose_) The whole thing is still about guidance, so let us –

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, of course what you are saying is both rational and correct. The only question in my mind is that if Parliament, by resolution, has taken a position on a principle, for instance like pay rise, can the Budget Committee then go and say, “Although you said pay rise, we find no money, therefore, there should be no pay rise”?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be it. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: If that is ok then I have absolutely no problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, because there will be no money for the pay rise.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Then that is fine. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. (Applause) Yes, hon. Katuntu.

8.10
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do agree with you that after a critical reading of our rules, we should have proceeded differently. Actually when you look at rule 147(b) the Budget Committee should have considered the national Budget, compiled reports -(Interjections)- and referred to the relevant committees. You see we are now trying to cure a step, which was missed because if the Budget Committee had sat with the chairpersons and looked at all these things before the reports came here, we would not be having this debate. So, I do not know. 

Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from you is whether Parliament is now proceeding under rule 147(c) which says, “The Budget Committee shall carry out such other functions relating to the national budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely. I thought that was the safe place - to move back to the Budget Committee so that these matters are harmonised. 

MR KATUNTU: I agree with this entirely, Mr Speaker. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and the Prime Minister for conceding with the motion on the Floor to find a solution for the teachers. I heard the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business saying that 50 percent -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. no. hon. Member, please.

MR EKANYA: Okay, let me go to guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go to guidance. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, yesterday before we ended the sitting you made a proclamation that we should end this matter by the 8th of next month -(Interjections)- this month. That was yesterday. And you also directed the minister of finance to bring the supplementary appropriation the other day. I seek your guidance that to save time it would be prudent - and nothing stops the minister of finance, next week even Monday or even over the weekend, to submit the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bill and the Appropriation Bill. If the minister of finance submitted the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bills - and today during the Budget Committee meeting we were told that the Appropriation Bill was ready - so that when the committee is handling the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bill, we pass them with the amendments; because it is in the Appropriation Bill where we have the Vote by Vote allocation. That would save us time. 

But if the Budget Committee only handles the committee report, excluding appropriation, then the Appropriation Bill comes may be after one week, we shall have a problem of time.

May I request that you cause the Minister of Finance to bring the two; Supplementary and Appropriation Bills and we handle them together in the Budget Committee with the recommendations?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the situation. All the other Bills are already before this House, not so? All the Finance Bills are before the House, except the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bill. That is to my knowledge.

The Budget Committee indicated to me that they have finished with all those Bills and are ready to proceed with them any time. That is why I raised the point yesterday about the Supplementary Appropriation and the Appropriation Bill that should come before the House so that it also goes through the processes so that we do not crowd the tail end of this programme. That is what I proposed yesterday.

For purposes of moving forward, and I am going to say it again, the process was started. Many people came on board when it was ongoing already. There were processes that could have been done earlier but did not take place but there is still a way of dealing with it. That is why my proposition is that we should pronounce ourselves on the committee reports, finish with them and then we can go back to the Budget Committee with all the chairpersons there now bringing out the specific issues. This is because I remember in my experience that the Budget Committee is the one that proposed the final re-allocations. That process would happen when we had already finished with this one. Am I communicating?

That is why I am proposing that we finish with the report of the Committee on Social Services, pronounce ourselves on the report with the amendments that are there and are acceptable because the implication of those amendments will still be vetted by the actual situation on the appropriation process. So, it is not like when you pronounce yourselves on this, it is final and that is what must be in the Budget. It will not be possible because now we have to deal with the actual rearrangement of figures when we are dealing with the appropriation.

8.17
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The chairman of the committee had moved a motion that this House adopts the report when Dr Epetait proposed an amendment. So as a way of moving forward and following your guidance, I thought we would put a question to the amendments Dr Epetait has proposed and then we come to the motion proposed and we adopt the report and move forward. So I move that the question be put on Dr Epetait’s question.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I did make an amendment of 100 percent salary increment but following further consultations, I am inclined to adopt the amendment that has been moved by the Leader of the Opposition that we go to 50 percent but without a Pay As You Earn pegged on to it. I beg to adopt that.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I think that is the debate that we have had and I think that in the whole guidance you have given, my understanding was very clearly and effectively pronounced by the Shadow Attorney-General, hon. Abdu Katuntu. We moved away from that and said we cannot pass a resolution when we do not have figures to back that resolution, it does not make sense.

In the report, the chairman of the committee, on behalf of the committee, is asking this Parliament to adopt the proposals and he gives figures. How can we adopt a report saying increase when in fact you have not changed these figures? They are the same and you do not have the money. Therefore, I think it is really obvious and I am sure that my sister hon. Franca Akello will agree that it is obvious.

What we are saying is: because of that, let us go back. The Budget Committee now comprising all the members of the sectoral committees will go through the figures and when they come, they will have considered all this information in detail from every report and Vote so that they can come and give us proposals on concrete figures that are in the Budget. I thought we had all agreed on it and that was the consensus that we had reached?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, we have all agreed that the Budget Committee will go back and harmonise the figures. What the House is attempting to do is to set a target upon which the Budget Committee will go and look into. We just do not go and send the Budget Committee empty handed. After they have considered those figures, they will come back to the House and report accordingly on what they have been able to do based on what the whole House has recommended. I thought that is what we had agreed on?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the committee that examined this matter proposed 20 percent. The explanation they have given is that they were hoping that since they had discovered some wasteful expenditure proposed in their sector, there could be possibilities in other areas. That is why they came to the proposed 20 percent. But on their own, they were only able to get Shs 29 billion, which if translated would only amount to an increase of five percent. That was my understanding.

So even the 20 percent proposal is already anticipatory on possible areas of wastage that might be found in the other sectors. That is why they came up with that figure. Basing on what they had found as a committee, they could only propose a five percent increase and only for teachers. Are we together?

That is why the chairperson of the committee said he was also excited, just like many of us, that there were actually figures that could beef up some of these other things that could make them even bigger. Can I just propose, as a way forward, that we pronounce ourselves on the principle rather than the detail and we leave the detail for the specific committees to go to the Budget Committee and then they deal with it? Would that be proper?

The principle would be that when they go back to the Budget Committee, they should look for avenues of trying to cut down and re-allocate things that could cater for other sectors. Would that not be the proper way to handle it? Should I put the question? I put the question that the report presented by the Social Services Committee Chairperson and the proposed amendments, be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is now coming to 8.30 p.m. Now you can see that the volume of work has increased. May I make a special appeal that we adjourn within 30 minutes? [HON. MEMBERS: “No.”] I am just making an appeal. Moreover, I am the only one who has been sitting here since the beginning; all of you have been coming in and going out. (Laughter) I should actually be the standard measure. I am prepared to go for another 30 minutes to enable us receive the Natural Resources Committee report, and the summary of the response from the shadow minister. Thereafter, we will adjourn and continue with the rest tomorrow. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

8.26
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

In accordance with Article 155, clause 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee is mandated, among other things, to examine and comment on policy matters, and to examine critically Government recurrent and capital budget estimates.

The committee considered the ministerial policy statements and examined the budget estimates for the Fiscal Year 2010/2011 for the following votes: Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment; Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority (NEMA); Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority (NFA). The report covers the following aspects:
i.	Sector mandates;
ii.	Budget performance in the Financial Year 2010/2011;
iii.	Sector achievements in the Financial Year 2010/2011;
iv.	Planned activities and programmes for the Financial Year 2010/2011;
v.	Funds requested for to implement the planned activities and;
vi.	Committee’s observations and recommendations.

Mr Speaker, I am beginning with Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. I will request the hon. Members to proceed to page 6 of the report because the pages between two and six are about the achievements, planned activities – I think those can be read during your free time.

On observations and recommendations, we shall begin with a review of the concession agreement with Umeme. This is under energy. Umeme has a 20-year concession to distribute power in Uganda. The concession started on 01 March 2005 and expires on 28 February 2025. The concession agreements have contractual targets that were set for Umeme for the first seven years of the concession and to be re-negotiated thereafter.

The committee found out that Government has started to re-negotiate concession targets with Umeme. However, this review exercise is not anchored on concrete policy guidelines and the Electricity Regulatory Authority has not generated possible alternative options that will inform the negotiations. 

On thermal power subsidy, the committee was informed that Government owes independent power suppliers or thermal energy suppliers money amounting to Shs 207,532,000,000 for the Financial Year 2010/2011 and that the projected subsidy requirement for the Financial Year 2011/2012 is Shs 209,468,000,000. The committee considers this power subsidy abnormally high and, therefore, the purchase of thermal power from independent suppliers is not sustainable.

The committee recommends that the Government should fast track the completion of Bujagali Hydro Power plant and expedite the construction of Karuma Hydro Power project in a bid to step up electricity power supply in the country. 

As for high electricity tariffs, hon. Members should be aware about this and we are all experiencing the pinch. In light of this, therefore, the committee recommends that a forensic investigation be carried out to, among others ascertain the extent of energy losses, Umeme level of investment in the power sector, income tax reporting of Umeme metering system and the transactions of thermal energy suppliers with Government.

The committee also recommends that the Government should consider the report on Electricity Tariff Reduction with the view of implementing the best practices therein. 

The committee also recommends that the Government should consider investing substantial resources in renewable energy generation by, among others, giving incentives to firms or companies that provide this service.

Mr Speaker, regarding Escrow Accounts, the committee established that Government, particularly the energy sector is operating two Escrow Accounts - often demanded by development partners as security tools to ensure fulfillment of obligations stipulated in agreements. 

In light of this, the committee recommends that the Auditor General should institute a special audit into the operations and management of Escrow Accounts and report to Parliament within four months. 

The committee also recommends that the Government should expedite the development of a policy on management of Escrow Accounts, and explore other financial alternatives to meet the Public Private Partnership requirements other than tying up such huge resources amidst competing unfunded priorities. 

On the development of the petroleum industry – this is the sector we all know and of course what is happening is that we are experiencing high prices. The committee recommends that the Government should integrate the oil and gas sector developments into the National Development Plan and the land use policy and also come up with strategies on how to handle the likely impact of oil exploration on socio-economic and environmental sectors to avoid the negative effects usually associated with oil discoveries. 

Management of Oil Revenue 

Parliament has consistently urged Government to adhere to good governance principles and establish a legal framework to regulate the operations of the petroleum industry, but nothing to date has been done. It is prudent that the necessary oil and gas laws be enacted for the effective management of huge revenue inflows and smooth take-off of the oil industry. Therefore, the committee recommends that Government tables before Parliament all the relevant Oil and Gas Bills before December this year. (Applause) I will move on to page 11.

Downstream Sector Developments 

As alluded to in my earlier submission, as pump prices of petroleum products in the country continue to soar, Government seems not committed to devising appropriate strategies to address the matter. 

On page 11 at the bottom, the committee recommends that the Government should urgently make efforts to regulate the activities of the downstream sector and also make appropriate interventions to mitigate the hike in petroleum prices. There is need to establish an authority to regulate this sector.

Jinja Fuel Storage Tanks

The Government storage facilities in Jinja have remained un-stocked for a long time. This has created unprecedented market shortages at times of crisis in the global oil market, which leaves Government with a no fallback position to mitigate and stabilise the petroleum prices. 

Recommendation on page 12: the committee recommends that the Government should give priority to the Jinja Storage Tanks and take over the responsibility of refurbishing, restocking, operating and managing this facility.

Kenya-Uganda Oil Pipeline

Under the Public Private Partnership arrangement, Government procured Tamoil (a Libyan firm) to develop the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline. Given the fragile political situation in Libya, the project is likely to stall. Therefore, the committee recommends that the Government should consider reviewing the agreement with Tamoil as the Libyan situation remains highly fragile.

Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment, is on pages 13 and 16. I invite hon. Members to look at page 16.

Observations and Recommendations

Rural water and sanitation - we proceed to page 17 where we get the recommendations under rural water and sanitation, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment should develop a more sustainable, institutional framework for the operation and maintenance of water systems and facilities in the country. 

Water for Production

Substantial resources, both from the Government of Uganda and donors have been allocated to the ministry over the years to construct water systems or facilities for this purpose. However, the committee established that the cost of these facilities is always abnormally high and apparently the functionality of these facilities leaves a lot to be desired.

The committee recommends that a value for money audit should be instituted in the Water for Production Vote Function for the period between 2008/09 and that one of 2010/11. 

The committee recommends that the Government should prioritise and allocate more resources to bulk water supply systems in rural areas, especially water stressed areas, as well as revamp the Community Based Maintenance System countrywide.

Value Added Tax on Water

With no justification, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has over the years continued to ignore Parliament’s recommendation to VAT exempt water in order to make it affordable. Water is a basic need, which should be made accessible by all citizenry. Apparently, Uganda is the only country in Africa charging VAT on water.

The committee recommends that the Government should VAT exempt water effective this financial year. (Applause)

Ban on Polythene Material (Kaveera)

The Government banned the production and use of certain categories of polythene material, but the Minister of Water and Environment has up to now failed to come up with regulations to enforce the ban on polythene material as required by the Finance Act. 

The committee recommends that the Minister of Water and Environment urgently puts in place regulations for enforcing the ban on polythene material by December this year.

The committee further recommends that the Government should urgently consider provision of incentives to firms or individuals producing alternative packing material to kaveera, such as paper bags.

Procurement of Radar

Despite an earlier parliamentary recommendation in May 2011 to make the procurement of this facility a priority in this financial year, the Government has not provided resources for this item. 

The committee recommends that as a matter of urgency, the Government should provide resources for the procurement of a radar system this financial year.

I move on to Vote 150 - National Environmental Management Authority, and I invite honourable colleagues to proceed to page 23 where there are observations and recommendations under that Vote.

Observations and Recommendations

1.	 Encroachment and degradation of wetlands:
The degradation of wetlands in the country has hit alarming levels, yet the national environmental watchdog, NEMA, looks completely incapacitated to reverse the trend. 

The committee recommends that NEMA should expedite the process of physical demarcation of wetlands throughout the country and steps up its efforts to protect lake shores and river banks.

The committee recommends that the Government should establish the Environmental Court to adjudicate environmental degradation cases and related matters.

The committee undertakes to carry out a comprehensive investigation into the rampant encroachment on wetlands in Uganda especially in Kampala and the surrounding districts and report back to the House. 

2.	The Environment Protection Force: 
The committee established that the Government has started the process of recruiting an Environment Protection Force of 600 personnel, of which 450 will be designated to NEMA and 150 to NFA respectively to stem the rampant encroachment and degradation of the environment and ensure compliance with all the environmental and other conservation laws. 
 
The committee recommends that the Government should expedite the establishment and operationalisation of the Environment Protection Force with the command and control structure similar to that of the Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

3.	 Environmental Levy:
The committee recommends that the minister of finance should comply with the NEMA Act on remittance of environmental levy to the National Environment Fund.

4. 	Environmental Pollution:
The committee recommends that NEMA should step up its efforts on the enforcement of the law on environmental pollution.

Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority

I invite honourable colleagues to straight away move on to page 29 with observations and recommendations.

Observations and Recommendations

1. NFA Board of Directors
The committee established that National Forestry Authority had for almost a year, since May 2010 operated without a dully constituted board of directors following the expiration of the contract of three board members. The authority, therefore, lacked the critical leadership to provide strategic direction and guidance, supervision of the operations of the authority and the ability to exercise disciplinary control over staff. The committee recommends that when appointing members to the NFA Board of Directors, the minister should comply with the law.

We move on to page 30 and the staff. This also applies actually to the recruitment and appointment of the Executive Director. We did observe that the Executive Director has for a long time not been put in place. Of course, you remember the saga that surrounded the appointment whereby the person who had qualified through the interviews was rejected on flimsy excuses. However, the committee recommends that the Minister of Water and Environment appoints an executive director to the NFA without further delay. The recruitment and appointment exercise must be done in accordance with the law.

I will go straight to page 31, on the wage bill. Since the enactment of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 to date, the National Forestry Authority continues to rely on non-tax revenue and donor funds to finance most of its operations and the payment of the wage bill. Owing to the decline in forest products and the significant reduction in donor support, NFA is no longer able to raise the necessary financial resources to fund its programmes. 

The committee recommends that the Government should take up the NFA wage bill amounting to Shs 6.2 billion with effect from this financial year. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish.

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, the proposal by Government to give away Mabira Central Forest Reserve to Mehta Group for sugarcane growing arose during the consideration of the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for this financial year. The matter has since generated debate both in the public and private or civil arena. However, in view of rule 67(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee could not pronounce itself on the matter since it has not been formally tabled before Parliament.

However, the committee would like to reaffirm that the mandate of degazetting forest reserves as contained in the Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 lies with Parliament. Therefore, when the matter is formally tabled, the House will handle it accordingly. (Applause)

Forest Encroachment

Under that one, the committee recommends that the NFA should be allowed to execute its mandate without undue interference. The committee further recommends that the National Forestry Authority should prioritise the demarcation and marking of all central forest reserves boundaries with concrete pillars with effect from this financial year.

Mr Speaker, I conclude. Subject to the above observations and recommendations, the committee recommends that Parliament approves [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “Land titles.”] Well, the land titles, I think we did recommend that the committee should undertake to comprehensively inquire into the issuance of land titles in the central forest reserves by the Uganda Land Commission with a view of having them cancelled. That is the recommendation.

I do move that Parliament approves the budget estimates for Votes 017,019,150 and 157 as follows:

Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; recurrent expenditure, Shs 8,353,822,000; development expenditure, Shs 1,539,130,930,000; and the total is Shs 1,547,484,752,000.

Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment; recurrent expenditure, Shs 7,185,137,000; development expenditure, Shs 192,693,210,000; and the total is Shs 199,878,347,000.

Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority; recurrent expenditure, Shs 5,075,974,000; development expenditure, Shs 6,292,257,000; and the total is Shs 11,368,224,000.

Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority; recurrent expenditure, Shs 200,000,000; development expenditure, Shs 8,083,505,000; non-tax revenue, Shs 10,118,486,000; and the total is Shs 18,401,921,000.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairman. Can I have the Shadow Minister for this sector, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi? You have ten minutes.

8.52
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr John Ken-Lukyamuzi): Mr Speaker, I have got two sectors; one for Energy and one for Water and Environment but I will try to be very brief in view of the time constraint we have. 

Some of you could have read my paper. The statistics in my paper are a revelation of the imbalances in sectoral allocations of funds between the Government and the donors. As important as the ministry may be, it greatly depends on foreign donations which in my view, is a big constraint because in the event that the donors stop funding those sectors, we would have a big problem.

Of very great importance is one point I have noted. All the problems in this Ministry of Water and Environment, a good number of problems are related to lack of compliance by the ministry to the policy on the environment articulated by the National Objectives of State Policy XXVII. There are two specific provisions which should continually guide and direct the ministry on how to move. 

There should be no shortfall. The ministerial statement for Water and Environment does not explain how monitoring of the actually funds shall be done neither does it propose any funds for doing that work. It also does not demonstrate how the climate change unit is going to be integrated in the budget and this is a new sector. 

Mr Speaker, the ministry greatly depends on foreign donations and I have also noted that there are duplications between the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture. So as you look for the money to pay the teachers, there are some gaps I have noted here as well.

Water is a very important component. While I appreciate the good work being done by National Water and Sewerage Corporation; because it has made us proud by making an institution of a parastatal nature a success story; nobody should talk about privatising it because water is life and it is a social good. Uganda subscribes to the UN Slogan that, “Water is life”. The current cost of water, therefore, negates the UN slogan because water is not affordable. If water is life, it is also as priceless as life should be, therefore, it should be costless. Every person should have ready access to water. In spite of all that, I would like to commend the good work of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation.

We must inject more funds into the rural water sector so as to meet the Millennium Development Goals. We are more focused on the urban sector where there are many rich people; but what about the poor people who stay in the rural areas? This is still a gap in the ministry, which the Government should attend to.

Government has no clear policy on irrigation and rain water harvesting. Something must be done if we are going to combat climate change. The phenomenon of climate change is at large in this country. You have heard disasters related to it; we must pay attention to it. Otherwise, if you do not do so as Government, we promise you that when we come to power we shall attend to it with a policy, which is constructive. 

The current procedure of getting the developer in NEMA to pay for the environmental assessment services is bound to lead to conflict of interest. So we propose as the Opposition that NEMA should collectively pay for the assessor’s professional services instead of getting the developer to directly pay the assessor. We have had so many problems of compromise, where the results in the end do not benefit the population. 

Mr Speaker, this area of water and environment is also related to oil and gas because in the end you need an environmental policy to direct oil exploration and production. There is a lot of excitement about oil production. But in my view, oil production should not begin until the appropriate laws are brought in conformity with the proposed Oil and Gas Policy. The petroleum and mineral (exploration) provisions in the Constitution are seemingly ambiguous and cannot be at the basis of the oil refinery. We can end up in a calamity of oil spills similar to what we witnessed in Mexico in the resent months. 

On the matter of NFA; the success of NFA depends on the role of the Authority as well and the executive director. This institution has been in wrangles for the last ten years. No meaningful afforestation programme can go on in this country when you do not have leadership in the NFA. Government is meandering around; using politics to appoint people who are short-lived circumstantially. You must be serious! You should appoint a person formidable enough to lead the forestry sector.

As we speak, Uganda loses 88,000 hectares of forestry every year and this is a catastrophe as far as we are concerned. However, I was listening attentively to the Chairperson of the Committee on National Resources and I got saddened when he quoted from the Rules of Procedure why the committee could not say anything about the statement of the President on Mabira. 

While he quoted from the Rules of the Procedure, I want to quote from the Constitution. Article 245 of the Constitution demands that Parliament has a duty to protect areas like forests for the good of all and to make appropriate laws; yet he is quoting for us from the Rules of Procure. My God! What are you talking about? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, on a number of occasions, I stood on the Floor of this House to raise a matter of public concern about the statement of the President. On none of those occasions has the Prime Minister said, “Yes” or, “No”. Parliament has the duty to protect the environment because we all know that Mabira is held in public trust by the Government for the people of Uganda. You cannot allocate arable land in Mabira by word of mouth or declaration or decree; even if you are the President. And it would be a shame for a whole President whom we respect, under Article 98 and 99 of the Constitution; he is the full executive of the Constitution. All the laws tilt on him. That kind of character cannot make a statement that messes up the constitutional provisions. He would have to apologise and we could also take action. 

Why do I say so? Under Article 107(1) of the Constitution, a President could be removed from office if that President makes a mess, which is inimical to the economy of the country. We know very well that Uganda’s economy is environment based. We know that the future of dams like Karuma and Bujagali entirely depend on the water catchment impact of Mabira. So we could move that the President comes out of office because he does not know how to govern this country in accordance with the Constitution. 

I would like to end by saying that there is a big problem in this country. We have not been impressed by how Lake Victoria is being managed. This is one area where there is free money, which we could make use of if it were not predominantly donations. The side of Uganda on Lake Victoria in terms of protectionism is badly off. The Government of Uganda, through NEMA, has failed to control the industries’ effluent flow into Lake Victoria and this is a catastrophe. So, you stand warned that if you are so relaxed, the Opposition is on standby to capture power and rectify the errors. Thank you very much. 

I now move to the next report, I think I am doing well on time – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give hon. Lukyamuzi more time, please.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay this paper on the Table. It is entitled: “Analysis of the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Water and Environment Sector, by the Shadow Minister, John Ken-Lukyamuzi the man.” (Laughter)

I now come to the sector of Energy. Mr Speaker, like the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Ministry of Energy gravely suffers from non-compliancy and adherence to National Objectives of the State Policy XXVII of the Constitution, which demands that the State shall promote and implement energy policies, which ensure that people’s basic lives and needs, and those of the environment are catered for. From time to time, activities of that honourable ministry negate the provisions of the Constitution. Now –(Mr Kiwanda rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwanda, you are ruled out of order. Hon. Simon Mulongo, you are also ruled out of order.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Electricity has a bearing on people’s livelihoods. It should, therefore, be affordable. But as we speak, the unit cost for domestic consumption is about Shs 640, which is unexplainable and unconstitutional, pursuant to the provision I just read. The affordability of energy will ensure the safety of forests and the entire environment including the wetlands. So, we should do our best to ensure energy is affordable enough to create alternatives.

The regulatory authority in Uganda has not assisted the public because on a number of occasions, in accordance with the Electricity Act of 1999, whenever the tariff is to be increased, there is usually mandatory demand to consult the consumers through their associations. This has not been happening.

Electricity depends greatly on water but the rate at which Government is encouraging the germination of dams can be dangerous to our waters. I am saying this because dams can be risky. They deoxygenate the waters. They negatively affect the fish; they may harm the aquatic lives and you know very well that dead waters cannot last biologically. Those are the issues that the appropriate ministry should try to grasp.

There are other energy sources other than hydro electricity that Uganda can adopt. I am talking about geo-thermal, upon which a study has been done in Western Uganda showing the availability of 450 Megawatts. How about the solar energy? It shines in Uganda from morning to evening – you can tap the natural resource without costs. (Applause) What are you doing? In terms of the geographical perspectives, wind energy can be harvested largely in Karamoja, Kalangala and along the shores of Lake Victoria. There is bio-gas. Waste accumulated in Kampala can be used to generate power to light up the entire city. We have some of the richest waste materials, in terms of accumulation of methane, a notable gas in bio-gas formation. I don’t want to go scientific beyond what I am able to talk about. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, let me talk about Umeme. Much as we are grateful for Umeme being able to do some work, there are many questions about its operations. Also many of us regret why we sold out UEB because this has caused a calamity. The exercise is very expensive. You know when you talk about hydro electricity, you are talking about water running down the turbine and lighting up the system. There is nothing beyond that. Umeme has not performed well, although it is doing a good job.

These are the issues about Umeme. From the research I have conducted, many people think it is exploiting the consumers. For example, there is a feeling that the monthly meter readings are generalized, which is very unfair to the public. Because of the economic crunch we are facing today, if in the month of August I realise that things are not moving very well, I could choose to sacrifice some of the lights. But for Umeme, whether someone has made a sacrifice or not, the bill will be uniform. That is being unfair to the people. There must be periodic readings to match the money we pay.

Umeme reflected its electricity bills in its submission in regard to the UPDF, police and prisons yet we all know that UEDCL is supposed to be paying electricity bills for those institutions. Before we pass the budget for the energy sector, we need an explanation on that. How come the proposals we got in the Natural Resources Committee of Parliament reflect electricity bills for those institutions? 

We also need an explanation – I had the opportunity, on behalf of the Opposition, to look at the agreements made between Uganda Government and Umeme. In that agreement there is a clear undertaking of investment of US $20 million in the first five years. That information is not reflected anywhere in Uganda. Where is that money? Are you sending it to South Africa? This is a very big charge over which we need an explanation, as spokespersons of the Ugandan taxpayers.

There are also loopholes in the development programme you have put forward before our committee namely – in fact for the next two years from now, you have created loopholes that are environmentally not explainable. For example, how can you begin spending money from Tullow Oil before the oil resources have been harvested? There is a charge over which I want clarification to the effect that a sum of about US $800 million realised from the deals with Tullow Oil has been earmarked to be spent on Karuma even before harvesting the product –(Interjections)– what are you talking about – good will over what?

Mr Speaker, I noted that one of the biggest loopholes in the Energy sector is related to massive expenditure of money using infrastructure development, which has also not been realised on the ground. We need an explanation on that because big money is being spent in the absence of a programme, which has a legal approval.

It is also risky to begin developing Karuma Dam before realising the fruits from the Bujagali Dam in view of the tragedy that befell the development programme when I was in the sixth Parliament between Kiira and Nalubale. What miracles do you have? Remember the problems between Nalubale and Kiira? Will these not befall Bujagali, which is only four miles away from Kiira? What is the magic wand? We need an explanation.

For example, when you talk about 50 megawatts at Bujagali being realised this year, where is the computation in science to make us believe you that eight months later, you will have realised to 250 megawatts. It is upon this speculation spectrum, where you are spending a lot of taxpayers’ money that we are charging you. And it is a serious charge. (Laughter) 

Before I end, the development programme under oil production still has many loopholes, many of which are unexplainable. For example you state in your programme of endeavoring to pass two laws on the utilisation and management of the oil and gas revenue by 2012, and you want to construct an oil refinery in Kabale by that time. Where is the proof that you will scientifically meet the requirements? I have already looked at the state of the environment report from NEMA, which has already revealed that around River Semliki, there are already environmental obstacles occurring as a result of the activities of Tamoil even before full production of oil.

There are over 40 by-products, which will be produced out of the oil exploration exercise. I know of one environmental impact assessment which we discussed publicly in Hoima. I am assuming that each product may necessitate the production of an environment impact assessment. You have gone ahead to tell everybody that you are going to refine oil; where is the law to direct you? Most of what you are going to do is a catastrophe, which could cause a lot of hazards to the environment. You know very well that Lake Albert area harbours over 500 bird species and birds contribute greatly towards the booming tourism. You also know that Uganda is second to Namibia in the abundance of rich species of birds, many of which are extinct, as we speak. 

Until you realise the results from oil, how can you get excited to the extent of risking your environment? Suppose as a result of the exercise of oil production, you kill the agricultural sector throughout Bunyoro and Bundibugyo, what will you explain to the public? There is a problem lingering around and you don’t seem to have seen it. 

I have already articulated a point of great importance. There is a problem about the sharing of the oil resources. You talk about sharing oil resources on a programme, which was produced by the framers of the 1995 Constitution at the time when oil was only in anticipation. Many of you do not know that the species of oil you are talking about is predominantly waxy. And in science that means you have to add value before the product is worth consuming -(Interjections)- why are you pretending not to know the hurdles you have to go through?

Finally, I would like to end by proposing - as a serious student of law, I am mindful about the law; I would like Government to revisit the contents of Article 244. Until you have revised that provision of the law, you may not go in for oil production. Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi. Only hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi could have carried us this far! 

Thank you very much hon. Members for the endurance. We have achieved a lot today. Tomorrow when debate begins we hope we will not take very long. We, therefore, need to take a break but when we come back tomorrow, we should be able to hopefully finalise. Let’s target finishing with the committee reports tomorrow so that we free next week to deal with the Bills and the Budget Committee that now will be considering the reports that have been passed. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10 O’clock. 

 (The House rose at 9.20 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 2 September 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)


