
Tuesday, 1 September 2009

Parliament met at 11.55. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FORM THE CHAIR


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome the few of you who are here for the morning session. I hope the benches will fill up as we proceed. We intend to fully proceed with the work.

Secondly, I am delighted to inform you that last weekend I received the African Woman in Public Life Excellency Leadership Award –(Applause)- in the institutional leadership category by the Rich Executive in London. 

Another recipient was Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa; she received a Peace Award for her work in conflict areas. We hope that with your support, we shall continue doing more work and getting more awards. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2009/2010

10.59
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Gerald Menhya): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to present the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Fiscal Year 2009/2010.

Introduction

This report was prepared in accordance with the provisions of Article 90 and Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, in compliance with Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure, and Section 9 of the Budget Act, 2001. 

The committee considered the Ministerial Policy Statement and examined the recurrent and development estimates for Vote 001 – Office of the President; 002 – State House; 003 – Office of the Prime Minister; 107 – Uganda Aids Commission; 112 – Ethics and Integrity; and Vote 159 – External Security Organisation for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

The committee now wishes to report its findings, observations and recommendations for consideration and adoption by this august House.

In writing this report, the committee considered the following methods:

    i. The previous and current ministerial policy statements and parliamentary reports on the sectors; the report of the Auditor General on accounts of the votes under its supervision; and findings of committee field visits; for instance, NUSAF Project implementation in Northern Uganda was considered.

    ii. The committee met the Prime Minister and all the ministers from his office, together with their technical officers, a team from Relief and Disaster Preparedness Department, Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme, Luweeero Triangle, Government Chief Whip, Economic Monitoring, Information and National Guidance, and Karamoja Affairs.

    iii. The committee also met the Minister for the Presidency and her team that included the Minister without Portfolio with officials from the Office of the President, State House, Uganda Aids Commission, and External and Internal Security Organisations.

I would like to ask you to move to page 6 of the report because I suppose the members went through the achievements and work plans for this docket.

Hoping all of us are now on page 6, allow me read out the observations and recommendations that the committee arrived at. 

i) Assistant Resident District Commissioners

The Office of the President is planning to recruit assistant RDCs in charge of youth and to monitor patriotic clubs. The committee would like to note that while this is a good plan intended to promote patriotism among young people, it lacks basic documentation on how it shall be implemented, and what the roles of the different stakeholders will be.

The committee is concerned about the increasing cost of public administration. We recommend that the Minister for the Presidency works out a concept paper for this project, specifying the roles of the assistant RDCs and the different stakeholders, for example, school administration, local governments, teachers and students, in running patriotism clubs in secondary schools.

We also recommend that there is need for better facilitation for RDCs and their assistants to enable them play their roles with efficacy. The process of filling the 55 vacant positions for support staff in the offices of RDCs, DRDCs and ARDCs, should be expedited as soon as possible.

The committee further reiterates its earlier recommendation that summary reports from RDCs on the monitoring of Government socio-economic programmes, be made available to Parliament by the Minister for the Presidency, for examination, on a quarterly basis.

ii) High cost of rent for Government ministries

The committee would like to reiterate its earlier concerns over the increasing cost of public administration as a result of renting of office space by Government ministries. The committee is concerned that out of 49 Government ministries and departments, only 21 are housed in Government buildings, leaving a total of 28 Government ministries and departments paying rent for office space in private buildings.

The committee recommends that Government should expedite the process of coming up with a long-term work plan to put up buildings for Government ministries, so as to reduce the cost of public administration in future. The committee believes that this will help Government save money to meet costs of other priority areas, and cut down on costs of public administration.


iii) High number of Presidential Advisors

The committee observed that there were 59 Presidential Advisors and their assistants, who are paid under U1 scale. However, the job descriptions, academic qualifications and expertise of these presidential advisers and their assistants were not clearly defined and could not be linked to performance output.

Some of the advisers are on permanent appointments, others on contract, or on part-time; and yet others are on retainer basis. The committee considered that whereas Presidential Advisors are important in helping the President in execution of his Constitutional mandate, their roles, responsibilities and functions need to be rationalised. However, the committee is not convinced that adequate action was taken on this matter last financial year. 

The committee would like to recommend and reiterate its earlier recommendation that the portfolio of various posts of Presidential Advisors should be re-evaluated with a view of scaling down the number, as a means of reducing the cost of public administration, while ensuring the quality of the personnel and services offered by them to the President. In addition, Government should streamline its recruitment policies for Presidential Advisors in order to rationalise their roles and terms of service.

Observations and recommendations for Vote 002 - State House 

    i) The disposal of the old Presidential Jet 

Last financial year, State House informed Parliament that it would dispose of the old Presidential Jet since a new one had been procured for the President. The committee has learnt that since then, the Jet has not been disposed of. The committee is concerned that the delay in its disposal may lead to loss of value due to depreciation.

The committee recommends that State House should consider disposing of the Jet this financial year to avoid causing loss of value.

    ii) Management of staff structures for Government ministries

The committee observed that of the 622 established posts that exist in State House, 33.4 percent are still vacant. A case in point is that of the five legal positions in the Vice President’s Office as evidenced on page 55 in the policy statement, which have not been filled. Besides, the committee is concerned that some of these positions, including that of the Chief Engineer in the Flight Unit department are extremely sensitive and need to be urgently filled.

The committee further observes that whereas the approved structure for the household unit in State house is 78 staff - please refer to page 154 of the policy statement - 123 have been recruited, resulting in an excess of 45 staff. Other positions where excess staff was recruited include those of gardeners, drivers and mechanics as evidenced on page 154.

The committee recommends that given the high unemployment rate in Uganda, Government positions for which finances are appropriated should not be left unfilled.

We also observed that recruitment should be restricted to approved structures only. 

Refer to page 12 for Vote 107, in regard to Uganda AIDS Commission.

i) The surge in the prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS
It has come to the attention of the committee that in the recent past, there has been an upward surge in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Uganda. The committee is concerned that the strategy seems to be directed to the young people other than the age group which is most affected by the increasing rate of infection. 

Current statistics indicate that the new infections are occurring among married couples, and according to the latest figures from the Uganda AIDS Commission, the prevalence rate among married couples for men is 9.9 percent while for women is 12.1 percent. This is not a good trend.

The committee recommends that Government designs a new strategy in the fight against HIV/AIDS if the new surge is to be effectively responded to. Uganda AIDS Commission needs to strengthen the campaign on prevention other than popularise the effectiveness of ARVs, since it is not a cure.

On page 15 and we look at observations and recommendations for Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity. 

    iii) Recruitment of staff

The committee observes that of the approved 49 positions in the structure of Ethics and Integrity, 27 which is 55 percent, have not been filled. For instance, in the department for strengthening the Anti-Corruption Legal Framework, six staff are needed, but only one officer has been appointed. In the Coordination Department, no staff has been recruited out of the eight posts that exist there. In the Coordination and Policy Analysis Unit, of the eight approved positions, none has been recruited.

The committee has learnt that failure to attract and retain staff is a result of inadequate remuneration and motivation.

In light of the above, the committee is concerned that the performance of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity in fulfilling its mandate is wanting.

The committee recommends that Government should seek avenues to attract and retain staff so as to enable the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity to attract and retain competent staff.
 
iii) Hosting of the Conference on the International Federation Against Corruption

The committee would like to observe that Uganda has been chosen to host, on behalf of Africa, the annual Conference of the International Federation Against Corruption. Whereas this decision was made known to Government in 2008 through the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity, and whereas the ministry has made a submission to Cabinet on this matter, including the financial requirements for the next two financial years, there is no allocation in the Budget for this activity.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance makes appropriate provision in the Budget for financial year 2009/2010 for the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity to begin early preparations for this conference.

On page 17, observations and recommendations for Vote 159 in regard to External Security Organisation.

The committee observes that the External Security Organisation has outstanding arrears which have been accumulating over the years due to inadequate budget funding. For instance, arrears grew from Shs 1,124,000,000 in last year’s budget to Shs 4.6 billion in this year’s financial budget.

The committee recommends that Government should expedite the process of clearing the outstanding arrears for the External Security Organisation as soon as possible.

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister

Observations

    i) Relief efforts in famine-stricken districts of Uganda

The committee observes that in the past three years, there have been recurring emergency crises of famine, related mostly to issues of climate change, especially in Eastern and Northern Uganda. Whereas the Office of the Prime Minister has made some progress in disaster management, there still remains a lot to be done in regard to climatological and meteorological early warning prediction systems, to help farmers to have timely planting of crops to avoid crop failures. Besides, there are still inadequate storage facilities for relief items to respond to these emergencies. 

The committee recommends that besides undertaking the repairs of the old storage facilities, the Office of the Prime Minister should construct new ones to improve on its relief storage capacity, and to enable it to effectively respond to disasters as and when they occur.

Government needs to develop a comprehensive policy to respond to the emerging challenges and adequately fund the meteorological centre, to be able to produce reliable data for effective weather predictions.

    ii) Utilisation of donor funding and project management

The sector has attracted a lot of donor support in terms of recovery and social development programmes and projects, especially for disadvantaged areas. However, it is not clear if the various donor-funded projects are really attaining their set objectives. This is worsened by inadequate reports on performance evaluation of these projects. For instance, whereas NUSAF II is beginning this financial year, there is no comprehensive terminal evaluation report covering the entire implementation of NUSAF I. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that performance evaluation should be taken seriously by the Office of the Prime Minister, and reports be produced to Parliament about the performance of the various projects.

In view of NUSAF II and PRDP, implementation should be carried out, taking into account the major challenges or lessons learnt and recommendations drawn from the NUSAF I project, which unfortunately has not been undertaken.

iii) Management of the Avian Flu

The committee would like to observe that the Office of the Prime Minister is co-ordinating the Avian Flu Prevention and Control Programme in Uganda. Please refer to page 61 and 63 of the Policy Statement. The committee questions the rationale of the decision of Government to assign this responsibility to the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that the Avian Flu response is a matter of public health, which should have been run and co-ordinated by the Ministry of Health. The committee recommends that Government should review this decision with a view of ensuring effective management and response to the Avian Flu. 

iv) Establishment of a website

Following the committee’s recommendation to the Office of the Prime Minister to design a website as an electronic manual to provide valuable information related to their roles, responsibilities and activities in various sub-sectors, the Office of the Prime Minister has designed and launched a website, www.opm.go.ug. The committee compliments the Office of the Prime Minister for this effort. However, it is worth noting that the information published on the website on the various activities undertaken by the Office of the Prime Minister is still inadequate. 

We recommend, as a committee, that the Office of the Prime Minister should make the website interactive and informative, and the site should be made an effective source of information about the performance of the various sectors under the Office of the Prime Minister, which is vital for the public. 

In conclusion, I now move that Parliament approves the following estimates for the respective ministries and departments for the financial year 2009/2010. 

There is a new revised copy of figures which has been circulated and I want you to turn to that page. 

Vote 001 - Office of the President; recurrent expenditure is Shs 53,067,902,000 and development expenditure is Shs 14,657,466,000.

For Vote 002 - State House; recurrent expenditure is Shs 61,353,916,000 while development expenditure is Shs 16,874,580,000. 

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister; recurrent expenditure is Shs 20,522,471,000 and development expenditure Shs 124, 940, 809, 000.

Vote 107 - Uganda Aids Commission; development expenditure is Shs 5,367,604,000. 

Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity; recurrent expenditure is Shs 1,427, 43,000; development expenditure is Shs 2,853,114,000.
 
Vote 159 - External Security Organisation; recurrent expenditure is Shs 9,644,940,000 and development expenditure is Shs 442,000,0000.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you Chairperson and your committee. Just before I call the Leader of Opposition, this amendment you have circulated, the non-tax revenue, is it a deliberate omission, and not an accident?

Because the original reads off taxes, arrears and non-tax revenue; this one only reads taxes and arrears.

MR MENHYA: The revised figures as concluded and imbedded in the conclusion is the latest information and figures that we have, and we have indicated for each budget, the figures that are included there in form of arrears, and also some of the estimates have taxes. Take an example of development expenditure for Vote 001; it has taxes worth Shs 3.5 billion. So, this is the latest information that we have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just wanted to ensure that the omission of non-tax revenue running through the amendment is not an accident, because it is here in all of them, and it is not here. I just wanted that clarification.

MR MENHYA: I want to request the Minister of Finance to help me.

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU: I would like to draw your attention to the big book. In the original figures, amount of funds totalling Shs 3.4 billion was gratuity for ISO as well as the gratuity arrears; and consequently if you look in the big book, this money is statutory; that is anything which is arrears on the salaries and wages of people, as well as court awards. 

I just want to draw your attention to page 72 of the big book. You will find that court awards are listed but there pension and gratuity for classified ISO vote of Shs 3.4 billion. When this was adjusted on the original figures, it left the figures which the chairman of the committee has read. I hope that clarifies the issue that you were raising, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: We had quite a friendly fight last evening here on the Floor of the House when it came to issues of figures and I am already beginning to see that today may not be a smooth day when it comes to figures.

I would, therefore, wish to find out from you Madam Speaker with the explanation that the Minister of Finance has given, that we do not go into those details; we wait for the appropriate time when we will be giving an eye examination on each and every figure that we have been supplied with. 

The only thing I will appeal to the minister and the chairperson of the committee, is to arrange the figures properly, because this business of bringing changes at the last moment may not help us much. I, therefore, beg that we do not dwell on these figures now. Let us go into the general debate, and then, when we are to pronounce ourselves on these figures, we give them a critical look. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the questions I asked were for me to understand because there were things I did not understand, but you can restrain yourself from talking about the figures; I have no problem. So, please, the Leader of the Opposition, five minutes.

MR WADRI: In the absence of my Shadow Minister for the Presidency, I have the honour to make a few observations on the statement that has been given to us by the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs.

I agree with the chairperson when he cries over the issue of high administrative expenses incurred by the Office of the Presidency, and this makes me ask the following question; for us, I think as a country, we know that we are the only country at least in East Africa which has two State Houses; there is a State House in Nakasero, in which we are spending colossal sums of money; and we have a State House in Entebbe. [Honourable members: “State Lodge”] 

I do not know whether it is a State lodge or what, there is a bed there for the President to sleep on.

The question I am asking myself is, is it feasibly possible for one man to sleep on two beds in a night? If that is not the case, we also do have a Vice President in this country who likes official residence. If it is not a matter of one person wanting to have everything, why haven’t we thought of giving up the State Lodge in Nakasero so that the Vice-President also has somewhere he can be found officially?

At the same time, when we generally look at the presentation that has been made, there are a lot of figures on arrears. I do not want to get into the details, but I do know that in Government management today, there is what we call commitment control. In this case, you cannot commit Government into receiving goods and services for money that you do not have. And the moment you commit Government, you must be able to fulfil the transaction during that financial year. What has happened to the Office of the President? Don’t the technocrats and the politicians there adhere to the principle and the rule of commitment control so that this country is saved from unnecessary commitments which end up in domestic arrears?

The second issue that I would want to address our minds to is that of the Resident District Commissioners. I agree with you, Mr Chairman, when you say that administrative costs are very high in that Office of the President. Out of the 59 Presidential Advisors - I even doubt whether some of them even interface with the President at all; and yet they are paid. 

Today, we are again being told that there is need to have additional assistant RDCs and yet presently, the number of RDCs is at least two per district; there is the RDC and the Deputy or Assistant RDC. Now, you want to recruit more to be in charge of youth. What has happened to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development? Where are the commissioners? Where are District Directors of Community Services? Are these Assistant RDCs going to usurp the powers and duties of these civil servants? 

In addition to that, the issue of the qualifications of RDCs is even questionable. When you look at our Constitution, it clearly states that for a person to be an RDC, which is a senior service post, he or she must have qualifications that can earn him a seat in this House. He or she must have the equivalent qualifications of a Member of Parliament. But in the past year, we have noted that even some members of Parliament who were dismissed from this House by court because of lack of academic qualifications, were taken and recycled and appointed as RDCs. 

In Buganda, where I used to be a civil servant, there is a tree called egirigiti; it is a thorny tree with bright red leaves, and it is a tree where dead dogs in Buganda are hanged to rot; the Baganda do not bury dogs. So, we are now asking ourselves, has the government come up with an equivalent of the egirigiti where all those political failures, people who do not even have qualifications to be in Parliament, are recycled and made RDCs? (Members rose_) 

What are you going to do? If you want to put me to order, you can do so. I am sure of what I am saying because the crux of the matter is that there are people who were thrown out of this Parliament for lack of academic qualifications and conveniently they were made RDCs the following month. What is it that we want to achieve as a country if we cannot respect the Constitutional provisions of Parliament?  

There is also the issue of the Presidential Jet. Just like State House, we are the only country – much as most Ugandans are grappling with poverty, we can afford to be very luxurious to the extent that Shs 84 billion is said to have been spent on buying a Presidential Jet even without the approval of Parliament, and yet there is a jet which still works. Is there seriousness on the part of Government to sell the Gulf Stream 4 Jet which still lies at Entebbe Airport so that the money can be put to better use? 

On the Office of the Inspector General of Government, over the last year, we had a battle and drama in this country when we had an appointee tussling it out with the appointing authority and the institution of Parliament as to whether one should be vetted or not. I hope this time, now that there is that vacancy, that the appointing authority will seek the necessary technical advice from the bureaucrats so that no more errors will be made in that regard. 

In addition, the issue of disaster preparedness; in the month of May, I was on the Floor of Parliament to sound the drums of looming disaster and at that time I said that my people in Terego were surviving on mangoes, and that Government should prepare to assist them because the moment the mango season ends, there would be deaths. I was taken as a person who was just telling an ordinary story. 

Before the month of May ended, the whole country was engulfed in disaster. My appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister and more particularly the Minister for Relief, Refugees and Disaster Preparedness is that let it itself not be a disaster. Let it be proactive and make the necessary preventive and educative arrangements so that people are conscious of disasters that strike them. We have been talking about famine, but we are already receiving reports that there are heavy rains in some parts of the country which may again culminate into disaster. Office of the Prime Minister, please get prepared so that you are able to avert disaster instead of joining it. 

Lastly, the issue of PRDP vis-à-vis NUSAF. While NUSAF was being implemented, there were some parts of this country which registered commendable success as a result of implementation of some of the projects funded under NUSAF. But at the same time, there were also parts of this country which were not happy with the implementation of NUSAF and it ended up being a programme marred with the highest levels of corruption. With PRDP now coming in place, and with huge amounts of money being committed both by Government and development partners, I appeal to the Office of the Prime Minister, to have its eyes and hands on this programme so that again, we do not go into hearing stories of misappropriation of resources. 

Madam Speaker, as I said about the issue of figures, we are holding our breath and we shall take them on at the appropriate time. I thank you, Rt. hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aol, aren’t you the Shadow Minister for Disaster?

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I actually left this to the Shadow of the Presidency but it is important for me to say one thing that with the disaster, we are not satisfied. We were promised that the policy of disaster would be brought to this Parliament before July this year, but to date we have not received a comprehensive policy of disaster preparedness and we have been waiting. 

Sometimes we have been challenged to offer an alternative policy on disaster -(Interjections)- yeah, we could do that very easily but I think the government has a better opportunity to do it because of the staffing in the Disaster Preparedness Department. We have been waiting and we still wish to have that policy presented here on the Floor of the House. 

We talked about people suffering and there has been no preparation for disaster; no education. Some of us were challenged by the fact that people who die used to died of AIDS; they also died of other things like poor feeding. A person who has HIV/AIDS is very vulnerable to that situation and can die very easily and yet we have food shortages with us here; such a person can live even for 10 or so years if there is no starvation. We need to help our people better. 

Just last week we were in Gulu and I was very happy that we were able to help our chiefs, the cultural leaders. They was distribution of iron sheets to 54 chiefdoms; each of them received 150 iron sheets. That is about 8,100 iron sheets; and then we also had cement and Hydra Form machines. 

We are very happy about it but we need to follow up very closely; is that under disaster preparedness? Is it under PRDP? Is it under NUSAF II? Which budget? I’ve been just pondering. We need that clarification. I even consulted the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, Prof Kabwegyere. I said, “Where did this budget come from? Is it from PRDP because from there I heard that PRDP ….” While we are very happy, we need to help all our people equally and it is not NRM, but it is the government because this is taxpayers’ money; it is public funds. Yes, we need to help our people but when we help our people; we don’t have to mix up a lot of issues. There are a lot of issues that we mix to confuse things and to promote corruption. 

We have already seen that sometimes when this food is taken - for example I went to Katakwi, I consulted the Katakwi chairman on disaster preparedness about the food delivered to his district. He was very happy that food was delivered to his district during the time that the district really needed it. But there have been deliberate efforts to just, you know, skip the district straight from the national to the sub-county or to the parish. Why do we do that when we have structures? We do that because we want to divert; we want to misappropriate. 

At least the chairperson of Katakwi district told me very clearly and also the CAO. They were not happy -(Interruption)- please, I take the information.

THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that districts have pleaded with the Prime Minister that as much as possible, food should get to the target population. Because when food goes to the districts, you have problems of storage; then you also have problems of transport. So we have undertaken in our office to deliver food as close as possible to the population needing the food.  So, it is not really true that food is delivered where it is delivered because you want to divert the food. It is in fact to make sure that the food arrives.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much hon. Aol, and the minister in charge of disaster. And, Madam Speaker, the minister of disaster has said they are delivering food closer to the people. The information I want to give -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He looks a disaster himself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no. What I have is what I am telling you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Madam Speaker, Okay the minister for disaster. In Bushenyi -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker. First of all, hon. Nandala-Mafabi must have a very strange image of disaster if I look like disaster. (Laughter)  Secondly, is he in order not to respect your ruling and continue to refer to me as the minister of disaster?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are out of order. Hon. Kabwegyere is a Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. That is the full title, please. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. It is unfortunate I went to Busoga College Mwiri maybe I would have a problem with English, changing a word here and there, but I am sure - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, those who went to Busoga College speak good English. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker and hon. Aol, the minister has stated that he is delivering food closer to the people. Recently, he delivered food closer to the people in Bushenyi but in Bushenyi, it has not been declared that there is disaster of hunger and he comes from Bushenyi; he takes food to Bushenyi, in his village, leaving people who are dying of hunger in Bugisu, Teso or wherever and takes it to Bushenyi! 

Now there is a report indicating that these people are selling this food in order to buy alcohol. Is this minister really nationalistic? Madam Speaker, I am sorry to have made a mistake of disaster. (Laughter)

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members for all the information. I would like to react to the information by the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees on why Katakwi District was bypassed. 

In Gulu, at least the district knew about everything. Why do you have to do it differently, is it because of the lack of policy? Why do we have District Disaster Management Committees if we have to bypass the districts? It does not mean everything has to be offloaded to the district stores, but at least there should be flow of information so that there are checks and balances to avoid diverting this food. 

Experience has shown that sometimes this food is taken to the district and then at night they change the bags and the food finds its way back to Kampala stores. This is very unfortunately; we leave our people in food insecurity. I have already given you an example of Katakwi where you deliberately refused to use the District Disaster Management Committee. 

It is also important that I comment a bit on the youth RDCs. We have a lot of problems in our country. We have been told the resources are not enough, but we are over burdening our parents with increasing fees, for instance, in the universities. We even have a problem on how to manage disasters that come up in our country and yet we say that we should have allocations for youth RDCs! 

Some of us do not even see the use of the RDCs that we already have in the districts; and you want to appropriate over Shs 11 billion for youth RDCs when we are over burdening our taxpayers and parents with unnecessary payments? Why don’t we appropriate the little resources appropriately rather than focusing on individual interests? These youth RDCs are not a national interest but an attempt to capture votes from the youth for a particular party. That is wrong, we are in a multiparty dispensation, and we cannot focus on one party.

So, I want to declare that in my view, we should just forget about this issue. The RDCs who are already in place should work for the youth as well. A youth who qualifies to be an RDC should be appointed just like those other RDCs. If we appropriate enough money in schools, we would have helped our youth better. 

And on disaster, let us help our youth to have the spirit of volunteerism – because they have a lot of strength – let them volunteer in the times of disaster instead of making them RDCs. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.53
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start with the Vote on the Prime Minister’s Office. We as members from the areas where PRDP is being implemented had gone a long way with the Prime Minister to agree on certain benchmarks. One of them was that Members of Parliament from the PRDP area would sit with their councillors, technical staff and come up with their own work plan according to the IPF allocation from the ministry. 

Madam Speaker, I am from my district and the work plan that we approved with the district council and the technical staff has been altered from the Prime Minister’s Office. Instead, they have smuggled in a private school belonging to a former minister, Jovino Akaki, which was not in our work plan. They have allocated Shs 100 million under PRDP to it, when this money is supposed to rehabilitate the people who suffered during the war. The Office of the Prime Minister has given this money to a private school, belonging to a former minister. 

I want to know the circumstance under which this school came to the work plan of Apac District. We are going to reject that work plan. We had agreed with the Office of the Prime Minister that all Members of Parliament would be given –(Interruptions)

MR TOOLIT: Thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give is that there was a presidential directive to support Apac High. But in Apac, we have Apac Secondary School, which is government-owned and which is also in a very sorry state. We also have Apac High which is a private school. So we think there has been misinformation to the authorities, otherwise this should have been Apac Senior Secondary School. The President cannot make a commitment of Shs 100 million to a private school when even the pledge that the President made to Chegere Senior Secondary School in 1996 of Shs 20 million is still - thank you.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I want to state it clearly as their Member of Parliament that the district council is sitting now to reject that proposal. I should have been there but I returned because I was told that we are debating this particular subject. I want to state it here that we are not going to accept that school to be included in the work plan for Apac. 

Secondly, I want also to know, NUSAF II, which is supposed to be a proposed intervention; we have not yet received the report on NUSAF I as the committee stated. We were told that NUSAF II would come with new guidelines because of the failures of NUSAF I. But I am from my constituency and already they have allocated IPF for NUSAF II. The Minister for Finance stood here and presented a loan purportedly that Parliament should approve it for NUSAF II. We are waiting for the guidelines for NUSAF II and the loan being asked for by the minister. But already, the Office of the Prime Minister has gone ahead to implement NUSAF II without us the people from the North – they called all of us from the NUSAF area and we agreed with them that we sit down – (Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, hon. Betty for giving me this chance. Madam Speaker, it is only last week that the papers for NUSAF II were laid here on the Table. I have been with the committee and the money for NUSAF II has not yet been acquired because we are still waiting for the debate and approval of Parliament. Therefore, if in Apac they are already implementing it, then I do not know where they got the money from. 

MS AMONGI: In the sub-counties I visited, they already have IPF of PRDP for NUSAF II and for NAADS which has already been passed. It is good you have clarified but I think that is not enough because the IPFs for NUSAF II are already with the sub-counties. 

Lastly, I want to talk about the question of patriotism clubs. We debated the committee report on social services in charge of education and they have clearly recommended that this programme should be stayed so that clear documentation is given. 

The committee is also noting on page 6 that they were not given any clear documentation and guideline on how this patriotism would operate save for the fact that they want to recruit assistant RDCs in charge of youth to implement it. 

I am shocked that after all that the committee is going ahead to ask this Parliament to support a vote of Shs 11 billion for this particular patriotism club. What has gone wrong with the question of checks and balance? The oversight function that the committee should perform; you were not given documents; you were not satisfied with how it is going to be implemented, and now you are going ahead to ask Parliament to approve Shs 11 billion! (Member timed out _)

11.58
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County Soroti): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairman of this committee for his report. But I have a few reservations. There are certain things I would like to be clarified to me. 

On page 6, the Office of the President is planning to recruit assistant RDCs in charge of youth and monitoring of patriotic clubs. It is good to stay in a community where people love each other and in a country where citizens love their country. But it is equally good for the country to love its citizens and that is when the people can love the country. You cannot love your country if your job security is not guaranteed; you cannot love a country were you cannot get treatment in the hospitals; you cannot love the country if only 27 pupils in your district pass in division one.

I believe this patriotism is a national programme where people should be patriotic regardless of their parties. My understanding about the RDCs is that they are very partisan and they seem to be campaigning agents of the Movement Party. What guarantee shall we have that they will be patriotic in the execution of their duties? I hope we are not going to appropriate money here to run the exercise of one party -(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that many of these RDCs are busy campaigning for themselves but not for the Movement. 

MR OMOLO: Thank you for that information. I have very high doubt that these RDCs will be patriotic since the ones we already have in place are not patriotic. I have an example of an RDC in my district who became the chairperson of the district land committee. Like the chairman of the area land committees; he is also in charge of the committees in different sub-counties. I have seen him evicting people from Katini Sub-county out of their own land. I have seen this RDC gazetting a bus terminal in Soroti Municipality, which is the duty of the minister of transport; is that patriotic? 

Therefore, it is very wrong to give patriotism to RDCs. If we are to have patriotism, we should give it to schools. Let it be put in the curriculum of the schools. That is the only sure way to have patriotic citizens. But short of that – we would rather we give this money to schools; increase teachers’ salaries so that they can be patriotic and teach well. You cannot be patriotic when you do not even have beans in your house. 

On page 8, the planned activities: “Mobilising the masses towards poverty eradication and social economic transformation”. That is a very good thing. I would appreciate the President for that but my colleagues, let us forgive the President; I have the experience of age; age itself causes stress. We are giving the President too much work! Let us allocate this money to the districts and the LC IV chairpersons and the sub-county chairpersons to go and educate the people on that exercise. But we over stretch one person to go throughout the country teaching people – that will be stressing him and shortening his life. Let us give him time to be with us. We can even be charged for over stretching the President. Let us give the money to the districts and sub-counties and this exercise will be done, because the President cannot go to every village. (Laughter) 

And on page 9, the achievements are that it provided support to various farmers towards increased household incomes. Madam Speaker, I am one of the beneficiaries - the President managed to come to my house although it was after a hard time. 

I can assure my honourable colleagues on that side, in places where you do not have enough support, you may never get it because a few of your supporters in those places have cocooned the President; they have completely locked off the President. You are shaking your head but I am telling you my experience: getting the President to come to my house was an uphill task. 

Some of my colleagues here never wanted the President to go to my place, saying, “How does the man go to the Opposition.” I thought this was a Ugandan President and not a Movement President. It is only unfortunate that he is the chairman of the Movement and president of the party - but he is a President for Ugandans who should be free to go to any Ugandan’s house. I can assure you it is an uphill task to have the President going to the home of an Opposition MP.

I even got the machine, I have been to NAADS unlike other Movement supporters who were given envelopes on the spot -(Laughter)– and they were given pick-ups. The way this exercise is being done is not very genuine.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi

12.06
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank very much, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that NUSAF II does not have a work plan, and I do not know what we are going to rely on. 

You recall that when we were passing NUSAF I, it was mismanaged because they said, “Let us pass the money and the work plan will be worked on later”, and in the process there was no work plan and the money was mismanaged. I can assure you the same money we are borrowing is going to be mismanaged in the name of Ugandans, especially the people in Northern Uganda.

There is always an end of project report – you cannot approve money before you have seen an end of project report because the report is the basis on which to act. If we go on like that and approve money for the sake, Madam Speaker, I am very sorry. 

On patriotism, if we are now employing RDCs for youth, we should employ RDCs for women; RDCs for children; RDCs for the opposition and RDCs for the Movement so that we can balance this because we have discovered that an RDC is an RDC and there is no specific function – the youth and women are all in the same area. If you want to be patriotic, let us get this money and give it teachers - increase their salary and they will love Uganda. 

Of recent people producing children are naming them, “Obama”. I do not see people naming their children “Museveni”. Why are they naming them “Obama”? This is because they are seeing that he is patriotic. You do not need to tell people to love you. People must love you from conviction. 

Yesterday I read the newspapers which said the President gave the Bishop of Kasese 20 cows – 20 cows after having given him a car. We in North Mbale had never got a car for 17 years until we pushed him and they gave us one on Sunday – 17 years. However, there were no cows –(Laughter)- -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order, Minister for the Presidency.

THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is fond of over playing things. His Excellency the President was in Sironko last Saturday - and he was not there. While the President was fundraising, he was on radio actually ridiculing him and now he is here saying that we forced the President to give us a car when we know that it was by his own will that he made a pledge, which he fulfilled last weekend. 

I am wondering in what spirit hon. Nandala-Mafabi comes here to accuse the President that he was being coerced to give a vehicle to North Mbale Diocese. Is he in order to impute bad motive on the side of the President of Uganda who was so kind to visit us and raised Shs 150 million for a project in the diocese? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Really if His Excellency the President gave the diocese a car and Shs 150 million, you must be out of order to accuse him of not liking you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you for your wise ruling. What we are saying is that the President never sold his cows to give us a car. It was the taxpayers’ money which he picked and bought a car and gave to North Mbale Diocese. That has been applied to all dioceses – what we are trying to say is that it is very bad to be selective – the Bishop of North Mbale’s coronation was on 10 December 2006. 

The one of Mbale Diocese was recently coronated but he was given a car before the one of North Mbale. Why do you have to be selective? If all Bishops are supposed to get cars, let them get. If all District Khadi are supposed to get cars, let them get. If all are supposed to get 20 cows, we should get our cows because he does not sell his property to give us money because it is our own tax.

Madam Speaker, in that prospect, we must be very careful about this business of selective envelopes because it promotes corruption. Why should you give a few and leave others? It is very unfair and he is using our own people to do the same. 

I want to remind you that in 1969, there was a law being made and the chief architects were Balaki Kirya and Ibingira – do you know what happened to them? The following day the same law was applied on them - it will also apply to you. (Laughter) I am very happy that the Ministry of Finance has accepted that pension is a direct charge on the – 

MR WOPUWA: Clarification. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Which school did you go to get clarification? (Laughter) Madam Speaker, on pension – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR WOPUWA: I am a full Member of Parliament and allowed to debate. Procedure requires that if I am not satisfied, I seek for clarification. Is it in order for the honourable member to imply that I never went to school and therefore not qualified to be in this House? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Which school? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I think hon. Wopuwa was within his rights to seek clarification on a matter which he had not understood. It has nothing to do with his education. He is a qualified MP and that is why he is here. So you are out of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is very unfair. You start with information, clarification and then order. These are the problems we have. I think the debate must be well structured.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you challenging my ruling?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But I am ready to get your clarification. Now ask for clarification. 

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, when hon. Nandala was referring to the law made under Balaki Kirya and Grace Ibingira, he said the same law will apply to you. He used the word “you” in his language. Now I want seek clarification from him. Which “you” was he referring to? The Rt. Hon. Speaker, or all of us here?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you know what “you” means. It can be one or more. That is why I was saying we need to understand English.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can you explain who is under threat? Who of the “you” sitting here is under threat?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, “you” is us. If we pass anything here, which can be applied to us tomorrow, it is dangerous. A few minutes ago hon. Wopuwa got up and said, “If you give the money to the RDCs, some are already campaigning for the money”. They are campaigning against them so if you give the same money to the same people, you might think you are doing a good thing kumbe it is going to fight “you” the same person. So that is “you”. I am ready for them and I can assure you that I will deal with them whether ministers or any other person.

This issue of having NGOS and of government going to Northern Uganda, PRDP - now everybody is looking at the North because of the war. They are getting more NGOs and all the government support. If you are not careful, you are going to create wars. If we in Bugisu want something to come, we might have to start a war and after the war, many people will bring in resources to develop the area. (Member timed out_)

12.15
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs for bringing this report to this House. 

I want to raise some issues that affect the people of Uganda and Northern Uganda in particular, more so on peace, recovery and development programmes. I would be more comfortable if I were told how much money is allocated for PRDP in this financial year 2009/2010. 

We are also aware that the Office of the Prime Minister and this House agreed that the planning process of the projects was to be undertaken amongst the Members of Parliament, the district councils and technical people at the district.

This was done in some distracts but it is unfortunate that most of the projects, which are going to be implemented now are not according to the plan, which we had earlier on agreed upon at the district level. 

We had also agreed that PRDP should address areas where insurgency really affected people. For the case of Pallisa, over 500 people were brutally murdered from 1986 to 1991 and we have the list of those people and when they were killed. 

However, when you look at the schedule from the Prime Minister’s Office which I got today - the district yesterday passed a budget and said, “Don’t blame us for the allocation under PRDP. This list was harmonised in the Office of the Prime Minister without our consent.” So I want the Prime Minister to tell me why, for example, Kameke sub-county, which lost over 200 people got nothing; no project on PRDP; why Kogonyo sub-county, which also lost people got nothing; Kagumu nothing; Bulangira nothing and Kasodo nothing when all these areas were affected by the insurgency.

When you look at some areas where key people reside like Butebo sub-county, they had seven projects of over Shs 300 million each. Pallisa Town Council seven, Kibuku sub-county four then the rest of the sub-counties one each yet this was not our position when we were planning. I want the Prime Minister to tell the people of Pallisa and Northern Uganda why the programme was altered by the Office of the Prime Minister as indicated by the Council. Even if you recall the minutes, they have washed their hands and they are saying it is the Office of the Prime Minister.

We always addressed the issue of equitable distribution of projects, but I am also considering the issue of influence peddling as far as PRDP is concerned. First of all, they have shied away from telling us how much. This statement states how much there is for PRDP but we don’t know. 

The other thing is that they have meddled up the allocation of the projects. I don’t know the reason why yet we are all supposed to equitably allocate projects. I really urge the Prime Minister to clear this doubt and also provide this House with the planned projects for all the districts in Northern Uganda.

Regarding the issue of the old presidential jet, I was in the Committee on Presidential Affairs when this issue came to this House. We agreed in this House that it was actually barter trade. The suppliers were supposed to take the old jet and the Government of Uganda tops up and that is what we approved here in this House. I am surprised as to how the Office of the President acquired the money for paying the cost of the new jet in full whereas we had agreed that they were just going to top up. That is why I want hon. Wabudeya the Minister in charge of the Presidency and the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to tell us where they got the money for paying in full, either through this House or they have their own vote, which they used to pay.

There is also the issue of RDCs. These people are no longer RDCs but actually campaign agents for the NRM. Everywhere in Uganda they have involved themselves in land conflicts, including persecuting people who are not for the NRM. This should stop and they should go by their roles according to the constitutional provision -(Member timed out_)

12.20
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three issues to raise. One issue is on page 7 of the committee report and concerns the high number of presidential advisers. We have noted that the committee observed that there were 59 presidential advisers and their assistants and indeed this is a very big number. 

I want to know whether the committee went ahead to interface with some of those presidential advisers, or all of them. This is because as we are saying that the number is too much - even for these advisors to access the President is a tag of war. Ever since they were appointed as presidential advisors, we doubt whether they have ever met His Excellency the President, or whether they have ever advised him. So, Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the committee has plans or interfaced with some of these presidential advisors – even if it was in camera – to know whether they are carrying out their duties diligently, because we know that out of the 59 presidential advisors –(Interjection)- this happens because the President wants to appease or to make sure that every region is catered for, but when it comes to the actual advising of the President, seeing him is a tug-of-war. So, I want to know whether the Committee on Presidential Affairs has ever interfaced with these people to really justify their existence, because we are paying a lot of money for work not done.

My second issue is on the same page, regarding Vote 002 - State House. Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have two state houses. We want to know whether this vote covers Nakasero State House and Entebbe State House. Also, at various times, we have been concerned that the Vice President has no official home and it has been the appeal of this august House to ensure that one of those houses, either at Nakasero or at Entebbe, be handed over to the Vice President so that he can execute his duties. I do not know how far the committee has gone, because in my considerate opinion, I believe that Nakasero State House is better for H.E. the President because it is near the town centre, and it would be good for him in order to monitor the security of the city and the country at large. So, the Vice President can move to Entebbe State House –(Laughter)– that is my opinion, so that he can diligently execute his duties. But in any case, if the President feels more comfortable at Entebbe, let him stay there such that the Vice President takes over Nakasero.

Finally, is the issue of the Presidential Jet. I do not know whether it is becoming the order of the day, because I have just talked about the old state house and the new state house and now it is the old Presidential Jet and the new presidential jet. Since the committee observed that it has not been sold, is there any genuine reason as to why the President still possesses these two jets? I believe the President does not want to give away the old jet. Is it still in good condition so that the President can go ahead and use it, or does he just want to have two jets just like he has two houses? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

12.25
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for pointing out the high cost of Government ministries in terms of renting office accommodation. I think this is a very important issue, because if you look at Government ministries renting, for example, Simbamanyo House for about Shs 62 million per month, and the Police Headquarters at Shs 50 million per month, I think on this rationale, we have to adopt the notion of running Government as a business. It should not just allocate money without due consideration of the effectiveness of such a decision. There are cheaper options for Government ministries to acquire permanent establishments in terms of housing facilities. Even if it means using the mandate of this Parliament or using the mandate of the entire Government to give a guarantee for Government to acquire financial resources, or even if it is in terms of loans to have independent headquarters; it works cheaper on the basis that even if this was your own person making such a decision, you would really value which one is cost effective and this is how Government should be run. Even when you are a minister sitting in a rented headquarter of Government, you should take responsibility –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, honourable colleague. Talking of ministries renting premises, let us begin with our own Parliament. We are renting Baumann House and paying very handsomely. If we got such an amount of money and completed one floor on top of that building, I think we would be home and safe. So, much as we talk about other ministries, let us talk about our own case. I thank you. 

MR EBONG: Thank you. I think we need to adopt a mortgage policy on this so that ministries can go head to have their own headquarters, and that includes Parliament. But we assume that this position should originate more from the Executive, if we are to move in a more robust way. So, we should have executives that are proactive so that we comprehensively deal with these kinds of situations. 

The second issue, Madam Speaker, is on PRDP. World over, realising sustainable development has got great linkages in promoting private sector-led development, and I wonder how within the context of PRDP we can revolutionalise the agricultural sector in terms of promoting contract farming and industrialisation, because this is the basis for creating a strong capital base for the economy; and I also wonder how the PRDP is going to facilitate private sector-led development. But I have always remained hesitant, particularly on affirmative action programmes for Northern Uganda, where people misappropriate money and they simply get away with it. This happened in NUSAF I. 

There was an attempt to investigate, but up to today, how many have been prosecuted? What recoveries have been made? I am sure both the Prime Minister and the State Minister for Northern Uganda would be caught off-guard. I would like our learned Prime Minister to be quite responsive in dealing with these situations as far as Northern Uganda is concerned. Otherwise, why are we investing in Northern Uganda while the money is disappearing into the dark hole –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I just want to inform the House and my honourable colleagues that those who mismanaged, especially NUSAF I project, which was being handled at district level, were mostly chairpersons of districts. But when people, in the last election, acted by throwing them out of elective offices, Government instead appointed them to positions of RDCs.

MR EBONG: So, that kind of double approach, which does not comprehensively deal with such people who have robbed the citizens of this country - Government had overwhelming advantage to gunner support in the North, but has simply let the opportunity go. How do you put resources to the community; they do not receive it; and you think of getting support from them! It is up to whatever government is in power to gunner support from all corners of the country; every government should live in a more realistic way to ensure citizens get direct benefits from the services they are meant to access as their right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us first hear hon. Tana, Nalubega, Wamakuyu in that order.

12.31
MR SANJAY TANA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report as presented today. Let me go straight to their observations and recommendations as outlined on page 6.

I notice that this is not the first time Parliament has talked about better facilitation for RDCs and ARDCs in general.

Using Tororo as an example, as we speak, the RDC’s office is in darkness; there is no power because the dues have not been cleared. The RDC of Tororo has been ridiculed by stories in Bukedde and New Vision. The last picture that ridiculed him was that one when he was photographed while pushing a vehicle in Mabira forest.

Madam Speaker, we must know that these people are a representative of the fountain of honour in this country. So, if the justification given in this report is even an inch to the truth, then these people need facilitation in the real sense, if they are to perform as expected.

I would like to point out that year after year – for example, last financial year we appropriated money to buy 30 double-cabin vehicles under this programme, but we cannot tell where they are and who is using them. People who sit in air-conditioned offices in Kampala are the ones being allocated these vehicles, while those deep in the rural areas do not have transport –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much honourable colleague for giving way. I just want to inform you that the people in Kumi have gone through such bad times. The RDC of that district has no official vehicle. He has tried to use his personal car, but given maintenance costs, he is almost giving up. I have raised this matter with the Hon. Minister for the Presidency, but for over two years we are still grappling with that problem.

MR TANA: I would like to thank the honourable colleague for that information. As area members of parliament we know that this is the trend all over the country, and it is worse for the ARDCs. But now that this year, we have again budgeted for the principal car for the President and 20 others, I would like to urge the Minister for the Presidency to relocate the old cars to the RDCs to enable them do a better job.

Secondly, I would like to know whether there is any system used to vet the performance of these RDCs. We raised this issue last year and the year before. If there is any, then the allocation of some of the vehicles and other resources would follow that trend.

Madam Speaker, allow me move to page 7 to add onto what my colleagues have said about the issues of presidential advisors. What the colleagues in the Opposition have said of the advisors as being useless and do not get to speak to the President may be true. But what facilitation have they been given to perform their duties other than the salary? I would urge that the Office of the Presidency checks out all these loopholes so that they are systematically vetted basing on performance, as recommended in this report.

In the same vein, allow me add my voice to those of the other honourable colleagues by asking the hon. Minister to let us know what has happened to the old Presidential Jet; it is not reflected in this report. I personally talked to the chairperson and what he told me was, “It is there.” 

I do not think this is true because sometime back, the media carried reports that one of the presidential assistants had bidded to buy it. How far has the sale process gone? Initially we were told that it was going to be a swap deal; we need to know what is happening to that jet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Nalubega after which we will hear from hon. Wamakuyu, hon. Boona and hon. Ndeezi in that order.

12.37
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join other Members in thanking the committee chairperson for the report. My comments will be in respect to what is appearing on page 6.

As youth representatives in this Parliament, we welcome all the initiatives by Government and the private sector to create job opportunities for the young people. However, I would like to remind Government and any other concerned people that the youth are not looking for titles. Therefore, when I see this issue of youth RDCs I welcome it but I have many questions to pose. I want to know the task schedules. Apart from monitoring patriotism - which I believe is not going to be like a country programme mainstreamed in all departments of local governments and Government programmes - what else will they be doing? Because, we do not want to create an impression that we are giving youth titles simply to be comfortable and yet they will not be comfortable. We want the young people to be meaningfully involved in the running of the government affairs and development programmes as well. 

And I want to remind the government that youth are those people between 18 and 30. When it comes to this wording, “youth” it will be a youth. When it comes to re-appointment you will find 40 year old people posing as youths and occupying those positions. So, the age for the youth is 18 to 30. 

Also, we are promoting efficiency in running of the state affairs. What are the education levels for these portfolios? Is there going to be gender balancing and so on? Those are some of the questions I can pose for now. But we do welcome the initiatives because we know that we have a high rate of unemployment.

That brings me to another point under the observation by the committee on page 15. They say that there is inadequate recruitment of the staff and I am wondering, what are these categories of staff? We have potential young people; people who have lacked jobs for over 15 years, and now we have all these many vacancies. I really want to know what category of people we want to employ - and we are not getting in this country  - and yet we have even people fleeing to other countries to look for jua-kali jobs and yet they have the qualifications. So, I want to know why we are not recruiting.

Then I want to talk about the issue of Uganda AIDS Commission. I am looking at the planned activities for the Financial Year 2009/10, and to me it looks like a copy and paste thing, because when you try to read through the activities they do not really flow. I will read one example: “(a) a well motivated staff will ensure efficient delivery of HIV/AIDS services to partners.” That is a planned activity. 

So, to me it looks like someone copied somewhere and pasted on this page. So, this comes like an output and yet it is a planned activity. I think Uganda AIDS Commission needs to revisit these activities. As you have planned them, they are not really giving us a picture.

And I want to know, what has happened to the ABC strategy? It is not mentioned anywhere in your activities. Do you want to say that we are now free and the young people are safe and free of HIV, and so we have stopped the campaign and yet we are emphasising prevention? I remember in a meeting we held with Dr Kihumuro Apuuli, who I see around, we discussed and recommended that Uganda AIDS Commission should come up with a comprehensive national HIV dissemination toolkit that emphasises prevention. I do not see it here as a planned activity. So, I want to recommend to the committee that these activities be revisited to suit the needs of our country when it comes to HIV/AIDS prevention and control.

Then, Madam Speaker, as I conclude, we read two weeks ago that food for the North has been stolen and now, today, I have heard a Member raising an issue that the food was taken to western Uganda where it is being sold in shops because they do not need it. I want to know whether these people are really patriotic; when they leave people to die and then divert the food and give it to those who do not need it, simply to sell it for alcohol. I want to know if it is true and -(Member timed out_)

12.43
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for the report. On behalf of the people of Sironko, I thank the President for honouring our invitation to come for the fundraising at which we raised enough money and they gave us a new car.

Prior to that - I wanted hon. Nandala to hear this - he also held a similar fundraising the other week for the same purpose. but they raised only Shs 500,000 and the chief guest was Dr Kiiza Besigye. (Laughter)

MS AOL: Thank you colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member from the east that when hon. Nandala and his other friends raised Shs 500, 000 that was from their pockets; but when you and His Excellency the President raised over 150 million it was taxpayers’ money. Thank you.

MR WAMAKUYU: I thank the hon. Member for the information. However, hon. Member, I could tell you that during the fundraising I personally raised 500,000 as an individual. And like many other people, I bought other things. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I support this Government’s initiative to recruit deputy RDCs for patriotism because this will help the schools to check the enrolment. You know that there is a problem with head count. But if you have such programmes, they will help to check Government because they look at the enrolment. 

We also want RDCs to be trained in financial management - [Hon. Nandala: “Clarification”] I will not take your clarification. You failed to raise money and you - (Laughter) We want RDCs to be trained in financial management because they are monitoring Government activities, and they do not have knowledge in financial management. So, that calls for RDCs to be qualified.

The committee talked of the cost of rent in Government ministries. The cost is going up because they are charging rent in dollars. I do not know what is happening, but if you went to other countries, they use their own currency. So, I do not know why people are charging dollars in Uganda. The rates they use are very high, and in the VAT component that they remit to URA, they use the lower rate. So, URA is losing money in this exchange rate. I suggest that URA should have its own dollar account because some people who charge in dollars opt to use the lower exchange rate to remit to URA. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, remember that you only have five minutes, if you are donating your time – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, since he has given me time, let me comment on URA.

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, I will discuss with hon. Nandala from outside. (Laughter) 

About the Presidential Jet, there was a plan which a Member alluded to regarding barter trade. At that time, they had wanted government to add US$ 28 million. Right now its value could be less than US$ 10 million; government would have taken this as its first call and topped up.

They talked of domestic arrears. I do not know what is happening with the commitment control system, because I used to fill those forms, but there is no way you could balance those forms because it looks for revenue and expenditure. It seems Government does not have internal control systems. 

On relief, I thank the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness - they at least gave some items to my constituency, Bulambuli; but I can tell this House that the supply was inadequate. 

12.50
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the report. I am interested in page 15, the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity, regarding lack of staff.

We have strongly emphasised the need to fight corruption in our Budget this year, and even in previous budgets. I feel it is very important that we strengthen the coordination department with the staff that they require to strengthen the anti-corruption legal framework. We are told that it has not been prioritised, and I think this is very important for our Government. 

Similarly, hosting the conference on the International Federation Against Corruption; this has not been budgeted for and we as Government take it as an important issue that this conference takes place so that we are not only heard to be fighting corruption, but also seen to be fighting corruption in our country. 

Secondly, I am interested in the issue of patriotism clubs. It was an issue in the Committee of Social Services, it is still an issue in this committee, and since the House seems to have some misgivings about the ability of our RDCs to be the teachers of this subject, I would propose that we take it up as a subject in our schools. That we first of all get teachers who can teach it effectively, by they themselves being taught how to teach it, so that once and for all, we put it in our curriculum as a subject. It is important that people know that it is their duty to love their country. Otherwise, we would not be having people who sabotage programmes that are meant for our Uganda and somebody chooses to fight the programme so that the population loses out. So, we need to have this in our schools. 

On page 11, there is a concern that donor figures are not available under Uganda AIDS Commission. This statement also appeared in the Committee of Social Services. I would like to understand why we are not availed the donor figures whenever we are making our budgets, and shown the past performances. I think this causes some confusion in what we are planning when we do not have these donor figures available. 

There is also the issue of the prevalence of HIV/AIDS getting higher among married couples. Recently, we had a meeting with Dr Kihumuro Apuuli and one of our recommendations was that we need to develop bills in Parliament to deal with situations where one couple chooses to get tested and know his or her status, and the other partner refuses. Women go to hospitals when they are pregnant, and they are tested and get to know their status, but their partners refuse to get tested. So, I feel that this is one of the reasons why the prevalence is getting higher. We as legislators should not stop at talking about it, but come up with some legislation about IT. Can it be compulsory for everybody to know his status? Otherwise, we just sing and talk about it and we continue to have higher infection rates.

Lastly, when a region is hit by disaster, for example, hailstorms, must we first come to Parliament to seek permission from the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to serve that area with what is required? For example, our school, Kashaka Girls Secondary School - in the history of Uganda - we were hit by A hailstorm and we lost very many iron sheets. 

Hon. Ecweru visited the school and promised us iron sheets. It is now two years and we have not had the iron sheets. So, I do not think disasters only happen in the North; other areas can be hit by disaster as well. And I think it is the minister’s prerogative to act and respond, and serve those areas that have been affected by disaster. It is not only the North that suffers disaster. Thank you. 

12.55
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issues are only two. The first issue is on page 7; it relates to the appointment of presidential advisors and RDCs. This issue is not new; it has boggled our minds for almost 10 years. But we need to look at the facts and I believe the committee has not given us a solution even this time round. 

People are lamenting over lack of job descriptions. You are talking about academic qualifications; you are talking about the recruitment process; you are talking about performance appraisals for presidential advisors and RDCs. 

The policy of assuming the highest office in this land is well known to all MPs. Upon assuming this office, one is automatically required to perform certain duties and obligations. In the performance of those duties and obligations, one has to work with some people; there must be some people to help him or her. There are several categories of officials who are required to work with the President. 

When you look at our Constitution, it is clear as to who should be in Cabinet. The qualifications are explained; the vetting process is explained; and the work of cabinet ministers is also explained. 

The other categories, like constitutional commissions, have clearly detailed functions in the Constitution; the qualifications are detailed and even the number of people to serve in this commission is clearly detailed.

Even when you come to Public Service, the same applies. The Public Service Standing Orders clearly explain how one can join the Public Service, Teaching Service and others. 

I would like to draw to the attention of this august House - you may call it a sad reality or a nice reality but reality is the key. When it comes to the appointment of presidential advisors, we MPs have nothing to do with the process. We have no mandate to vet them. When it comes to the qualifications, it is not our business to vet the qualifications. The qualifications are written and even the number of presidential advisors is written. What actually happens is that the President exercises his prerogative; this is what you may call the freedom to do his work. We may say that some other people are appointed by others or through some other policy, but the Constitution gives him a prerogative to appoint.

I would believe that the framers of the Constitution believed that the President would use this prerogative to be able to do his work properly. Therefore, I would like to emphasise and to let this august House believe that we have no power whatsoever to take over this prerogative. We may make a recommendation here, but this recommendation will not help. Those who are not happy with this prerogative should go and amend the relevant laws.

Lastly, on page 5 No.3, it talks about self-coordinating entities, like the Uganda AIDS Commission. Madam Speaker, sometime back the President promised to grant people with disabilities the status of a self-coordinating entity at the Uganda AIDS Commission. I request the Minister in charge of the Presidency to update this august House on measures that have been taken to implement this directive. Thank you so much. 

1.00
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concerns are on page 6, on recruitment of assistant RDCs in charge of youth. I wish to submit that among the RDCs and the assistant RDCs that we have, we can get some of them to be in charge of youths, because most of them are actually redundant, and that is why they go into areas of other officers. 

Most times you will find these RDCs going into issues of land, markets and sometimes they fight over protocols for no good reason, because they say that they are the representatives of the President. So in the absence of a Member of Parliament, they will tell you their protocol must come up, and in most times, we are fighting over these issues.

Their roles should also be spelt out because I had an incident in my constituency in Ibanda District, where the RDC requested that I furnish her office with office equipment. I was a new Member of Parliament then, and I had no office equipment in my own office, but this brought conflict between us because she thought I was deliberately trying to pull her down by refusing to furnish her office. (Laughter)

I come to the issue of presidential advisors. To begin with, I wish to submit that there should be qualifications attached to this office. These advisors must be able to understand the workings of Government. At one time, I had the privilege of being hosted by the President, and we made our submissions and requests. One of the members told the President that, “Your Excellency, you actually appointed me one of your advisors, but I have never had a chance to meet you.” So, we should have the numbers that we need; numbers that can adequately advise the President other than having a figure that just addresses certain sections of government but which are not helping the rest of us.

I have been concerned with the submission of the committee; there is no Vote for ISO yet in the policy statement, on page 24, we have figures attached to ISO. But in their submission, I do not see anything on ISO. I request that the chairperson of this committee clarifies to us what happened to the Vote for ISO.

On the issue of disaster, some Members were concerned that some areas in the West have received some supplies. I want to submit that I wrote to the Office of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness over one of my counties in Ibanda North, Nyamurebe sub-county which was very badly hit by famine. Since April, I have been requesting the minister to do something about it but nothing has been done.

Lastly, I want to address the issue of staffing. In some ministries, there is over staffing. For instance, the household unit in State House, which instead of 78 staff, has 123. Yet when we look at the President’s Office, they are under staffed, State House is understaffed, the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity leaves a lot to be desired -(Member timed out_)

1.06
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concerns are on the manifesto implementation unit that carried out country wide consultations. I believe that as Members of Parliament, we ought to be consulted. I do not know if these people really moved around the country because I did not see them in my constituency, neither did I see them in Kabarole District. I hope that will be clarified by the minister. 

The national and presidential awards are a very noble thing but Parliament needs to know the criteria so that we are in the know. Promoting the image of Uganda; domestically and internationally is very good. We need to emphasise the areas of security, good governance, and we reduce on corruption and then this country will be known. As long as we do not do those, then there will be a problem.

At another level, we can promote the image of Uganda by investing directly, like we did in CHOGM. As Parliament, we need to know where the money has gone. Remember we put up a select committee on CHOGM, but let Members remind me if we ever got the results from the committee - so Members remain sceptical. On the same point, there was the discovery channel, but we have never been briefed on the results.

I support patriotism, but it must start with the families. We must sensitise our parents. And the leadership in the country must be patriot so that the people can emulate them. The reason most people are opposing it is that there is no documentation. Let us have a documentation concerning it so that we can give it our blessing as Parliament.

On presidential advisers, we really need to reduce the number. I would not want to say that they are useless - they are useful but we need to reduce the number because some of the advisory services to the President are given by Cabinet and the First Lady. So we do not need this big number. (Laughter) Yes, she is a minister and she is close to the President. So we reduce the numbers and appoint them according to their abilities.

I am happy with the President’s effort in mobilising our citizens. But we need to see other officials following suit because there are advisors on poverty alleviation, but we never hear about them moving around the country. This is not very good; let them follow up where the President has mobilised and left off.

Concerning the Luwero/Rwenzori, I am happy that Rwenzori has been brought on board. But I have mixed feelings because in Luwero where this programme has been, people continue to struggle; they have not been paid. So we need to be focused on implementing it.

On the construction of the two storey buildings for the President and the Prime Minister, I think we are having another joke because we have always talked about the government ministries year in, year out, but nothing is being done. So I think even if we decide that today – anyway, on the issue of the RDCs, they are suffering. Much as they have problems let us save them. The fact that they are in place, let us give them fuel and vehicles. And we should not appoint more RDCs because we already have a big burden and we are not giving them what is due to them.

As Parliament, we need to see our resolutions being implemented, otherwise we shall talk and nothing will be done. There are many of these things that are repeated in the policy statements and the reports of the committee chairpersons, but nothing is being done. So, let us be taken seriously; and if we are not taken seriously, let us use our capacity to refuse to pass some of these budgets. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

01.11
DR CHRIS ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I have a few observations to make. One is about the RDCs and patriotism clubs. I strongly believe that we do not need to recruit these RDCs for patriotism classes. We have plenty of RDCs all over the country and the deputy RDCs. And as my colleagues have observed, many of them are idle. The reason is that they are not well facilitated to carry out their work. If they were well facilitated, they would carry out this work. 

As one of my colleagues observed, if we can develop this into a curriculum, it is more sustainable than giving money to RDCs to go and carry out this work. Why don’t we put it in the curriculum? We have teachers who can teach patriotism in secondary schools. It is a very good and brilliant idea but we need to think more about it in order to develop it better.

I would like to talk about the HIV/AIDS Control Programme. As you are aware, the prevalence rate is very high especially among married couples. However, intervention is not very good. When the HIV/AIDS prevalence was very high in the 1990s, there were many activities carried out to talk about the spread of HIV among our youth and we saw the results in the late 1990s and early 2000. They were really on the ground. 

These days other than developing the policy - I have been looking at their 100 percent performance but we are not seeing them on the ground. We need to hear those drums again; we need to see them moving around the country; we need to see drama groups sounding the drum of prevention of HIV. Making guidelines and policies is good but it will not curb the spread of HIV as we expect in this country and we shall continue losing our dear ones to HIV/AIDS.

When you come to money sent to the Rwenzori region, I thank the government for the step it has taken to think about the Rwenzori region, which was hit by the ADF in the late 1990s. However, I am not very comfortable with the way money is being given to people who contributed to the success of the war by defeating the ADF. I feel that if this money is put into building infrastructure in our region, it can be better utilised rather than just giving it to a few people. 

It has even brought confusion in my constituency because they formed a committee and got some few people who helped during the insurgency to benefit from this money yet it will not help them get tangible benefits. If this money can be put into water - we lack water, roads and health facilities in our region. If this can be put into building infrastructure, I think we can benefit better than having this money given to a few individuals that contributed to the success of defeating the ADF insurgents that time.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.15
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairperson for the report. I have a few comments and the first is on corruption. Most of us here and those outside this House are not happy about the level of corruption. Something has to be done and the Minister of Ethics and Integrity has to do more than what is being done. 

I know they are co-ordinating but when you go to the areas where they coordinate like IGG, the investigation capacity is very low. They have no capacity to retain capable staff and as such, corruption is going up. I think we have to do something to save this country. We have to ensure that we put religious studies into the young children and maybe this issue of corruption will go down.

Let me turn to the Northern region and Karamoja. This PRDP, NUSAF and Karamoja projects - whenever we pass money here to those areas, I am the happiest man. Whenever I hear development partners giving us money for these areas, I am very happy but you go on the ground - where is this money going? It is very sad because when we total up the money, which has gone to these areas, there is nothing to show on the ground for it. I think we must become very serious and see that there is value for money otherwise we are going to be condemned by our grandchildren.

Whenever we talk about PRDP and NUSAF, you hear people in this House saying, “I called MPs from that area.” These are not local problems but national problems and as such, they must involve MPs from other areas so that people in the North know that somebody in Luweero or Kigezi is also concerned. When you go to the meetings and you are only people from Karamoja, it becomes localised and those people cannot be sure that we who are not from the North or from Karamoja are concerned. There must be a change whenever we call people to go for these programmes.

Let us now talk about the Directorate of Information and National Guidance. Government has failed to date to give timely government positions on issues happening in this country. People have been on radios talking about selling the airport but we are keeping quiet. There is no government position. There are many issues with people at “bimeeza” making allegations and giving false information but we are just quiet. I think the Executive has to do something to see that we give timely and correct information so that the people know what is happening and we do not depend on speculators, people trying to blackmail and all that. I appeal to the Leader of Government Business to see that we improve in this area.

I am very happy to know that the Office of the Prime Minister is coordinating the policy and implementation of special programmes in Karamoja, Northern Uganda and Luweero Triangle. Let me repeat what I said some time back: the war was in Luweero twenty three years ago. Programmes have been developed for the North where the war has just ended and these programmes have developed everywhere. We appeal for Luweero programmes to come. They should have come even before PRDP since we had the war first. My people are suffering and we want these programmes. I appeal to the Prime Minister that these programmes they are starting should come and start immediately.

Lastly, I am very happy that -(Interruption)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I have been forced to rise on a point of order. Many colleagues have alluded this morning to support being given to the people of Northern Uganda and not in their areas. And the colleague on the Floor has again alluded to the fact that the war in Luweero ended years back and there is no PRDP, and yet many of us know that actually there have been a lot of funds for Luweero Triangle that have been abused over the years. There has even been a special ministry for Luweero Triangle for all these years but the money has been abused. Is it, therefore, fair for any hon. Member on the Floor of the House representing his or her constituency, when they want to ask for help, to always link the help being given to the people of Northern Uganda to what they are not getting? 

It is the responsibility of a Member of Parliament to raise concern to government and to donors about the crisis in their areas and it is incumbent upon them to make a follow up. The representatives of the people from Northern Uganda have persistently continued to raise their concern over the suffering people and government has listened and donors have listened. Is he, therefore, in order to continuously use the North as a scapegoat for not getting support in their areas? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you arrived late when we had just started this debate. The second person who took the Floor said she was shocked that relief items were taken to Bushenyi. She was specific on that. According to her tone, there was not supposed to be relief there. So, members on this side who come from that area are responding to what that Member said. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your ruling. I am very happy that we are developing a National Policy on Peace Building and Conflict Resolution. This is very important for the development of this country and I hope it will come in time to ensure that we really stay in peace as brothers and sisters and enjoy the fruits of this country. I thank you very much, for giving me this chance. 

1.23
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report presented and I will start with your ruling that it is true we have disasters in Western Uganda. Of late, I have been using personal money to buy food and distribute it in my constituency –(Interjections)- yes, I want to put it on record. Relief services should also be extended to areas in Western Uganda where people are suffering because there has been famine. 

Secondly, I want to address myself to the issue of patriotism, which has been discussed at length. As a Committee on Social Services which handles the sector of education, we did have a lengthy discussion on this matter and our view was that it is important to teach patriotism, but it is also equally important to get prepared to have it thought out and institutionalised. We thought that government should be systematic in introducing the teaching of patriotism. We thought the Ministry of Education should be facilitated first to develop the necessary instruments like the curriculum and the syllabus to train the teachers and eventually when they are ready; it can be introduced properly rather than leaving it to soldiers and RDCs to start invading classrooms in the name of teaching patriotism. We thought there should be a systematic approach to introducing the teaching of patriotism and we think the Executive should take this in good faith so that the introduction of patriotism can be done in a good way to help the entire country.

Like many colleagues have said, the Constitution is very clear on the role and qualifications of RDCs and we would like the Minister for the Presidency to really monitor and supervise RDCs because most of them are redundant. They end up engaging in local politics and because of the poor facilitation, they always beg the CAOs for fuel and at the end of the day, they get compromised and they do not do their work of monitoring government programmes. Therefore, what we need is to strengthen the existing offices rather than creating very many officers who at the end of the day will be poorly facilitated and unable to discharge their function. We want the government to take this seriously so that we strengthen the Office of the RDC in order for them to do the work they are supposed to do. 

My other point is on the issue of HIV/AIDS. The committee makes a correct observation that there is a problem that HIV infection rates are starting to rise again and yet Uganda is one of the few countries that had registered significant improvement in terms of declining trends. So, there is a problem and we would like government and the Uganda AIDS Commission to prepare us for a new battle to address the challenge of HIV/AIDS. 

But the committee made a statement on page 13 and they said that UAC needs to strengthen the campaign on prevention other than popularising the effectiveness of ARVs since it is not a cure. We should not understand it that it is not important to popularise ARVs; what we know now is that we have around 400,000 people who need ARVs and about half of them are accessing them. We know that these are important drugs and we also know that the major funder of the HIV/AIDS programme in Uganda, the US Government, has said it will not provide resources for new clients for ARVs. So, there is a crisis and when you look at the money that we spend on HIV/AIDS, the Government of Uganda only spends six percent. The programme is donor-funded. We would like the committee to tell us whether they have really discussed with government and with the ministry to see how much money they should be able to provide as a government in order to address the challenge of HIV/AIDS in this country. 

Lastly, there is an SMS that has been circulating to Members of Parliament from disgruntled former employees of ISO, saying that they are not being paid their benefits. We would like the ministry and the committee to tell us because in the list of the votes, we do not see ISO and there is this complaint. Everyday they send us messages to remind the Leader of Government Business to have them paid their gratuity and entitlements. Therefore, we want this addressed in the current budget so that we do not get former employees complaining through many channels, including sending us messages. I thank you very much.

1.29
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is on the issue of the RDCs who are going to be in charge of patriotism and youth clubs.

The officers in the districts before were the RDCs, the deputies and now these are going to be assistants. When it comes to facilitation, it will be the RDC who is their boss to receive it. The deputy and the assistant will come later.

My problem is that if they are going to visit schools with no details, I wonder which schools they will visit. Are they going to visit primary schools? Are they going to secondary schools? Will it be all schools? Will they be only government schools? What about private schools? I am asking these questions because if they are to go to all these schools, even the most hardworking RDC will not be able to deliver patriotism lessons in all these schools. They will not be able to cover something substantive to the children. There are some districts that are big, for example Bushenyi and Masaka, which have got so many constituencies, but also very big in size. The size of Nyabishozi County is bigger than the whole of Bugisu that has four districts. So, how will these wonderful ARDCs be able to move the facilitations – supposing he goes to Tororo where there is even no vehicle, how will he be able to cover both government and private schools? 

I know this is a good project, but it will only count if there is a better arrangement in place. Many things can be improved. We are not against patriotism, but as we go to the students in schools, we should think about those in the same age bracket, but not in schools. And what about Ugandans who are no longer youth and not patriotic or they simply do nothing about patriotism?

When some of us were in civil service, we worked in humble ways with nothing behind. But there are some people who are still in service who want to even buy the old presidential jet. I think there is need for special patriotism for the people in offices to make them appreciate – it is good my former lecturer in Public Administration who used to teach us about civil competence is here. He used to teach us about people knowing their rights and obligations while in government offices. It is because they do not know that they are working for the public and not themselves. They need more patriotism than the youth. By going to them first, we shall be saving, is it Shs 500 billion per year? If we start from there, I think it will make a lot of sense. We will be able to save that Shs 500 billion that is said to be disappearing per year in Uganda.

The main duty of the Prime Minister’s Office is to coordinate and monitor government policies, programmes and projects. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for trying. (Laughter) But I think he should wash his hands clean; he should not accept to be used to soil his hands.

When you look at disaster – Members of Parliament volunteer information by bringing it to the Floor of Parliament with the Speaker guiding the Leader of Government Business asking him to meet the members with the information - but that takes ages. On that note, I should thank the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness for having acted quickly in Bushenyi –(Laughter)– and I encourage you to –(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the Speaker actually said that he was going to handle that matter himself with hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere –(Interjections)– yes. That is what he said. I can report that after the meeting, I also spoke to him and we are all waiting for the outcome –(Interjections)– that is what he said. You can look at the Hansard. I thank you.

MR BUKENI: Thank you so much. The Prime Minster should help us, for example under NAADS, every new sub-county that is created by the Ministry of Local Government is provided for. The Ministry of Local Government, for example, will regard Manafwa District to be having only ten sub-counties when it is that very ministry that has created 222 sub-counties in that district –(Member timed out_)

1.36
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this report. However, I would like to say that it raises one issue that was not examined carefully. I think human resource management is now a profession, but when you read this report, you wonder whether there is any human resource professionalism in any ministry, the President’s Office or even in government.

To illustrate the point, when you look at page 6, it says: “It lacks basic documentation on how the project shall be implemented and what the roles of the different stakeholders will be.” How can you start creating an office when you do not know what the occupants will be doing? And you want us to include it in the budget?

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, hon. Kawanga, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to correct this impression. Maybe the problem we had was that the committee did not ask for further information on this matter. But there is no way anybody can plan to institute an office without a plan of how that office is going to work. So, I want to make a correction and in the afternoon I will put the matter to the House.

MR KAWANGA: Most obliged on that note. But I think I will make one point about this patriotism thing. It is not taught by individuals; it is developed over time. When I look at the Front Bench I see very patriotic Ugandans; some of them even grew up during colonial times but they learnt how to love their country and defend it. Where did they go to school? Who taught them this? Why don’t we examine this experience and use it rather than make it a class subject to be taught by a few individuals in the district?

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the Member on the Floor that patriotism is developed over a period of time. At one time I travelled with hon. Reagan Okumu to Botswana and while we were there on an audit committee, everybody who stood up talked about their country saying, “We the Batswana do it like this ….” He got annoyed and rose up to tell them, “We Ugandans behave this way and we have an excellent President in the name of His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.” Nobody taught him that kind of patriotism but the onus was on him to know that we were out there as Ugandans and he really brought out Uganda in its true colours. Thank you.

MR KAWANGA: I thank you for that. 

About job descriptions, the minister said something about RDCs but look at page 7 of the report: high number of presidential advisors. They say, “However, the job descriptions, academic qualifications and expertise of these Presidential Advisors and their assistants were not clearly defined and could not be linked to the performance output.” These are very important people. They are advisors to the President but the report tells us that their job descriptions, academic qualifications and expertise are not clearly defined and they are very well paid. I keep asking: do we have a human resource management section in this country? 

As if that is not bad enough, when you go to page 10 of the same report, management of staff structures for government ministries - the committee observed that of the 624 established posts that exist in State House, 208, that is 33.4 percent, are still vacant. Surely, is that true? In a state where people are looking for employment in this country, you have 338 jobs just there? Surely! Somebody should be able to answer for this. Our sons and daughters are walking the streets of this country with no jobs and yet nobody is recruiting them. I am asking: do we have a human resource management section in this country?

When you go to page 11 -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we must be able to take seriously the life of our head of state. When we look at the page which hon. Kawanga is talking about concerning the vacant positions, one of the key and important positions, that is, the chief engineer in the flight unit department, is vacant and yet we are acquiring a state-of-the-art jet. If we do not have the senior people who are going to take charge of the life of the President and those who use that jet, how serious are we? Can we get an explanation as to why we are not very serious in taking the life of the people that lead this country seriously?

MRS WABUDEYA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that that post was since filled. There is a chief engineer in place.

MR KAWANGA: I am sorry but these are issues I am raising so that people look at them. That is why on page 11 the recommendation is of interest that, “Given the high unemployment rate in Uganda, vacant positions for which finances are appropriated should not be left unfilled while recruitment should be restricted to the approved structures.” Surely, this recommendation should be taken very seriously. I hope somebody is going to do something about that.

And finally, the committee observes that the approved 49 positions in the structure of Ethics and Integrity have not been filled, for instance, in the Department of Strengthening Anti-Corruption Framework. Surely, with the level of corruption we are at in this country, this is a ministry which should be taken seriously and which should be assisted. I hope that now that this has been raised, somebody is going to take it up.

I want to end with the matter of arrears. These are arrears which are supposed to be in the ESO section. It used to be Shs 1.124 billion but it has now risen to Shs 4.6 billion. That means government is not paying its debts. Even in public life when people do not pay their debts, it is not good manners. It is very bad manners and it is even worse if government does not pay its debts. But as we speak, Shs 4.6 billion is owed by only one section, ESO. When you look at the budget of this vote, the arrears have been given Shs 4.5 billion. This means that this year, the arrears for ESO alone are not going to be paid. Who is going to pay these debts?

I hope we are going to take up these matters seriously. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.45
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Hon. Members, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has been around for close to ten years. Today, it is a pity that that particular ministry seems to be discharging its duties in a very ad hoc manner because as we speak, they have repeated their usual rhetoric that they are preparing a national policy; that they will come up with a national policy on disaster preparedness and management. May I find out, who are these stakeholders who have failed to complete that task of developing the national disaster preparedness and management policy?

No wonder, today, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is engaged more in relief supplies. By the way, the relief supplies we are talking about are not received with maximum appreciation by the beneficiaries, because the amounts that are given do not measure up. There is no way you would talk about giving a family two kilogrammes of posho for a month. 

When we went with the Committee on Agriculture to assess the famine situation in Teso, one woman narrated her bad experience in Ongino. She reported to the distribution centre at 8.30 a.m. and was only served at 3.00 p.m. with two cups of posho. She was even lucky to get two cups of posho because very many people did not get anything. 

I think the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should consider giving agricultural inputs like planting materials to beneficiaries at the right time. There is a tendency for the ministry to run with planting materials to farmers at the peak of the dry season. You SHOULD take cassava stems there; cassava stems dried up in Lira.

I would also like to observe that in the planned activities by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, there is no initiative to help save food at the time of plenty or bumper harvests for tougher times ahead. We have many times recommended that efforts should be made to put in place silos for cereals at district level. If you went to Kaberamaido district headquarters, you would see what our previous leaders did. Putting up such silos – (Interruption)

MRS JANET MUSEVENI: I just want to say that the work of reminding our communities when they should plant, when they can grow food; and what they should store when they have a good harvest is work for the Member of Parliament of the area. It is not –(Interjection)- Yes, it is! That is our work as members of Parliament. I have done that in Ruhama. We have had a long drought, but people in Ruhama have food because I was there when we were supposed to be growing food. 

When you say everything should be done by the central government, it cannot be done properly; it will not be monitored properly. That is the work of the Member of Parliament, and if the members of Parliament are not playing their own role, there will be a problem in their areas.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, hon. Janet, for that information. I would also want to inform you how frustrated the Ministry of Agriculture is in accessing meteorological data. They say that in order to get meteorological data, they have to buy the information from the meteorology department. In many cases, appropriations do not even provide for such information. 

Yes, I agree with you; it is not just the duty of members of Parliament, but all leaders at all levels, but my point of concern –(Interjection)– Madam Speaker, please protect me from hon. Janet; she seems to be forgetting parliamentary procedure. The question I am raising is that the absence of a national policy on disaster preparedness and management is making everybody act in a very adhoc manner.

I would like to go to the second point, and that is in regard to the control of Avian Flu, which is being coordinated by the Prime Minister’s Office. I actually got a little bit surprised, because I do not know whether the Prime Minister’s Office is more technically competent than the Ministry of Health in that line. I think the Prime Minister’s Office is overloaded with a number of programmes. It is high time that Government reviewed that position and let health matters be handled by Ministry of Health. (Interruption)   

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that Avian Flu falls under the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture. You very well know that the Office of the Prime Minister does the coordination and monitoring role. So, it rightly falls under the Office of the Prime Minister to coordinate the two sectors of agriculture and health. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Epetait, I am forced to give you this information following what the Minister in charge of Karamoja raised. I want to read Article 79 of the Constitution regarding the functions of Parliament, and bring it to her attention: 

“Functions of Parliament 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. 
(2) Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament. 
(3) Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.” 

Those are the functions of members of Parliament.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleagues for the information they have given. 

Certainly, when we talk about the professional competence of the Ministry of Health in health matters - we were talking about the Avian Flu, and the committee in its report said that in matters of public health, the coordination ought to be done by a more competent ministry. I was only reacting to the recommendation. Hon. Okupa’s information was to reinforce our knowledge of the laws governing our country.

Lastly, there is the matter to do with Uganda AIDS Commission. You all appreciate that the Uganda AIDS Commission is under President’s Office, and that is why you see this Vote 107 appearing in the committee’s report. In the draft estimates, however, Vote 107 is conveniently hidden under Ministry of Health. That is a matter that I have kept pressurising for. I have kept pressurising that that particular vote should go to its right house. (Member timed out_)

1.55
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting the report and the members of the committee for compiling it. 

I have areas to make observations on. I want to start with the Minister for the Presidency. Hon. Minister, I do not know whether the President is being advised properly. Fifty-nine advisors! I do not know in what different disciplines they are advising the President on. 

I would like to inform the honourable minister that we have highly qualified people in this country who would willingly advise the President in all things without a fee, and they would be honoured to do that. So, I do not know why public funds are being expended on these advisors whose qualifications and job descriptions are unidentified.

Secondly, I would like to address the question of patriotism. Patriotism has become something that we should discuss in Parliament. It would not have come here if we were ourselves patriotic. You should not tell me that I should teach my son or my daughter to love me. No, patriotism is modelled; it is emulated from the good acts which have been shown to the people of a country. Why don’t we ask ourselves the cause of lack of patriotism in Uganda and establish patriotism clubs? I know patriotism was there; Uganda was once loved by all its citizens. So, let us ask ourselves why that patriotism is not there now.

The third point I would like to raise is with the Office of the Prime Minister. The PRDP is important for the development of Northern Uganda. I was interested in hearing what hon. Amongi was saying, that recommendations by districts are being changed in the Prime Minister’s Office. I think it is not fair. The district councils know what they are doing and their recommendations should be honoured. 

I would like to say something about HIV/AIDS. The report states that there is no cure. True, there is no cure, but I would like to commend Uganda Aids Commission for what it has done for this country. It has put Uganda on the world map because we have managed to control HIV/AIDS. However, that control seems to be disappearing. So, I would like to urge the Ministry of the Presidency to think of facilitating Uganda Aids Commission so that it doubles its effort in preventing measures.

Last but not least, the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS came up with a suggestion of establishing constituency task forces on HIV/AIDS. I thank the ministry –(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and honourable members of parliament, Mr Pius Bigirimana, the PS of my office, has asserted that when districts produced their plans, nothing was changed. If anybody has evidence, we shall tackle it, and we are ready to answer to that evidence. He has asserted that there was no change. 

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, hon. Prime Minister, for that assertion. It was your Office that advised that members of parliament work together with the local councils, and those recommendations should go as they were presented to you.

I was talking bout the constituency task force for HIV/AIDS. This concept has been put forward by your standing committee and I think it should be supported so that members of Parliament take part in the prevention at the grassroots. Short of that, we are going to see a surge in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS. Thank you.

2.02
MR SAMUEL ABURA (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The Committee on Presidential Affairs deserves a big clap for the good report they have presented. It is comprehensive and elaborate. 

I have noticed a few items in the report. On page 23, they mention Karamoja Affairs. It is a pity that Karamoja is featuring here as a disaster area again. 

We would like to thank the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness for their intervention. We are very grateful for all they have done. If it was not for the calamities of the environment, this year I would like to say that our Minister of Karamoja Affairs undertook large mobilisation from the grassroots by bringing in agricultural inputs. It is only unfortunate that we have been let down by the weather. This was the first time that tractors and ox ploughs were given to the people, but unfortunately, we were let down. We really clap for the mobilisation which was done. 

I would like to thank the committee for identifying one thing, which is the water aspect. They forgot only one aspect which would permanently address the issue of water in Karamoja, and that is irrigation. Harvesting water from the rivers would be one of the best measures to address this issue. This was a practice in the colonial times, in 1945 and 1947, to address the issue of famine in Karamoja. 

There is rain water - about 600 millimetres every year - but that comes in a short period. If we were to use those technical aspects of harvesting that water, we would do something. The areas that practiced irrigation at that time surely supplied us with food.

The other issue I want to raise is corruption. Corruption is a big challenge to all of us. The Ministry of Ethics and Integrity has attempted to fight corruption, but I am sorry to say that every time we talk about this, the scale of corruption rises. A couple of weeks ago we were reading in the newspapers that someone is already purchasing Entebbe International Airport. Two days ago, another story talked about Workers’ House. What modalities are these people using to get these items? If I could get one also, I could own Kampala Road. It is a big challenge. 

Unless we are patriotic in our lives, we will not fight corruption. Patriotism in our hearts can finish this. However, as we plan, the corrupt are also planning. 

On the security aspect in Karamoja, any member of this House or any committee can travel to Karamoja assured of your life. There is no more waylaying of vehicles -(Interjection)–  Madam, I need protection from hon. Nandala. He has become somebody who can terrorise this House. I think we should retain our dignity as politicians.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected from the honourable member.

MR ABURA: Madam Speaker, the command should not continue –(Interjection)- Honourable Pallisa, please. I was saying that the security aspect has improved. Any investor or committee of this Parliament that wants to crosscheck the situation in Karamoja will reach there safely and come back safely.

The other issue is the rearmament aspect. This is another challenge that is cropping up and we need to put in place serious measures –(Member timed out_)

2.07
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity, and I want to thank the committee for the report. I have four issues to raise. 

The first is about the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). Whenever the issue of RDCs comes on the Floor of this House, the first question that Members raise is their role and usefulness. I have always said that this House is privileged to have honourable members that once held this noble office, and at least we did not let anybody down. Among us there is hon. Kiyingi, hon. Ecweru, hon. Nyombi Thembo, hon. Butime, hon. Kigyagi and others.

The issue I am raising here is that some RDCs may not have lived up to their expectations, but the majority of them, we inclusive, have worked to the utmost in what was expected of us. I agree with the committee that there should be better facilitation. This office has done its best and is useful for this country. The roles and functions are very specific and they are to our interest as members of this Parliament, and people in this nation, for mobilisation as they are heads of security. 

When these RDCs do not have facilitation that is good enough, they cannot perform to our expectations. I, therefore, agree that the offices of the RDCs and their deputies should be well facilitated. It is high time this is done because this issue comes up now and again, and there is nothing that the Office of the President is doing to ensure their facilitation so that at least their performance is noticed.

The other issue is about Presidential Advisers. I would not say that I have been there, but from the little that I know, I think a few of them do what is expected of them. They are either misplaced -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my sister, hon. Kawooya, for accepting this piece of information. We have decried the large number of presidential advisers whom we believe are redundant. Last month, Uganda hosted the Smart Partnership Conference in Munyonyo, and as I talk now, one of the senior presidential advisors, a former Member of Parliament, is under investigations for having, out of redundancy, printed fake receipts and collected US$ 1700 from the First Lady of Swaziland. (Laughter) Yes, that shows how redundant they are; they have to create some work for themselves. Thank you.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, this calls for us to support the committee’s recommendation that there should be vetting of these presidential advisors. There is need for expertise in order for us to get quality service from these presidential advisors. As you have heard, it is not enough that whoever looses a political election has the expertise to carry out the duties of a presidential advisor. I, therefore, call upon the President’s Office to consider this. Much as it is the President’s prerogative to appoint them, the advisors should be subjected to vetting by the Committee on Appointments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think more than 20 members have contributed to this debate. I allowed that because the sector is large, but I think we need to close. So, I am suspending the House for an hour to allow the Government side organise their response. We will adjourn to 3.30 p.m. Members who had wanted to speak on this report will contribute to the report on agriculture. House is suspended until 3.15 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 2.15 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.37_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon session. Before we begin, I would like to inform you that we have, in the public gallery, residents of Namusisi Community in Kigulu North, Iganga District. They are represented by hon. Baliddawa and hon. Magoola. They are here to observe our proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause) 

When we suspended the House in the afternoon, we agreed that Government would respond to the issues raised during the debate. So, I will start with hon. Kabwegyere, who will be followed by hon. Wabudeya, and then we will have the Minister of State for Northern Uganda Reconstruction.

3.39
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I can report that the interactions we had during the committee meetings have brought out the most important points. However, on the Floor of the House a number of issues came up and I would like to comment on them.

First, let me say something about the issue of relief. As I have said before, relief cannot replace self-reliance or self-sufficiency. Relief is mere intervention to help a person in need organise resources to survive, though in the case of Uganda, there have been situations where we have had to feed large numbers of people for a long time. Cases in point are Karamoja and IDP camps where we have had to feed the people who had escaped from the murderous intentions of Kony. Thanks to the efforts of Government; Kony is no longer around and people have gone back to their homes and are growing their own food.

When we talk about relief, it is about a situation that might have occurred requiring interventions to keep life. One of the obvious problems of relief food is that it can never be enough. I heard some members complain that only two cups or one kilogramme was given. Often times, the numbers that are targeted keep increasing as the food arrives. Sooner, the supply itself will become insufficient. 

As we all know, disasters do not give notice, yet the country does not have food in stores to be loaded on trucks as demand comes. Based on that, I want to say that there is always inadequacy, partly due to money unavailability, but also partly due to the increasing numbers that emerge as the food is known to be on the way.

Our knowledge about disasters is still inadequate; we do not have a comprehensive disaster preparedness and management policy. However, I would like to report that we are working on that. Although we have had problems with completing, it is because of funding. There is some information that we need, but which has to be collected and we will not be able to get that information in the near future. So, much as the policy is in the offing, I do not agree with any suggestions that it be discussed here. Information can be given, but it is not our tradition that a Government policy, be it on agriculture, internal affairs and so on, is discussed in Parliament. What I know is that it can be tabled for Members to discuss it at committee level. 

The reason why it delayed is because I want to come up with a comprehensive policy so that it guides all of us, including members of parliament. If I walked out of here to check our cars to see how many of them have fire extinguishers and so on, you may find that not many of us are that prepared, even at a personal level. So, we need a very comprehensive policy, which needs to be followed by programmes extending to schools and villages. Ultimately, we should have a disaster preparedness committee in every village so that information can flow.

There is a problem which I have faced over the supply of relief. Perhaps this has been a wrong season. We have to sit down in our office to weigh where to give the first priority for the food. Some of the requests do not get met because either their urgency is not so demanding or we are not equipped with the food. Nevertheless, we come in as much as possible, and I am glad that some of the members in this House have come to say, “Prof. Kabwegyere, thank you very much, the food arrived. It was a bit late, but it came”.

One honourable member was talking about people with AIDS and that, again, it is the duty of our office to feed people with AIDS. I did not quite understand how this would be practical. The honourable member told us that we have about 400,000 people scattered in the whole of Uganda with AIDS. Now, how would we target these to deliver the relief? 

The only exception was that there were people in food shortage areas who were sick of AIDS and could not sustain themselves. Yes, we can meet those as we supply food, but the local leaders must identify and let us know the vulnerable groups. Otherwise, there is no way we can know which village has an AIDS patient that we can supply with food.

About malnutrition, it is extensive in Uganda; if we were to also target that, we would have a bigger problem. Food relief is not a substitute to food self-sufficiency. I have said it several times that if we used the land as we should, probably we would have less of these shortages. 

I believe that there are areas which under-produce partly because of traditions. I want to say this very clearly; the customary land tenure restricts production. I know members of Parliament here who could not grow food beyond two or three acres because customary rules could not allow. I have asked some members whether they have a ranch and they have said, “No, how could you have a ranch in our area? In our tradition, the land is owned communally” -(Interjections)- Please, can you give me a bit of time I pray, Madam?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please focus on the issues raised in the debate because I have six other ministers who want to speak.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Okay. Some of the issues that came up were a unfair treatment of the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. It looks like it is easy for members to pronounce the word “disaster” without qualification. So, they find it easy to say “Mr Disaster or Minister Disaster”, but it is not a pleasant address. I certainly would not want to have that name associated with me. If hon. Nandala were here, I would want to exchange seats with him so that he can enjoy being called a disaster.

Do we have the responsibility of telling people to keep food? That has also come up. It was said that we should have a policy of telling people how to store food. When I was sharing with colleagues at lunch, I just asked, “Who tells the squirrel to keep food?” That little animal picks food and keeps it because it has a rainy day. Similarly, survival dictates that we have to keep food. If you cannot keep food, then we keep money in banks and buy food. (Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I think the minister seems to have forgotten that it is his mandate to initiate policies. In 2004, the government, through a joint sponsorship between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Health, laid on the Table here the Food and Nutrition Policy. This has gone a long way to address part of what the minister is talking about. What is now left is the Bill to operationalise the policy. So, I do not know whether the minister is aware of what is contained in the Food and Nutrition Policy.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, hon. Member. I am very much aware; that falls under a different portfolio, but it is always attributed to me. Distributing cassava cuttings and so on is not within my portfolio, but we are part of the same system.

I want to conclude. We are doing our best. It may take time to deliver the food, but we are doing our best. Everyday we are getting more and more able to know what to do. We have now moved from management of disaster to both management of disaster and preparing against disaster. I can inform this House, we are already in full-swing, preparing for El Nino. It is now established that it will come. How much it will be, we do not know; but we are already preparing to address it. I have already informed the districts to identify those areas which are subject to flooding, to prepare the people in advance for them to be able to evacuate those areas. Otherwise, all is in place to make sure that we do not get the same situations as we had two years ago.

3.53
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of issues were raised, but most of them are related to the issue of RDCs and deputy RDCs, patriotism, and the issues of the Presidential Jet and the advisors. I am going to answer them in those categories. 

First of all, I would like to clarify this issue. When members were debating the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, they referred to a title of Assistant RDC. I want to clarify that we do not have assistant RDCs, and we are not planning to recruit them. The proposal is to recruit Deputy RDCs to be responsible for mobilising mainly the youth and women for development. 

There has also been confusion between this category of recruitment and the intention for patriotism. These Deputy RDCs whom we intend to recruit are not the ones going to handle patriotism as such. In patriotism, there is going to be a secretariat which will be responsible for coordinating this programme of patriotism, and which will involve many stakeholders. 

At the moment, members of this secretariat have already been appointed and will soon start their work to make sure that they refine the concept paper which Members are demanding for; members of the NRM Secretariat who have already been exposed to the concept paper. This secretariat is now going to refine the concept paper and then we shall disseminate it to the general public, and the workplan will come out.

I also want to dispel the idea that this should be the responsibility of the Ministry of Education. Patriotism should concern all of us. Some of us think it is obvious, others think it is not obvious. Some of us believe that we have lost the moral fibre for being patriotic in some ways. 

So, much as schools will be focused on as one area of concern, there will be other areas where people will be mobilised and reminded about their need to love their country and work for it. 

Madam Speaker, I took note of the committee’s concern on the cost of public administration. But we also have to know that if we are to get good governance, we must spend on it. So, we need leaders to promote the country for development. 

I would also like to remind the House that the role of RDCs is clearly spelt out in the Constitution, in Article 203, which I may not have to read because I  have referred to it many times earlier on in this House. It tells us that the RDCs will be responsible for mobilisation, but there is also the last section which says, “---And any other duties that may be assigned to them”.

Some Members were arguing that RDCs are getting involved even in land matters. We have specifically asked the RDCs to get involved in land matters where the local people are being mistreated by those who seem to have money, and want to throw them off the land they have lived on all their lives. If there are those who have overstepped that assignment, we can deal with those cases on individual basis. 

I also want to assure Members of this Parliament that the issue of facilitation of RDCs is one of our biggest concerns, and we are slowly but surely trying to ensure that we facilitate RDCs. For example, last year, we bought 30 pick-ups and we distributed them in areas on the priority list which deserved to get the first 30. 

This year we are planning to buy 50, and they will be distributed. We hope that as more money becomes available, we shall be able to facilitate all the RDCs and even renovate their offices. For example, this year, we have four offices which are lined up for renovation. As we go on, we shall ensure that the issue of facilitation of the RDCs is clearly catered for. 

I also want to use this opportunity to talk about the seemingly two State Houses. Madam Speaker, we have only one State House and that State House is in Entebbe. The house in Nakasero is a State Lodge; it is like the Mbale State Lodge; it is like the State Lodge in Bushenyi and Jinja. I wanted to clarify that matter. The President uses these State Lodges when he is out of his station and he has to find a place to work. So, we do not have any to allocate to the Vice President. This Parliament should find money and we buy a house or construct a home for the Vice President of Uganda. I think that responsibility is within the Ministry of Public Service. 

On the issue of the Presidential Jet, I would like to report that the process of disposal of the old jet is on course, and I think very soon, the sales agent will be appointed by the State House Contracts Committee. That is all I can report now. I cannot go into details. When this agent is appointed, then he will assist the government in disposing of the old Presidential Jet. 

There was an issue raised by the committee on the high cost of rent for Government ministries. I agree with them entirely, but Government has also taken steps. Cabinet has set up a committee to look into the matters of office accommodation and to come up with a long-term plan, and I am sure that when this is accomplished, we shall see each ministry moving into getting their own accommodation.

As of now, we are expecting to have accommodation for the Office of the President and that of the Prime Minister constructed. Maybe, within the next one or two years, we shall have a home of our own. I thank the committee for raising that matter.

We are concerned about Presidential advisors; on the numbers, the quality, the qualifications, and some of them were suggesting that we should have guidelines on how they should operate. I would like to respond by saying that the matter of appointment of Presidential advisers is indeed a prerogative of the President, and it is him who is advised or who is supposed to be advised by these people; and it is him who identifies the quality in them, so that he gives them the responsibility to advise him on the different areas.

As to the allegation that they never see the President, I am the Minister in Charge of the Presidency. I have been there for the last four years, but I have not got a complaint from any of the advisers that they have failed to advise the President.

If they are there, I am not in the know, because my office is open even to you Members of Parliament. So, I do not want to agree that there is a Presidential Adviser who feels aggrieved, and if there are any, we can advise them to resign the post. 

I would also like to respond to one of the issues that were raised by the committee on the structure, because the committee was complaining about failure of State House to fill some of the vacant places. I would like to respond by informing the House that the last review that was carried out by State House was in 2000, and because of the changes that have emerged, which includes the new State House, we have found it prudent to carryout a small review of the structure, and once this is finalised, then the vacancies that will remain will be filled. This is necessary because we are trying to avoid instances where we would recruit people who would eventually become irrelevant and become a problem laying off and, therefore, creating costs thereof. So I am very sure that in the near future that matter will be handled.

On Uganda Aids Commission, I agree with Members that there is need for us to worry about the seemingly increasing prevalence, and more so within the age group which we thought ordinarily would be more responsible, because it looks like the youth have taken heed; they have delayed their engagement into sex, but the married couples are now the biggest problem.

Therefore, Uganda Aids Commission is designing new strategies to step-up activities in the area of prevention, and this year, as you might note, there has been an allocation of Shs 1 billion to support Uganda Aids Commission to improve and step-up its preventive measures, so that we may be able to once again hear the drum as one colleague raised, and also put in place other mechanisms that would address the various age groups who seem to be having the biggest problem. I call upon Parliament as usual to participate in this campaign to try and curb the spread of HIV/AIDS.
  
I would like to say that there was an issue on Ethics and Integrity, but the Minister for Ethics and Integrity is here, so, I hope that he will handle that matter.
 
I wanted to assure hon. Tanna that the office of the RDC Tororo is listed for renovation this financial year, and when we get the vehicles, his RDC will be relieved from pushing the vehicle.

Hon. Tanna was wondering whether we vet performance of RDCs. Yes, we do and from time to time. Some of them are really advised on their weaknesses as is normal for Public Service. 

I would, therefore, wish to request the House to appropriate money for the Presidency, and to justify the need to recruit deputy RDCs to support mobilisation of the development programmes for youth, by reminding the House that first of all, we are operating a decentralised system, and there is alot of money going out in the districts, for programmes which are meant to be implemented in the districts; which we all cry about; which need to be monitored; and for which the population needs to be mobilised and sensitised.
 
We strongly think that the numbers of youth in our population demand and deserve special attention. I would, therefore, like to ask this House to request Members to vote for money so that we recruit a deputy RDC to specifically concentrate on mobilising and sensitising the youths and women for development programmes. I thank you. 

4.08
THE STATE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Mr David Wakikona): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I have to thank the committee for the report, in most cases they have stated exactly what we intend to do under PRDP, and of course, we were clear with them during the discussions concerning NUSAF I, and how we would proceed to NUSAF II. 

Members wanted some clarifications. I will start with hon. Wadri who indicated that under NUSAF I, there was a lot of corruption and poor performance. And this is also in line with what other Members had stated, that nothing at all was produced under NUSAF I. 

NUSAF I produced alot of sub-projects. Out of 69,152 interest forms picked, 44,131 were transformed into sub-project proposals, 24,479 were field appraised, and 14,212 were approved by the District Executive Committees but only 9,307 were funded. You can see that the funding did not match the demand by the beneficiaries. But even this 9,307 was above the expected 6,000, which had been planned for under the contract which was signed by the Uganda Government and the World Bank. So, the performance itself did not meet the demand, but it was very good. 

Under PRDP again, my sister Betty Amongi said that members of parliament make work plans, but work plans are altered to fit some preferred thing, particularly that school of Akaki. But the Prime Minister has told you, and the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister is here; nothing submitted by the district for PRDP was altered and we are willing to bring the submission as sent by the district, with their signatures, and lay it here on the Table to prove this. 

Obviously, NUSAF I ended on 31st March 2009, but because certain things were not complete, we thought that we would end three months later –[Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_]

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, answer what was raised.

MR WAKIKONA: Sit down, hon. Mafabi. (Laughter) Hon. David Ebong asked where the guidelines are. We have issued guidelines for handling NUSAF II. All the CAOs and coordinating officers from all districts – and these coordinating officers were not appointed by the Prime Minister’s Office. They were nominated by the district and their names were given to us. Of course you know that under PRDP we had told all districts that everything they submit to us in form of work plans or suggestions, must have the involvement of MPs. And we passed this information to all MPs in the NUSAF area. Under the Greater North Parliamentary Group, we agreed on this. So, the guidelines have been issued. Every CAO has been given copies, and we are obviously going to circulate these copies to all members of parliament. 

Hon. Nandala, you stood up before I came to your matter, but I am handling your issue now. You wanted to know where the end of project report is. We have the report. Of course this was one of the demands by the Cabinet. We have already issued these reports. We also had to involve UBOS who also sub-contracted a consultant to work with them. They too have a report and we are going to circulate copies of these reports. I have a big book here, but I will make enough copies and ensure that all members of parliament get a copy. 

Hon. Opange - again PRDP is not a programme but a plan. I said 500 people from Pallisa died - but obviously, under PRDP, you remember that during the meetings we were having, we said work plans must come from districts. The choice of what you want to do will depend on you members of parliament from those districts. You submit these work plans to the Office of the Prime Minister’s Permanent Secretary, and if you did not participate, the Prime Minister advised you to write directly to the PS, Office of the Prime Minister saying, “My district dodged me and I did not participate.” 

Put your case before us and we will look at it. Otherwise, we thought that everybody had followed the guidelines given by the Prime Minister, and we knew that you had agreed with what had been stated in the work plans. All the work plans were given to the Ministry of Finance, and as we speak now, all districts under PRDP have been given money. All we have to do now is to follow-up through monitoring. 

Somebody asked; for how long will you do it? What we have decided is that we begin as soon as money goes there, and it will follow the normal Government system under decentralisation. The contract committees there will have people to do the job and even the work of the district will involve monitoring. And if they identify any problem, we will alter that immediately and have the money go to other places. Those CAOs who will misuse this money or anybody who will misuse this money, the directive is that we have such people arrested immediately. The others will learn from those who will have been taken to that university where they do not pay school fees. 

Somebody asked that under NUSAF I, were there no people affected? There were people who were affected and the cases are with the Police. We have those who are already in court; they are 15, and there are others the Police say they are still investigating – these are 92. 

Altogether, there are 105 cases, and I have listed them here. This will be reproduced and all Members shall get copies of cases with the Police, those in court and those yet to be arrested -(Interjections)- time you know. Sit down. Now what -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I think you will lay that document on Table so that Members can have a copy.

MR WAKIKONA: Madam Speaker, I lay a copy of the cases with the Police on the Table. 

There was a case -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please wind up.

MR WAKIKONA: When you spoke, I kept quiet -(Laughter) There was a question concerning industrialisation; The private sector and the PRDP now. The government has decided that we are going to have tractors which will plough. Under the private sector, all areas in commercial - like now we have US$ 20 million for commercial farming in Acholi, Lango and parts of Teso -(Interjections)- you listen please - and we are going to have this private arrangement. The ploughs under these sectors will work evenly, and the owners will have to use ploughed land. We want to see where to begin from. (Mr Byandala rose_)

Hon. Byandala, you asked where the money is going. The money is going to the 40 districts as stated, and it is going to do the work as I have already told all MPs. 

Hon. Byandala also said that each time we talk to MPs from the North, all MPs in the House should be invited. It is a good idea, but it disrupts a lot of things. So, we feel that MPs from the affected areas will tell their colleagues, through the committees which they attend, after the workshops. 

After knowing this, they will work and go on as they have agreed. And if there is a problem, they will not hide. They will come straight and inform members of parliament about the problems they have found in those areas. 

Also, hon. Byandala, there are the Luwero and Rwenzori programmes being developed and soon -(Interjections)- I am also acting as Minister for Luwero at the moment - so, soon this will also be brought here like we brought PRDP for those areas, and some of these matters of Luwero, as stated by hon. Byandala, will be handled accordingly.

Otherwise, I thank the committee for the good report. They even praised us for the Northern Uganda Data Centre. This is something wonderful, and we are going to make sure that there is no duplication in the programmes now. In the past, we used to have duplications, but now, with the Northern Uganda Data Centre, if you are a donor and you are bringing money or a financier coming with money, you have to pass through the Northern Uganda Data Centre, choose where you are going to take the money, they print a chart and if what you are going to do is already on that chart - even the cameras the Prime Minister has bought for people who make projects there, indicate co-ordination of what they are doing there. 

If it is a borehole, the co-coordinators are given and they are printed on that data chart. So, you only choose where nobody else has gone. This is to avoid the problems we used to have in other projects. Thank you very much honourable members. 

I appeal to you to make sure that the Office of the Prime Minister still gets enough money as requested to enable us continue doing the work you have told us to do. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY)(Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Presidential Affairs did recommend that Government should seek avenues to attract and retain staff so as to enable the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity to attract and retain competent staff. I know this is a view which the entire House has supported. I want to say that since the time when the chairperson of the committee did make these observations, we have made considerable progress. We have had four more staff and I want to assure the House that by the end of this year, the Directorate will be 80 percent strong, which will give us sufficient mandate to continue with the work we have been given. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MAJ. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Hon. James Nsaba Buturo - very few of us could really cope with his English accent. (Laughter) So, we did not pick what he was exactly saying. We are begging the indulgence of the Deputy Speaker so that the minister goes back to the microphone and -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the Hansard may not have captured what you have said. Can you say it more slowly for the Hansard? (Laughter)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I was making a point in response to what the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs did point out, which is that the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity is under-staffed. I was making a point that since he made these observations on behalf of his committee, we have actually moved a long way. We have had additional four staff members, one legal officer, and a number of Ethics officers, which has brought us to a good percentage of strength that we need to be able to do the work that has been assigned to us.

I also did say that at the end of this year, the Directorate will be 80 percent strong, which means that this problem of under-staffing will not be a major issue next time round. 


4.25
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, we are very grateful for your contribution and I want to thank the committee for having made very important points.

I would like to make two points. One, the sale of our airport is absolutely false. It is not being sold. Do not believe what you read. 

The other day, the Red Pepper said that Esther and I would like to have a baby through artificial fertilisation. Do you believe that rubbish; that I would like to have a baby through artificial fertilisation? -(Laughter)- I have five girls and I do not intend to have any more children. I have made this point several times. So, do not believe whatever you read. A lot of rubbish is written and we political leaders just ignore some of those statements.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, Mr Prime Minister, I think the issue the Members raised was that no one from government has come out to clarify, despite all those reports. That was their worry. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Hon. Nasasira did but probably he should have come here. He did make that clarification when he met the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, and it was also captured by the mass media. The Speaker has disallowed us to accept. 

The second issue has to do with corruption. Hon. Abura lamented that corruption is on the increase, but I would like to make two points here. It is still –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think as leaders we should really be very clear and specific on the issues we put to the public. This issue of the airport should come out clearly; it should not just pass out and in a very flimsy manner. 

Here is a copy of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Uganda and Dorso Infrastructure Developers Limited and it was signed by the minister who is now an ambassador, Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka, Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Investment) and for Dorso Infrastructure Developers Limited, Mr Rajen Clachan, Chairman and President of Dorso Group. I think the country deserves a better explanation on this issue of the airport. That is why even the Movement Caucus constituted a committee to look into this matter. We should not just gloss over this matter. 

I will lay this on the Table but is it in order for the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, the Rt. Hon. Apolo Nsibambi to just gloss over this very serious matter yet Ugandans deserve a precise explanation on what is going on? May I lay this on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Come and lay it on the Table.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want to lay on the Table a Memorandum of Understanding in the matter of investment in the aviation industry between the Government of the Republic of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which was signed on 4 August 2008 and Dorso Infrastructure Developers Limited, a company registered in the British Virgin Islands, with company registration No. 1469952 and signed on behalf of the Government of Uganda  by Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka, PhD, Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Investment) and for Dorso Infrastructure Developers Limited, Mr Rajan Clachans, Chairman and President, Dorso Group. I beg to lay it on the Table, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, I do not see the Attorney-General here or his deputy; so I do not know who is going to assure us of the authenticity of that document. I do not know what you have to say. 

THE PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That paper is a photoset copy. The Minister of Works – (Interruption)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, what my honourable colleague has laid on the Table is an authentic document given to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises by the Executive Director of the Civil Aviation Authority when they appeared before the committee to explain this matter of the sale of Entebbe Airport. 

The Executive Director made it abundantly clear that CAA and the Minister of Works - Hon. John Nasasira - were not even aware of this Memorandum of Understanding. That this was a deal of the Ministry of Finance and they only came to know when the matter was already signed, and I think if the Prime Minister is not aware of what is taking place, then we don’t need to gloss over that matter. But that is an authentic document which if the Prime Minister had not seen; he should refer it to the Minister of Finance. 

The Minister of Finance appeared before the Committee of Finance and actually made a statement and said that if the Government of Uganda fails to honour this Memorandum of Understanding, we would lose out. So, government is aware but our biggest disappointment is how government operates because even in that document, the person who committed government was Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka and every correspondence according to that document is supposed to be channelled through Professor Kiwanuka and the witness who signed on behalf of the other company is the vice-chairman. 

The designation for the witness who signed on behalf of the Government of Uganda is not even indicated. It is just a name given on the space where the designation should have been put; but there is nothing. This leaves this country - I think this matter, now that it has come up, needs to be handled more seriously than the way it is being concluded. Because, as far as we are concerned, even what the Minister of Works is referring to, is not party to this agreement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much Rt. Hon. Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. We are debating the policy statement and the report for Presidential Affairs. Hon. Reagan Okumu has rightly informed this House that his committee of COSASE is dealing with this matter and that is how they received this information. Is it, therefore, procedurally correct to bring in this matter instead of waiting for the committee report of COSASE then we can exhaustively debate this issue. Is it procedurally correct? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would say two things. One, the committees of this House are delegated by this plenary to do their work so they are doing that work on our behalf. But secondly, this matter is of gross public concern. It has been in the press for the last one month. We cannot deny that there is a problem about that airport. So, Prime Minister, when can you arrange that a proper statement is made by the ministers of Finance, Justice and Works on this matter? (Applause)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance after interfacing with the Minister of Works, will make an appropriate statement at the propitious time. 

The second issue I would like to deal with is the issue of corruption, because Hon. Abura lamented that corruption is on the increase. But I would like to inform Hon. Abura that it is true that corruption is still an endemic problem but there are some important developments. For example, the Anti-Corruption Court imposed very stiff punishments if I may call them, to those who are involved in mismanaging or actually stealing funds; GAVI funds and you know what has happened to those people. You know Mr Cheeye and others. So, when these stiff punishments are imposed on those who are involved in corruption, I think it is going to have an impact on corruption.

The second matter, which is usually ignored, is the power of prayer. And I would like to give you one example. I bought a very good mobile phone for my wife -(Laughter)- and it was stolen -(Interjections)- when it was stolen, we prayed. (Laughter) Today we have recovered it –(Interjections)- and discovered that it was stolen by one of our workers. Today I wanted to cane him but he apologised and we forgave him. So, don’t underestimate, we need to pray that the Almighty helps us to get rid of corruption. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, on that note may I invite you to the weekly prayer breakfast at Parliament? It takes place every Thursday, come and pray with Members of Parliament. 

But concerning the airport, I think as soon as we finish this budget, we want a statement on the airport -(Interruption) 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much Rt. Hon. Speaker. I just need guidance so that I can also be in a position to guide our members. This matter is under investigation by the Committee on Commissions, Authorities and Statutory Enterprises. They have summoned a number of people; they have summoned ministers; they have summoned managers, Civil Aviation Authority and other entities. I know also Prof. Ssemakula Kiwanuka has been summoned. Now, how are we going to proceed on this one? 

The statement which the minister is going to make will be in regard to the status quo but there have been doubts expressed just like you have indicated that this is an issue of great public concern. We thought the committee would help us and come up with a report that is comprehensive and has taken everything into account. How should we proceed, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I said when we complete the budget, because I expect that by the time we finish the budget they will also have finished their report so they bring their report, we have the statement and we vet them together.

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Secondly, I do think that we want the Executive arm of Government to be on record, the Committee’s findings notwithstanding, that someone either Hon. Hajati Bbumba Syda Namirembe, hon. Batavia -(Laughter)- or Hon. John Nasasira or Hon. Eng. John Byabagambi – any of those to be on record, representing the Executive that the only airport that this country owns is safe. 

The Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises will give us what they would have found out – but we want the Executive to be on record by telling us what they know to assure the country through us here that our airport is available. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. We need the budget first. So Prime Minister and ministers you have heard that. After the budget, we want that statement.

MR WADRI: Thank you. The issue of Entebbe Airport should not just be taken in isolation. As I even talk, staff in other inland airfields like Arua have been threatened with dismissal that the airport has already been bought by a foreign company and therefore they are required to vacate their places of employment. 

I will, therefore, request that the idea of laying these people off be halted until when the government commits itself on the Floor of this House otherwise we may come here when these people have already been sent off -(Interjections)- yes, you are the Government. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, since we have not yet dealt with the report of the Committee on Infrastructure, you can bring up that matter during this process. So can we go to the Committee of Supply?

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 001 - Office of the President 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I propose the question that a sum of Shs 53,067,893,956 under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/2010. Yes?

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, it is in this Vote 001 for the recurrent expenditure for the Office of the President that a sum of Shs 6.5 billion is included for the establishing the patriotism clubs and that it is a point of contention and we still insist that we are not ready for that programme – we do not have the documentation, the curriculum – we were just not ready. We suggest that Shs 6.5 billion be reduced from that particular recurrent expenditure of Vote 001. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, the Minister for the Presidency.

MRS WABUDEYA: I stood here some minutes ago and clarified - if you were not around, you should have asked your friends -(Laughter)- because I clarified this matter. I said this matter is not a matter for schools or the curriculum. We are going to start developing a consistency programme for patriotism for this country. 

I even clarified that the deputy RDCs we are talking about are not patriotic RDCs and -(Interjections)- yes, I did. You have just come in, yes, and their budget is different. I would like to continue urging the House that we pass Vote 001 for the Office of the President -(Interruptions)   

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, when the ministers were responding, I think there was an understanding that the ministers be given time without any interruption from other members. So do not take it that because nobody questioned you as you presented, it means that all you presented was agreed on. Members rose but it was not possible to seek clarification and information from the ministers who were holding the Floor. It is really unpatriotic – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Epetait; no! Members attempted to seek clarification from the Minister for the Presidency; I was here. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No! Not from this minister.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, we respected your ruling and guidance. You did say – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you received from the Prime Minister - it was also part of my guidance –

DR EPETAIT: Well, I still wanted to drive my point home that we would actually be showing a level of non-patriotism if we –(Laughter)- passed on this very money for patriotism and yet we are not prepared to undertake that programme in schools, when Mbarara University of Science and Technology is having problems in developing a new campus at Kihimuro and we are here gambling to put money to undertake a programme that we are just not ready for - there is no documentation; there are no guidelines -(Interjection)- that is according to the committee report. I still insist that the Shs 6.5 billion meant for patriotism and lumped in that budget should not be passed.

MR MENHYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee did not say we reject this. Much as it was an expensive venture, it was necessary. In any case, patriotism is a subject like English, Economics and there is no way we can prepare without funding. Therefore, I pray to the House that this money be passed so that it facilitates the preparation for this arrangement.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to make a passionate appeal to this august House. If we are talking about patriotism, it is about love for this country. What we are about to do is what we exactly did in 2005 when we pronounced ourselves on Article 105(2) of the Constitution amendment process. 

As we go into taking decisions on this matter, the entire country is watching. Even our conscience should be our guiding factor. In no way am I intimidating anyone but I am making an appeal that when we stand up to say that the idea of patriotism maybe good, the conceptual framework is not okay. According to the report of the committee, which unfortunately the line minister is not agreeing to, the recruitment of the 80 assistant RDCs is to particularly ensure the implementation of the patriotism clubs in this country. 

The target clientele are the youth and according to the Youth Statute, a person is regarded as a youth from the ages of 12 to 30 years and these are the school going youth. Surely aren’t we mixing up roles? If we were targeting youth to be the beneficiaries of patriotism, there is a ministry where the youth largely fall when it comes to issues of education and that is Ministry of Education. That is also where we have competent people, so why isn’t this role ascribed to the Ministry of Education? 

There is even the Ministry of Gender, Youth and Social Development, which is charged with the responsibility of character formation of the youth. I say this because I was privileged to have served in that ministry as a commissioner especially for that sector. Why are we now coming up, more so at this critical time when Ugandans out there are already bent on believing that this is a deliberate move to begin the process of 2011 elections? 

I don’t think that we as a Parliament should be part of the electioneering process, never. So my appeal to you honourable colleagues is: use your conscience and stand by it. At the end of the day whether you vote for it or not, you will individually be haunted by your own conscience. Yes, you will be haunted and held responsible, whether during sleep or not. You will reflect and know whether you have acted in the best interests of this country or not. 

My appeal to you is to vehemently reject the idea of having the patriotism clubs under the Office of the President. If it is a good idea, let us transfer it to the Ministry of Education so that the teachers take charge of this programme. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Wadri, can you tell me, of the 309 million people in this country, how many of the youth are captured by the Ministry of Education? What percentage of the population?

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, I may not be able to have a succinct figure of the fraction of youth who are beneficiaries of the education programmes in this country but for certain if they are not in school then they are catered for under the youth programmes in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. There is a ministry for that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we hear from the youth? Hon. Nalubega.

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, I want to inform hon. Wadri that USE caters for 3.2 million people. Those in higher education are about 1.7 million. The total of those in schools minus UPE are about 4.6 million. Those out of school are 8 million and these must be covered as well because they are youths and must benefit.

MRS WABUDEYA: Madam Chairperson, sitting here and listening to hon. Wadri made me come up and say this. He categorically told us that people out there think that we are establishing patriotic clubs in preparation for 2011. That is the very reason why some of my colleagues are against this very noble cause. 

I would like us to differentiate elections from development and from building a country and from supporting systems that help Uganda be what it is. By doing so, I would like to quote some provisions of the Constitution. You can jeer but the truth is the truth and we need to hear it, hon. Member for Arua.

If you look at Article 17 of the Constitution, it talks about the duties of every citizen. That we must respect the National Anthem, flag, Court of Arms, currency, respect the rights and freedoms of others, protect children and vulnerable persons, protect and preserve public property, defend Uganda and render national service when necessary, cooperate with lawful agencies in the maintenance of law and order, pay taxes, register for electoral and other lawful purposes, combat corruption, et cetera. That is Article 17(1). 

Article 17(2) says, “It is the duty of all able bodied citizens to undergo military training for the defence of this Constitution and to protect the territorial integrity of Uganda whenever called upon to do so and the state shall ensure the facilities are available …” 
Before 17, we have Section 29, duties of a citizen; and it states that, “The exercise and enjoinment of rights and freedoms is inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations, and accordingly, it shall be the duty of every citizen to be patriotic and loyal to Uganda, and to promote its wellbeing.” 

If you go to Article 99(1), the executive authority of Uganda: “The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of Uganda.
(2)The President shall execute and maintain this Constitution and all laws made under or continued in force by this Constitution. 
(3)It shall be the duty of the President to abide by, uphold and safeguard this Constitution and the laws of Uganda and to promote the welfare of the citizens and protect - ”

We are doing all this under the legal framework that is given to us by the Constitution.

I have already stated that we should not confuse the proposed deputy RDCs with the patriotism programme. I want to clearly state that we are going to recruit RDCs for mobilisation, sensitisation and ensuring that the youth participate in development programmes. We are establishing a patriotic secretariat to promote patriotism in Uganda - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I wish to thank the honourable minister for accepting that I put the following to her for clarification. I believe the chairperson and the committee members for presidential affairs gave ample time, and interacted with the honourable minister and her technical team. If that is the case, I take it that the position of the committee is that the recruitment of 80 assistant RDCs is specifically to oversee the implementation of the patriotic clubs, as contained in this report, but now the minister is saying that is not. Did the minister appear before this committee or not?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Rwamirama and then hon. Kagwera.

LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I listened to my brother Hon. Kassiano Wadri and Dr Epetait, and actually, their concern is the domicile of this vote. The other concern is that it could possibly be used for elections and what not. We hold these offices for the chief executive and these offices are occupied by members of the ruling party. I would like them to allay their fears that if it was to be so, wherever it would go, still it  would be used, and I think what is very important is to appreciate that patriotism is a necessity now.  Therefore, wherever it resides, as long as it is within the ruling party, the fears of misusing it will not arise. Therefore, I would appeal to my colleagues to support and pass the budget.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Kagwera.

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with hon. Bright Rwamirama that patriotism is a necessity and nobody is refusing to pass this money, but the problem is with the minister. When you look at the committee, it lacks basic documentation on how the project shall be implemented, and what the roles of the different stakeholders will be. In addition, the committee is concerned about the increasing — for me I would not be concerned even with the rising cost of administration so much, if it was to benefit this country; but the issue is with the minister. Where is the documentation? Give us the documentation, and we pass the thing, other than being heard, because this Parliament will refuse and it will be a contradiction. Just tell us you are bringing it and then we pass. We see the necessity. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESRON: Yes, Minister for the Presidency.

DR WABUDEYA: Madam Chairperson, when I was responding to issues raised by Parliament, I made a comment with regard to the fact that the committee did not ask me to produce these papers; because I have got the first concept paper on patriotism here. This is a paper I told you I had introduced to the NRM caucus. This is the basis paper that the patriotic secretariat is going to build on so that we start implementation, and I would like to lay it on Table.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if the minister says that she has brought a concept paper, let us stand over this particular vote and give opportunity to members to look at it and then we finish.

Yeah, but I haven’t read and you haven’t read it. No, let us stand over that vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 61,353,912,001 under Vote 002, State House, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is always common knowledge that whenever we pass the budget for State House, by October, a supplementary has jetted in. We want to get an assurance now from, first the Minister for the Presidency, because she is near here, the chairman of the committee and the Minister of Finance. Now, is the money we are going to give the State House, the President’s family, enough? This issue of coming with suplementaries after passing the budget within the shortest time will not be accepted. We only want the assurance that when we pass this budget, the money will be enough. If not – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Nandala, you are a former shadow finance minister. Really, you know that we cannot legislate in anticipation. 

Vote 002 – State House 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 61,353,912,001 under Vote 002, State House, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2009/10.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 16,874,580,451 under Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 003 – Office of the Prime Minister 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 20,522,474,665 under Vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2009/10 – 

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, we have two papers; the one that is attached to the report of the committee and the other with revised figures. I have noticed that the figures you are reading are not in tandem with the revised figures. The issue is, can we, as a House, get the copies of the document from which you are reading?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Minister of Finance.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, Members will recall the words that you said when we were breaking off for lunch. I remember you said that we utilise the lunch break to take a final look at the figures. 

I would like to say that the figures that appeared in the report of the chairperson of the committee were rounded off; the figures that Madam Chairperson is reading are a sum of the money for wage, non-wage and arrears. That figure amounts to what Madam Chairperson has read to the Members. Madam Chair, I do not want to start an argument with the members in the House. 

Anyway, what I am saying is that we were given the opportunity to revise these figures. I want to inform you that we did that; the figures that the chairperson is reading are the correct ones. The total sum is Shs 20,141,475,716.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Chairperson, it is true, during the break we were consulting and we did agree on a lot of issues. But I would like to say that there is one issue that we did not agree upon. That was vote 001 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But we have stood over that. Please, only deal with Vote 003 for the Office of the Prime Minister.

MR ODUMAN: Yes, the principle was that we should have dealt with the issues in the vote to encompass all these other recurrent expenditures, which include arrears. 

Our position regarding the arrears is that we have information from the previous financial statements; we provided funds during Financial Year 2008/09 to cater for arrears for the period ending June 2008. But from the documents we have, the cumulative arrears for these votes under the presidency – money was appropriated to cater for those outstanding arrears, which includes Vote 003. 

The question that runs through us is, what are these new arrears that we are now again providing for, if the arrears up to June 2008 were cleared? We should not forget that the budget for last financial year was fully appropriated, including supplementaries. That should have covered these particular votes. That is why we have a concern over the inclusion of these arrears; we are not comfortable with them.

Secondly, we previously were informed in the committee of PAC that there has been a contention between the accounting officers in this sector, regarding the amount for the arrears. Whereas the accounting officers were saying the arrears had been verified by the internal auditors, the Auditor-General was never involved in that verification. Therefore, the exact amount of the arrears is unknown. 

Our concern, Madam Chair, is that we are not comfortable with these arrears figures as a principle. I actually wanted to drive my point home at the time we were handling Vote 001 had we not stood over it. 

We actually have an example. If you look at these documents, we have Shs 3.8 billion for Vote 001 as outstanding arrears as at June 2008. Money to pay that was provided for. Now, where is the Shs 4.5 billion coming from? That question applies to all these votes under the Presidency. Our request is that these inclusions of arrears be verified. Our reasoning is that we do not have any clear basis for including them, Madam Chair; we have a concern over them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Shadow Finance Minister, are members of the Opposition represented on the Committee on Presidential Affairs? Really, you are on that committee and you did not file a minority report? No. This is a matter of principle! The shadow minister is a member of this committee - don’t you have members on this committee? Where is your minority report?

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, as it is a provision of our Rules of Procedures, the designation of Members to the various standing or sessional committees of Parliament is based on the numerical strength of the political parties in this House. Therefore, on the Presidential Affairs Committee, the Opposition has four slots, but my shadow minister for finance who has got the technical eyes on the issues of figures is not a member of that committee. That is the information I wanted to share with this House. 

Having said that, the understanding is that you can only put arrears for appropriation request if the performance of the budget in the previous year was not up to 100 percent. But in this particular case, I do not know what is wrong with the Office of the Presidency. Even when you look at this report, they have over-performed. They have performed to the tune of 632 percent meaning that all the money that they asked of us as Parliament and that we appropriated, was given to them; they exhausted it and we added more. So, technically, they have no basis to put forward a request for arrears, because arrears can only be put for appropriation if the budget performance was below 100 percent; but this time they are over and above. We have to be convinced; there is no technical explanation you can give other than what I have said. There is no way you can appropriate if the budget has performed more than 100 percent.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, it is true that during the break we did consult with the shadow ministers, except that they are shadow ministers. But we did consult with the Shadow Minister of Finance and indeed the Whip, and we did agree that the Minister of Finance came to this very House, gave full explanation about the debt sustainability, and in that report, she indicated the domestic arrears as part of sustainability of the external debt. 

The stock of domestic arrears is also known. As of end of June 2008, the stock of debt stood at 614 billion, and this needs to be understood. Domestic arrears arise because we may not have budgeted adequately, in which case - (Interjections)- yes let me put this point across because it is a source of controversy for nothing. 

When you appropriate a budget and it is not adequate to cover the items, there are arrears incurred. Also, because of the unpredictability of some expenses such as court awards; you cannot predict what court award is going to be as you are budgeting. Some of these arise during the course of business. The awards from courts are very difficult to predict and budget for right here. I am just explaining why these points of arrears do arise, and we have to come to the House and request.

The distinctive point is to categorise these domestic arrears. There are domestic arrears which are statutory, in the sense that they do a first call on the Consolidated Fund; and there are also arrears which arise because of rent and utilities -(Hon. Wadri rose_)- but we had a meeting with you; why are you bringing it here? We settled this matter. This is being intellectually dishonest. When we have settled to save the time of the House -(Interjections)- now I will be a gentleman and accept the information. (Laughter) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The point I want to give my long-time friend, Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu is that, yes it is true we held a discussion so as to save time for this House. The information I want to give you is that you are trying to confuse this House in your deliberation. The issue is that statutory arrears cannot constitute part of our appropriation. That is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. What we are engaging ourselves in are the recurrent expenditures. So, why then do we make reference to statutory arrears? Whether they arise out of litigation or statutory organisations, they cannot constitute part of this. We are talking about recurrent arrears which were incurred when we had already even given you all the money that you have requested for, and even given you arrears on top of that. You have been very extravagant. Please, save this country.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chair, he was giving me information but if Hon. Kassiano Wadri had listened to me, I said there are two categories of arrears: One was statutory; and the statutory is exactly the information you are giving me. It is statutory; it has a first call on the Consolidated Fund, and it is not appropriated here, and that is what I said. Then there is a second category which has to be appropriated here because there has to be a law appropriating it. We have to come here for this appropriation, and these are the figures which are included in this budget, in this report, and indeed in the figures hon. Chairperson is reading. So, what is the issue? This is not information now.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Madam Chair. When the House resumed this afternoon, the hon. Minister of Finance was not in the House. So, subsequently we again consulted with - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But when the House resumed we received the responses from the Office of the Prime Minister - 

PROF. KAMUNTU: And when you entered and read the prayers I was here. So, why are you -(Interruption)

MR ODUMAN: Hon. Chairperson, allow me to give the information. If he was not here then we would have had another consultation over these matters with hon. Daudi Migereko from your side, and a technocrat from your side. We had a consultation in the lobby and the Minister of State for Finance was not here. Now, what did we agree -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You were consulting him in the lobby?

MR ODUMAN: We were consulting over these figures, hon. Chair. Now, what we agreed in that consultation is that with the new information that we had, and that was in the audited financial statement of the Auditor-General, given that those figures were not reconciling with the figures of arrears that we were given, could we receive an explanation before this stage regarding the non-reconciliation of those figures. We have not received that up to now. 

So, our prayer is that we stay the figures of arrears until we receive an adequate reconciliation from the concerned sector because this particular sector is usually a priority in budget appropriation and supplementary estimates appropriation. So, we do not exactly see how the amounts remain outstanding; even after a financial year, supplementary estimates are passed and this sector is usually a priority in allocation of supplementary estimates. We have a key concern; we are not coming out of the blue; we have been given figures during the break. We need the reconciliation and without that we will not follow what is happening here. So, we pray that we stay over the arrears for this particular sector and we move with the recurrent expenditure.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Chairperson, it is true that we have been engaged in a series of consultations with hon. Oduman, hon. Kassiano, hon. Kamuntu, and the technical officials of the Ministry of Finance. The response which Prof. Kamuntu has just given takes into account those consultations. The fact of the matter is that those arrears must be catered for and I beg the House to support this position and we pass these figures. Thank you.

MR ACHIA REMIGIO: I have listened to the points raised by the shadow minister, but reading through the report, particularly the one talking about Vote 003 and 002 as well, whereas they appreciate that there was performance over and above what was budgeted for in this sector’s budget, they go ahead to specify that it performed by over 12 percent in the wage and non-wage, but it underperformed in development and arrears. They say that it underperformed by 53 percent and 23 percent respectively. If we are supposed to go as we did with the position of the committee on patriotism, what is wrong with going with the findings of the committee? Unless the chair of the committee says to the contrary, but as far as we are concerned, they have specifically said that the arrears of these votes underperformed although some sub-votes under this sector performed. I find this very clear and I would beg the House to go by the position of the committee. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you. I am a member of this committee and I have been sitting quietly without debating. We are sitting here as the Parliament of Uganda, appropriating money for various Government departments. As far as I am concerned, the figures I have are only those from the committee. Now, I hear you reading figures which are not here and I am supposed to pass those figures as a Member of Parliament by hearing it and not seeing it. (Laughter) This is not what a Parliament is supposed to do. If there was consultation, to which we were not a party, those figures should be circulated to all of us, we look at them and then approve them. I think it is demeaning to this Parliament to behave the way we are behaving; that you hear figures and you say, “Aye”, what is all this? (Laughter) What kind of Parliament are we? I am extremely embarrassed by the behaviour of our Parliament. We should have rejected this thing outrightly. Let them bring the figures and we study them like we studied the ones in the report, and then we come here and pass them. What is the emergency? There is no emergency. We can stay over this. If need be, we should go to other ministries and come to this later when we are satisfied that we can now look at them. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am not party to your consultations. I did not meet anybody at lunch time, so I am not party to what you have been discussing. So, if there are mistakes, they have been made by you. 

MR MENHYA: Since last week, there have been revisions of these budgets for the different sectors, and today, the same thing happened; and during the break the Ministry officials from Finance and the committee, and the two ministers, met to look at these figures again. Because that is what was agreed to here; so, the figures that the chairperson – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let the chairperson report. Why do you not want him to report? I have said that I am not party to your consultations. So, I want to hear what happened during the consultation. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Hon. Nandala, I want to hear what the Chair of that committee, where hon. Okello sits, has to say.
 
MR MENHYA: Madam Chairperson, I also want to make a correction on what hon. Nandala is saying that hon. Okello-Okello is a member. Unfortunately, hon. Okello-Okello was not here and he is not even a signatory to this. So, he was away. We met, and the correct figures were given, and that is what the minister is reading. So, I pray that the House adopts the figures that the Deputy Chairperson is reading. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, whom did you meet in this consultation?

MR MENHYA: Madam Chairperson, we met the Ministry of Finance officials. They were three and we met with the minister himself, who is here, as well as the Minister for the Presidency. But the difference is not so significant –(Interjections)– I want to give an example. The changes emanated from the draft estimates and, therefore, we had to correct as advised by the ministry officials. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, when we were still debating, I think a request came from the Opposition that we should halt dealing with the Committee of Supply until we have had the consultation. What I want to know is whether you have had this consultation between you and the Members of the Opposition. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the consultation that I know of which involved the Minister of State for Finance, my Shadow Minister for Finance, myself and technocrats from the Ministry of Finance was on the position of arrears. It was not about figures. But what I can also report is that when the chairperson was presenting this report, when he reached that last part, we were supplied in this Chamber with another sheet of paper with new figures and that is what the chairperson should be accepting on the Floor of this House because these figures were circulated when we were all here. So, this does not have the blessing of the committee. What has been read is different from what the chairperson presented. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In every committee, the Minister of Finance has been coming with new figures. So later, after we failed to compromise on the Committee on Social Services, the Speaker told the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to sit with all the chairpersons so that we could reconcile and we did it. These new figures are coming almost on every committee. So, the only thing is for the Minister of Finance to tell the House that there were a number of errors and they were put right. And that they are issuing new figures so we move on. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, if it is true that this is what has been happening with every report, that everyday you have been doing this - okay, can I ask all the committee chairpersons to go and synchronise and harmonise their figures for all the remaining reports? Because it is going to happen with the Committee on Agriculture and the others and it means that everyday we will be moving back and forth. 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Chair, yesterday we spent the whole morning trying to realign these figures with the Minister of Finance and all the chairpersons who were there. So, the only error with these figures is that the new list that he brought does not tally with what we have. What you have is not what we have; that is all. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, if what I have is not what you have, then I think you should go and synchronise your figures. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I now beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.39 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposal for the Office of the President and stood over –(Interjections)– I am pained because there is a deliberate delay to pass these figures. But I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposal for the Office of the President and deferred the supply for it. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But we have passed Vote 002 of State House. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposal for State House, Vote 002 and passed it, and deferred consideration of the rest of the votes on Office of the President, Uganda Aids Commission, Ethics and Integrity and External Security Organisation. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can I ask that you synchronise these figures? I do not understand; you know the budget cycle begins in October and you are working from October up to June and now we are here disagreeing on the Floor of the House. What is the problem, hon. Minister of Finance?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, what happened was that the report of the chairperson of the committee gave figures, which were rounded up and they did not take into account the fact that arrears which are statutory need not be appropriated in the figures. So, we adjusted the figures for arrears on statutory items and this resulted into the figures you are reading in your report. 

The figures you were reading were right, only that we had not circulated this adjustment and I think that is what is causing the trouble. Otherwise, we have the figures; we have the facts and we can adjust them when we meet with the Budget Committee. Thank you very much.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, last week on Thursday we had an ugly scenario and we agreed that day that from then on the committees would go and synchronise figures with the Ministry of Finance and that from yesterday, we would not see a scenario where a committee chairperson comes here with a committee report like it happened today. 

Having presented the report, the Ministry of Finance presents revised figures. What is happening now is not good in that once the committee chairperson accepts to deal with those figures presented here by the Ministry of Finance he will have thrown out his committee members. So this is a critical point. 

We had agreed as moved by the chairperson on budget that let the committees go and synchronise the budget figures and bring them here as committee figures. I think that is the best way to move. Other wise, we will keep moving back and forth and the integrity of the process will be at stake because the committee members can disown those figures. 

So, can the Minister of Finance tell us that from tomorrow, the figures we get from the committees will not have any further amendments and that the committees will have taken into account the corrigenda? Whatever they are, we will believe the committees. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have already agreed on what to do, let us move to the next item. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/10

4.47
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Lastus Katende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have got the honour of presenting the report of the Committee on Agriculture and on page one, I would like to point out that we will be appropriating for votes: MAAIF - Vote 010 and NARO - Vote 142, NAADS - Vote 152, CDO - Vote 155 and UCDA - Vote 160. 

For Members with copies, you can see that Votes 500 to 850 are to do with NAADS production and services, which are being moved to the Ministry of Local Government. 

I would like to go to the committee sector priorities for Financial Year 2008/09 at the bottom of page one which goes overleaf to page 2. Those were the sector priorities in the Financial Year 2008/09. 

In section four, we looked at the financial performance of the agricultural sector which performed at 106.08 percent against the approved budget and this came out due to more releases to the Cotton Development Organisation during the financial year, especially for CDO budget release which performed at 360.9 percent arising from supplementary budgets towards the support of the cotton prices.  

Also, it shows at the bottom how the recurrent budget performed at 126.2 percent and the reasons are given for that over performance. 

On page 3 at the top, it shows the performance of the district agriculture advisory services at 100 percent, and so on. 

I want to say that overall, the domestic development budget for the agriculture sector over performed at 100.2 percent. This was largely attributed to MAAIF which performed at 103.1 percent. 

The committee observed that the under performance of the non-wage category for MAAIF at 86.4 was likely to constrain operations of the agencies like the Dairy Development Authority and the NAGRIC and DB that rely on non-wage budget for their operations. 

Our recommendation is that funding for research and development in those agencies like NAGRIC and NARO should be made a priority. 

On fiscal performance, let me go straight to the sectors where coffee brought in US $300 million into the national coffers and other achievements. 

The demand for coffee seedlings is expected to remain high as farmers continue to see coffee as a profitable crop. However, the coffee nursery operators have generated 33 million seedlings, which require Shs 5.2 billion to be bought off and distributed to the farmers. This has not been catered for in the budget we are trying to appropriate.

The observations include that the Coffee Wilt Disease continues to be a menace in the coffee industry and we need to acquire the Shs 5.2 billion for buying off the highly needed coffee seedlings.

Recommendations include that considering the demand for the coffee seedlings, Parliament should urgently provide the Shs 5.2 billion to UCDA to buy off the 33 million seedlings.

On page 5, production of cotton rose to 125,230 bales from 65,000 bales in 2007. However, the performance was below the targeted 300,000 bales. The government provided subsidies for pesticides and as I said earlier, supported the farmer prices for seed cotton to rise from Shs 450 to Shs 600 per kilogram of seed cotton. 

The next is to do with details on the seed multiplication as new varieties come from research stations. 

Regarding cotton production in the coming financial year, there are planned approaches, which are outlined in (i) to (vi) on page 5.

The next section is cocoa where we see increased production of cocoa when you compare 3,700 metric tonnes produced in cocoa year 2002 to 15,000 metric tonnes in 2008. The ministry targets to increase the cotton production to 50,000 tonnes by 2013.

The tea sub-sector has recorded good growth as shown by the above figures. The increase came about as a result of strategic interventions in the programmes of tea production in the tea industry. In this financial year 2009, MAAIF aims at availing 6.5 million tea seedlings to the farmers under the Strategic Intervention Programme. Construction of the tea factory in Buhweju is underway and the power line to support the factory is under construction.

Vegetable oil production - the committee noted the increase in production of sunflower from the original six districts to 23 districts and benefiting over 200,000 households. Other data and statistics are given. This increase in production is attributed to better productivity of the improved varieties and so on.

Out of the planned 10,000 hectares of land for oil palms, about 7,000 hectares have been planted in Bugala Islands. 

The next section is on NAADS. The committee noted that the release to NAADS programme was halted in 2005 by His Excellency but later lifted after the review of the programme implementation. The review enabled NAADS to address challenges and shortcomings especially for maximising farm level earnings in line with the PFA objectives. 

Cabinet approved specific action points, which were designed to re-focus the NAADS programme implementation and funding of NAADS activities and these are shown in (a) to (d) as action areas for alleviating the problems.

In response to the above review, NAADS started implementing the new changes that included utilisation of public extension workers for provision of advisory services and taking lead in primary agro processing or value addition.

Through Public Private Partnerships Strategy, NAADS procured processing equipment worth Shs 1 billion and these included a mini-diary plant for Toro Diary Cooperative Society, six milk cooling plants with stand-by generators, a rice mill for Koboko District, six sets of honey processing equipment and machinery and banana wine processing plants. Up to 30,000 demonstration farmers were selected in the 5,000 parishes where six households per parish are supported through the provision of inputs in line with PFA objectives.

Deliberate efforts were undertaken to encourage formation of higher level farmer organisations in every sub-county for farm product bulking and collective marketing. 

The committee observed that there was limited availability of quality planting and stocking materials, weak market and agro processing capacities and infrastructure development.

The recommendations by the committee include that the capacities both financial and technical on the existing private seed companies should be assessed by the Ministry of Agriculture as part of the means of identifying why those private companies are unable to meet the national needs on planting seeds and what interventions should be put in place to mitigate the national needs of planting and stocking material.

Also NAADS Secretariat together with leaders at all levels should enhance explaining to the community the working of the new guidelines especially the concept of the six farmers per parish although NAADS services are aimed at reaching out to all farmers.

The next section is NARO. NARO continued to be guided by the Agricultural Research Systems Act, 2005 and it came up with a number of new technologies including generating transgenic crop lines with traits or characteristics of early maturity and tolerant to drought, improved fruit quality, nematodes and Banana Bacterial Wilt resistance in bananas among other technologies.  NARO managed to have its entire organisations’ land surveyed and land titles were being processed. 

The observations by the committee include that efforts should be undertaken to narrow the gaps in the NARO/NAADS inter-linkages in the attempt to enhance dissemination and adoption of the new improved technologies.

The recommendation is that these linkages should be extended between NARO and other related agencies and projects in the sector like the CDO, NAGRIC & DB and UCDA among others.

The funding of NARO should be increased in order to enhance outputs in research and development. I would like to add that in addition to the funding, they need to have in place conducive Acts like the Bio-Technology Act to enable NARO come out very fast with new technologies using the very fast tools of Bio-Technology.

Regarding the livestock sector, the committee noted the increase in the population of livestock in the country. This was also said in the State of the Nation Address that we now have 11.4 million cattle, 12.5 million goats, 3.4 million sheep, 3.2 million pigs, 37.2 million chicken and 1.5 million ducks. This substantive increase is attributed to the restocking programme, improved security and peace in the country.

I would like to report that the ministry procured 600,000 doses of vaccines for the Foot and Mouth Disease, one million doses for the Livestock Skin Disease, 250,000 doses for Rabies, 20 million doses for the Newcastle Disease in poultry and one million doses for the contagious Bovine Pleura-pneumonia in cattle.

Page 10 outlines the committee observations relating to the fisheries sub-sector. It was noted that the exports were falling sharply, as the industry was threatened by destructive fishing methods. Catches from a number of lakes in the country were dwindling at a very alarming rate.

It was also noted that research by NARO has revealed that the total biomass of fish was about 2 million with over 80 percent comprising Mukene. The findings further showed that Nile Perch biomass had reduced from 1.2 million tonnes in 1999 to 0.25 million tonnes in 2008. 

In order to avert the above predicament, MAAIF introduced licensing and other regulatory measures to curb illegal fishing and trading practices including the capture and trading in immature fish. 

Basing on the findings of the dwindling fish biomass, measures were being formulated to increase stocks of the Nile Perch. 

Furthermore, to improve performance of the fisheries sub-sector and also to have fish stocks recovery, the Ministry intends to introduce the following measures:

        (a) Protection of the fishing areas through mapping fish breeding grounds and nurseries on five major fishery resource water bodies; 

        (b) Total rehabilitation of hatcheries and ponds in Kajjansi, Bushenyi, Gulu and Mbale; 

        (c) Declaring total closed fishing seasons as seen appropriate.  

The committee observed that the declining fish stocks continue to be a major concern. The recommendation is that the laws regulating the fisheries sector should be amended to meet the current challenges. 

Actual sector releases for the Financial Year 2008/2009:
The committee findings on this issue are indicated in Annex 1.

On the implementation of the Parliament’s recommendation for the Financial Year 2008/2009, the committee noted that there were efforts to address those concerns.


The performance of sector loans and grants:

Section seven looks at the performance of sector loans and grants. The first one is about the Vegetable Oil Development Project. This project had its lifespan extended to 2010, after starting in 1998. Our findings were as follows:

    • During the Financial Year 2008/2009, the project received Shs 12.14 billion and is projected to rise to Shs 12.89 billion during the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

    • The schemes for small holder out growers of oil palm were established in the Financial year 2008/2009.

    • The crude palm oil mill where farmers are supposed to acquire 10 percent shares in the Financial Year 2007/2008 is scheduled to start production in October this year. 

    • An additional 1,500 hectares of land was purchased and Buvuma Island is to be explored for additional land for oil palm growing.  

The committee observed that the project continues to be constrained by inadequate land to plant the oil palm seedlings on schedule. This delay will affect the production capacity of oil palm for refining, hence an inevitable rise in costs of production for vegetable oil.

The next project we looked at was Farming in Tsetse Controlled Areas (FITCA) Project. We established that FITCA project is implemented in 12 districts with its life project period starting from 2001 to 2009. 

The key objectives were: to decrease tsetse infestation by 75 percent; to reduce the sleeping sickness incidences to less than five percent per sub-county; and to reduce the prevalence of animal Trypanosomiasis to less than five percent per district.

The other project that we looked at was the Farm Income Enhancement Project, which is a five-year project running from 2005 to 2010 at a cost of US $51.15 million. 

I would like to report that members were concerned with its components on the enterprise development.  The objective of the project was to improve rural incomes, rural livelihoods and food security. The other objectives are outlined there. 

During the Financial Year 2008/2009, Shs 8.55 billion was budgeted for recurrent activities. It is a project that will rise to Shs 17.17 billion in the Financial Year 2009/2010. 

The committee observed that while the project is about to close, no tangible outputs had been recorded in irrigation, soil fertility and marketing areas.  

It was further observed that the construction of reservoirs was just at the procurement stage. 

The committee recommends that public investment in efficient irrigation technologies should be increased in order to improve crop productivity and stability of yields under these climatic changes with droughts in some seasons. 

We also looked at the Northwest Small Holder Agricultural Development Project, which is an eight-year project running from 2001 to 2008 funded by the Government of Uganda and African Development Bank. The project districts are shown in bullet two. 

The committee established that the project operated under five components as shown in bullet three. 

Bullet four shows that with the project closure, 12 water supply and distribution systems were completed, 205 kilometres of community access roads rehabilitated, and 189 pairs of oxen and 189 ox ploughs procured. 

The committee observed that under the credit component, it was not reported whether all the money earmarked for this activity was disbursed. The beneficiaries are also not named. 

Further, the committee observed that it would be important to report on the recovery rate to assess the credit performance.   

The committee agreed that since the project had closed, a project completion report should be availed to Parliament.

National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project (NLPIP)

The committee noted that:

    • This project is funded by Government of Uganda and ADB to a tune of US$ 29.6 million for five years (2005-2010). The project covers 29 districts in the cattle corridor, and has four major components which include: Livestock genetic resources development; animal health; water supply and forage resources development; and livestock market infrastructure and information systems. 

    • During the FY 2008/09, the recurrent budget for the project was Shs 9.12 billion and is projected to increase in FY 2009/10 to Shs 13.67 billion. 

    • Rehabilitation works for six out of 21 livestock markets, seven slaughter sheds out of 27, constituting 34 percent of the rehabilitation works, is still ongoing. On construction works, the project has completed 10 percent. 

Observation

The committee observed that the dismal project performance is a big challenge for the project to realise its objectives with one year to go.

Support to the Fisheries Development Project 

The committee noted that:

    • This was a 5-year project (2003–2008) funded by Government of Uganda and ADB to a tune of US$ 28.36 million. The project had five components, which included: Improvement of fish handling infrastructure and quality assurance; aquaculture research and development; fisheries credit fund for fisheries production, trade and processing; capacity building; and project co-ordination. 

The project objectives are given in the bullet that follows.   

    • The recurrent budget for the project during the FY 2008/09 was Shs 11.18 billion and was projected to rise to Shs 18.87 billion in FY 2009/10. Specifically, the project was to develop 30 modern fish landing centres, upgrade 21 fish markets, improve monitoring, control and surveillance through purchase of patrol boats, and establish a fish quality laboratory.  

The committee observed that:

1. 	Whereas the project period was extended to 2010, only 65 percent of the construction work had been completed on only 10 landing sites. Work on the other landing sites was not reported upon in the policy statement.

2. 	The Auditor-General provided a special audit report of the project at the request of Parliament. The report will be used by the committee to assess the project’s performance and the findings shall be presented to Parliament in the near future. 

Recommendation

The committee will present its report on the matter in due course. 

General Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that:

1. 	The development of the policy on water for production, which started in FY 2008/09 is still ongoing, yet farmers do need water. The current ongoing programmes under the National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project (NLPIP) and the rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes under the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project (FIEFOC) have remained inadequate to address water needs for agriculture.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the processes on the policy for delivering water for production should be expedited especially in view of the current unpredictable weather patterns. 

The committee observed that:

1. 	Whereas the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries spent more than its budgetary allocations, the magnitude of expenditures were in some cases not in consonance with the performance on the ground.

2. 	Under the PMA Secretariat, agricultural zoning studies are to be carried out in FY 2009/10. However, this has dragged on since the proposal of establishing agricultural zones was made in the Seventh Parliament. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that:

    • Stakeholders’ roles in the agriculture sector should be made clearer. 

    • The State should correct market failures, regulate competition and engage strategically in public-private partnerships.

    • Government should make input and product markets work better.

    • Co-ordinate donor investment in the sector to avoid duplication and wastage. This is evident in some projects with similar components and investments in northern Uganda under various ministries/institutions.

    • If the PMA Secretariat is to play a co-ordination role in the agricultural zoning studies then the budget for this needs to be clearly stated.

Sector priorities in FY 2009/10 are listed in about ten bullets.

Observations

The committee observed that:

1. Many natural waterways and reservoirs including lakes were highly silted leading to cases of floods in parts of Teso.

2. Irrigation schemes had been out of use for years.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that:

    • The sector should expedite finalisation of the policy on water for agricultural production.

    • Pilot and train farmers on simple methods of rain water harvesting and embark on rehabilitation of dams, valley tanks and irrigation schemes, and desilting of waterways and lakes. 

The sector budget for FY 2009/10 is also shown in Annex 1.

The Committee observed that:

    • During the FY 2009/10 the sector share to the total MTEF budget, excluding arrears and non-VAT taxes, was projected to be 4.4 percent up from 3.8 percent share during last financial year, 2008/09. The increase in the sector share was due to a significant increase in funding for MAAIF by Shs 55.6 billion this Financial Year, 2009/10. 

    • The sector budget for the FY 2009/10 is projected to be Shs 310.74 billion, excluding arrears and taxes, an increment of Shs 87.52 billion from last FY 2008/09. This is due to increased funding for NAADS activities by Shs 36 billion and MAAIF by Shs 55.6 billion. 

    • The increase in funding for MAAIF this financial year, 2009/10, is due to a significant increase in the donor-funded development budget by Shs 40.27 billion. The government-funded development budget has increased from last financial year levels of Shs 9.08 billion to Shs 22.82 billion in FY 2009/10, to provide counterpart funding for the increased donor support for the case of new projects. Further in line with this increase, fisheries inspection will rise by 20 percent; promote aquaculture; and restock depleted fish stocks.


The recurrent wage budget for MAAIF registered an increment of Shs 1.5 billion from last Financial Year, 2008/10, which enables semi-autonomous agencies like NAGRIC & DB and DDA to access more resources for their activities. This will further increase inspection and surveillance levels of disease occurrence. 

The committee observed that funding for NARO has increased by Shs 4.3 billion largely due to a significant increase in the non-wage budget by 102.5 percent. This will enhance technology generation and institutional capacity building. 

The traditional agricultural extension services have been integrated under NAADS, and that provides ground for non provision of an agricultural extension budget. What this means is that the budget for his has now gone as I said earlier, to the local governments. 

Non-sectoral grants have, however, been maintained this Financial Year, 2009/10, although they have suffered a reduction of Shs 1.17 billion, equivalent to 19 percent. This has enhanced the budget for NAADS at the local government level by Shs 36 billion. The additional resources will be used to provide technology inputs for demonstration and support for value addition through agro- processing and market linkages. 

The committee noted that the Cotton Development Organisation received the same budget, of Shs 5.7 billion, like that of last financial year, 2008/09. This is against the background of the institution benefiting from supplementary expenditures for additional spending. 

Observations

The committee observed that the budget for the agriculture sector and its ration to the national budget has increased during FY 2009/10. It is also expected to increase in FY 2010/2011 basing on the MTEF projections. This will be in conformity and in pursuance of the Maputo Declaration, which requires budgets for the agriculture sector to be at 10 percent of the national budgets. 

Recommendation 

In view of the above sector priorities, the committee recommends for the approval of a grand total of Shs 196,211,204,000 only, and this total includes both arrears and taxes for the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the FY 2009/2010. It is broken down below. 

I know that members have got the old format and as I said at the beginning, the funds for NAADS production and service provision have been moved to local governments. With the changes in these figures, with your permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to read mine. 

Vote 010 - MAAIF, receives recurrent expenditure of Shs 13,496,756,000 and development expenditure of Shs 108,385,354,000 bringing it to a total of Shs 121,882,110,000. These changes arise from the taxes on the new procurements of Shs 650 million. That is why there is a change in the figures. 

Vote 142 –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, since we have the new sheet, I think it is useless for him to read old figures when we have new figures. You could stop at your recommendations, and then you put in the new figures so that we move together. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the arrival of the new figures will bring the same debate we have been having. What I am proposing is that we debate the report generally, and then we shall have a separate Committee of Supply for all the sectors, so that we give time to the chairpersons, the Opposition and the Ministry of Finance to give us the right figures. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): I would readily agree with your guidance, because sometimes, these reports are given to us when we are on the Floor of the House. For instance, I am sure that this report was distributed when we were here. 

When we look into the estimates and the budgets, you occasionally find that some figures are omitted from the figures reported in the committee. Your recommendation that the Budget Committee and the Ministry of Finance looks at the committee report figures for final harmonisation, would save time when they debate on the Floor of the House. Thank you.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday I attended a meeting where we had the Minister of Finance. I think it would help all of us if the Minister of Finance can confirm that the figures that were given yesterday are the final figures that they are presenting now. If that is the position, you would supply the same figures that we had yesterday to committees, and then the committees would harmonise their final reports. 

I do not think it is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance to audit the reports of committees before they are presented in the House. If he can confirm that the figures that we had yesterday are the final figures, then the committee chairpersons would harmonise their figures and bring the final reports here. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a debate this afternoon, where members of the committee were saying that they did not have time to look at those figures. What we are saying is that we shall have a day for the Committee of Supply for all the remaining sectors after synchronising the figures. These are different figures and I have received a sheet here. I do not know who owns it, and it is saying something different. I do not know what they are going to say.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, we started it all, especially with our Committee on Social Services. The Speaker told the members of that committee to go and meet - [MR OKUMU: “Directed”] - That is hon. Reagan Okumu’s language of directing; but we were told that we go and look at the area of contention. Our committee met yesterday in the morning and during the mid-morning, we went and met the Budget Committee and all chairpersons were there. 

I would, therefore, suggest that the various committee chairpersons who have a difference in terms of figures that were communicated there, go and convene a meeting like we did yesterday, so that when we come here, Members are on board. The various committees should circulate these figures in time so that when we come here, the committee members have the original report and the changed figures, and then we move on. This was something that the Speaker told us. 

I propose that the committee chairpersons, out of what the Budget Committee decided, go and convene just to consider the figures, because the report cannot be changed, so that when we come here, Members will have the changed figures, and we will move on. That is the proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether you are saying something different from what I have said. That is exactly what I said. We shall have one day specifically for the Committee of Supply for all the sectors. So, each sector will come with their harmonised figures and we will deal with them. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, we need the assurance from the Ministry of Finance, because even when a meeting took place yesterday, we have heard today that figures were still being changed in the corridors of Parliament. So, we need a time when the Ministry of Finance can say, “These are the final figures which should be used”. We should get that commitment from the minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How will you get it after what has happened? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): I wanted to agree that when we were debating the report of the Committee on Social Services, we had a meeting with the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, and we synchronised and harmonised the figures. So, the figures that were passed were consistent with all the records that we have in the Ministry of Finance. 

Now, where we are saying your ruling is valid is on any other votes that have not come before this House. We should have a meeting with the Chairperson of the Budget Committee so that this thing is harmonised. 

What I am really saying is that no one is trying to doctor or hide or do anything. It is simply that when the report of a committee of Parliament is written, occasionally it is written without consulting the Ministry of Finance, and it is reported here. When it is reported here, we sometimes have very little time to verify. This very Ministry of Agriculture, for instance, had excluded taxes on NAADS. So, when you identify that omission, surely it is under our obligation to point out this omission before a vote is passed. That is really what we are pleading for.

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, I just need clarification on the procedure. Basically, the principle we agreed on was that the ownership of the figures should be with the committee. Now we talk about consultation, and I am hearing consultation with the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. The principle would be or should be, “consultation with the committee”. The Minister of Finance should come to the respective committees and introduce the new changes into those committees, so that when they come here, it is not again a report of the Budget Committee or whatever committee, but it is the report of that committee, including the new changes. This is what I seek clarification on; it should be with the committee of the sector.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we are proposing is that after we have concluded the debate, the Minister of Finance will sit with the Budget Committee, which comprises all the chairpersons, and they will go sector by sector and agree on the figures which we shall bring here for the Committee of Supply.

MR ANGIRO: Madam Speaker, I think the door is still open. The Ministry of Finance is not in London; it is just a walkable distance from here. Why, therefore, can’t the chairpersons of the remaining committees go and scrutinise their requests with the Ministry of Finance, and when they are coming here, they come with all the figures which they have agreed on? Because discussing this is discussing money; we cannot discuss anything here other than money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are giving my proposal in different ways. This is exactly what I have been saying for the last 20 minutes. The Committee of Supply will come separately after harmonisation of the remaining seven reports. Is that clear? The remaining seven reports will come together. That is my ruling. 

6.31
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Christine Bako): Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You might lose the report if she goes out. Proceed.

MS BAKO: I have the pleasure to present to this nation the alternative policy position on the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Actually, she has a copy - (Interjections). Honourable minister, certainly you will have one. As we speak to the nation, we speak to a theme – (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t you have the report?

MR KUBEKETERYA: The other side is always critical of Government policies, so they should lead by example. Whenever there is no report here, we do not allow discussing it. So, can we have the report of the Shadow Minister for Agriculture because we cannot be here to listen to stories?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the rule should apply across the board. If the reports are not there, produce them overnight and you present tomorrow.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, you are aware that I gave the copies for duplication. I only have 10 copies that were given to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know why you have brought three copies. You have the facilities of this Parliament. The Commission provides you with support services to produce these papers. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.33 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 September 2009 at 10.00 a.m.)


   



