Wednesday, 7 September 2011

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, hon. Members. I thank you for what we were able to achieve yesterday. I would like to let the House know that we have two important businesses of Parliament going on. We have the plenary going on here, but also you have to know that the budget committee that has been sitting since yesterday is also sitting as I talk, in order to execute what we referred to them. I hope that by closure of business today, they will have some headway and be in a position to attend plenary tomorrow. We are all waiting to see what they will come back with. That is all from the Chair. 

Yes, hon. Emma Boona.

3.06
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise an issue that is of national importance. I represent Mbarara District in Parliament. And although the problem emanates from that place, I am sure it has spread to many parts of the country. So, I think it is very important that this Parliament gets to know about it.

As I talk, it is the season when the NAADS Programme officers are procuring seeds and animals for the farmers that have been selected. However, the urgent problem in my district is that our animals are infected with some bacteria that causes a disease called Brucellosis, which is very harmful to cattle and goats, and cattle especially, because it causes premature delivery in cows. 

Consequently, it does not only stop at that. This disease also spreads to human beings. When you contract it, you will suffer severe headaches, chills, permanent weaknesses and you will even suffer from anaemia. From this point of view, I have realised that we are suffering an economic loss by having the numbers of cattle reduce because of the existence of this disease. Also, when this disease spreads to human beings and makes them chronically sick, it affects their potential to be economically productive. However, most importantly, you know that the purpose of NAADS is to cause a multiplier effect in regard to agricultural production; but when a farmer receives a sick animal, it beats the purpose of NAADS. 

As I talk, the few samples of the animals that have been tested show that 15 percent of those tested are positive with this disease. This means that the people who are buying these affected animals from our district are contributing to the spread of this disease. This is because they come and slaughter them from the city here before selling that meat to the people, hence spreading that Brucellosis to the people. 

So, the purpose of raising this as an issue of national importance is to ask the responsible ministry to quickly get into the vaccination programme of our animals. I am saying this because this programme has been left to the private investors, who also import the drugs into the country. 

And I would like to add that for the last two years, these drugs have not been available in my district. Consequently, the immunity to the old animals that had been vaccinated has lowered, while those that have never been vaccinated at all have no immunity towards this disease.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the responsible minister to quickly and within these two weeks, when the procurement process for materials for the NAADS Programme is still on, intervene in this matter to save our farmers from receiving sick animals as part of the NAADS Programme. Such animals have caused a big loss to the people by causing both sickness and the animals themselves dying off, hence reducing the number of cattle in our district.

This matter should be handled with urgency because as you all know, my district is well known for being a source of cattle for beef and milk. But also, it should be noted that Brucellosis does not only affect beef as a product from cattle, it also affects milk. This means that when people consume unpasteurised milk, cheeses and cow ghee from infected animals, they get sick of this disease. Because people come to my district to purchase cattle, it means this disease has also spread to the neighbouring districts and many other parts of the country, and maybe into the neighbouring countries.

In today’s The New Vision, there was a caption talking about how Uganda’s beef export is going to slow down given the fact that our numbers of cattle have reduced. If these numbers have reduced because we are selling our cattle to the neighbouring countries, it is going to be worse when we don’t control this disease. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much for raising that matter. We will give this matter about 12 minutes for general discussion, with each person contributing for only two minutes. I will start with Dr Francis Epetait, the veterinary doctor who knows these issues.

3.11
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Emma Boona for raising this matter and the way she has articulated it. It is true that Brucellosis is – first of all, it is a sexually transmittable disease in livestock. Also, it is important to note that it does not only cause abortion, it also causes infertility. 

But the most bothering thing with Brucellosis is that being cross-transmittable between man and livestock, a zootomic disease of that nature – in man it causes malaria symptoms to the extent that you find many patients that present such symptoms getting onto malaria treatment for some time, but without recovering. Most patients who do not respond to malaria treatment, in most cases turn to be positive of Brucellosis.

And Mr Speaker, time and again we have complained about the control of livestock diseases in this country, which has gone down in light of the limited funding to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It is actually very difficult for one to detect Brucellosis, unless one does some tests. 

I would like to caution that the major point of entry, when it is being transmitted from an animal to man is the conjunctiva and the consumption of raw or unpasteurised milk. So, people need to be very cautious; when you are in contact with or when you are consuming milk, you have to be mindful of the fact that Brucellosis is rampant in the country. 

I call upon Members to call upon Government to quickly review the issue of funding the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries, especially the livestock sub-sector. This is a disease which would ordinarily be easy to control, but because of limited funding, the department has had more or less to sit down. Now we have diseases on rampage; farmers are going to lose a lot and it is going to have a major economic impact to the country and the fatalities in humans are also very grave. This is what I had to add. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much Dr Epetait. 

3.15
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I represent Mbarara Municipality and I am a physician. When they talked about Brucellosis, my mind went back to the ward where I came from when I was coming to this Parliament. This is a disease that we were seeing in Mbarara Hospital and in clinics. What hon. Emma Boona was talking about and what Dr Epetait is talking about; the so-called fever, which presents as if it is malaria, that is the so called pyrexia of unknown origin.  

Mr Speaker, because the disease affects animals, human beings might not take it very serious and policy makers may even under look it, but I can tell you, it is a dangerous disease. Honourable Members, Brucellosis is a disease that is very difficult to treat once you get it. 

Firstly, the treatment for Brucellosis is almost the same treatment for tuberculosis because you have to use Rifampin, combined with Doxycycline, and you have to take these drugs for six weeks; and it’s too expensive. If you are pregnant, you cannot take Doxycycline; you have to take Streptomycin, and when you take Streptomycin when you are pregnant, it might cause some problems. 

The problem we have now is that the disease can cross to human beings when they consume animal products. But it is well documented that you get it when you deliver animals that have Brucellosis, and when you get into contact with those amniotic fluids.

Mr Speaker, I can tell you that when I look at everybody in this House, you are all potential candidates for Brucellosis. It is very important for us to say –(Interruption)

MS LEMATIA: Mr Speaker, I am glad we are discussing Brucellosis in this country. It is a serious disease. Everybody now knows Brucellosis. Is it in order for the consultant physician to use bombastic medical words? Members are busy asking me, what does this mean? (Laughter) Could you ask him to simplify the words so that people internalise what he is saying? Thank you very much.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, there are some words in science which are very difficult. For example, pyrexia of unknown origin is a fever which you will get for more than a month. The fever goes above 38oC and you will have done the so-called basic investigations in our common laboratories and you will not see the disease. 

I want to let this House know that Brucellosis will depend on Titer. And I want to make it very clear to you that if you go to any laboratory that is very small and they say you have Brucellosis, they should do what we call Titer. And Titer, which is significant from a clinical point of view, should be 1 in –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is Titer?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I am trying to drive my point home. This Titer you are talking about - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from another doctor there -

DR OMONA: Thank you hon. colleague for giving way. I take the concern of the honourable member who inquired about what you are saying. Allow me to say that Brucellosis is an animal disease transmitted to man and it is preventable; but the treatment of Brucellosis is long and expensive. In most times, the diagnosis for Brucellosis is also very expensive. In over 50 percent of our health facilities, they cannot diagnose Brucellosis; they just think that it could be Brucellosis. 

What my honourable colleague is saying about the Titer is that the laboratory equipment or the facilities for diagnosing Brucellosis is quite expensive and not very common. Many of these facilities just suspect that it could be Brucellosis. 

For example, when you get exposed to these bacteria which cause Brucellosis, which are of different species, you may have Brucellosis Sui or you may have Brucellosis Abortus. What many of these laboratories test is your exposure to bacteria, but it does not tell you whether you have the active disease. 

Finally, let me say that one thing that we have forgotten to advise our people about this disease is that, firstly, it is highly infectious. You can easily contract it either from animal droppings or from touching carcasses or parts of these animals that are infected. The easiest way of preventing this disease is by buying some of these products, say if it is meat, from those people who are registered or buying meat which has been inspected. 

Secondly, don’t share houses with animals. Very many of our people now share their residences with animals. This is one of the ways you can contract this disease. I want to call upon the Minister of Health to empower health facilities –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you had risen on a point of information. You are speaking longer than the – 

DR OMONA: Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. please wind up.

DR BITEKYEREZO: In conclusion, we have to protect our people and we also have to protect our animals. The way forward is very simple. That the Ministry of Health has to make sure that the laboratories we have in our Health Centre IVs are capable of detecting this disease, and make sure that they detect what an active disease is and what a disease which is not active is so that we can give appropriate treatment. 

Secondly, we should also look at pregnant mothers. Once this disease gets a pregnant mother, she might abort. We must make sure that we protect our pregnant mothers by making sure that people go for treatment early and we detect the disease early.

Lastly, there must be vaccination of animals. If we don’t do this, we shall be in trouble. I beg to stop here. I thank you so much.  

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am raising another issue of national importance.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can we conclude this matter first. Let us finish with Brucellosis and then we shall come to any other matter.

3.24
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. Moses Ali): I would like to thank colleagues who have raised this matter and I want to say that the minister responsible will be advised and directed to attend to these problems. Meanwhile, those people whose animals are affected should also help themselves. They should start by selling one or two animals and treat the animals themselves. Action will be taken. Thank you very much.

3.24
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): I am here to bring to your notice another issue of national importance. There is a border dispute between the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of South Sudan in the area of Moyo District and Kajo Kaji in South Sudan. Starting from the 5th to today, tension has been building up in the following areas on the side of Uganda: Laufori sub-county, Moyo sub-county, Dufile sub-county and Metu. Most of the tension is in the sub-counties of Laufori and Moyo. 

You might have come across the The Daily Monitor of today on page 7, where there is a story, which reads; “SPLA soldiers abduct 50 in Moyo”. Today, the tension is increasing and we predict that it may be worse tomorrow or in the days to come. We need action to be taken to restore calm so that co-existence in terms of peace and development prevails in the area.

This is not a new issue; it has been there for long and on the 1st of this month a joint team comprising of people from the ministries of Internal Affairs, Defence and Lands went there, but unfortunately, a corresponding team from South Sudan never came. Maybe it was not arranged or it was arranged poorly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not take any information, first raise the matter.

MR FUNGAROO: Today, the Police from Kajo Kaji were deployed on our border. On our side, the Police have been deployed in an extraordinary way. Tension is building up and the local people on the side of Uganda are boiling in anger because they think that Sudanese want to grab their land. The Sudanese are also saying that Ugandans want to grab their land. 

The President of the Republic of Uganda and that of South Sudan, Gen. Salva Kiir, came to Moyo in 2010 and this issue was presented to them. I was even present when the two heads of state promised the people of Moyo and those of South Sudan that they will take up the issue and resolve it quickly to restore normalcy, but up to now, nothing has materialised of their promises.

The issue is going back to its original nature, which predated the visit of the two heads of state in this area. There was a demonstration in Moyo, the road to Kajo Kaji was blocked, and patients were pulled out of beds in hospitals. The conflict is growing and it may result in a big surprise to those in South Sudan and Northern Uganda.

There are Ugandans in Southern Sudan and particularly the town of Juba. The Sudanese are threatening to harm them. Ugandans are saying that if they are harmed from there, then we shall harm Sudanese children in our schools or patients in our hospitals. So, you can see that there is a situation building up. 

In the spirit of the East African Community, which the Republic of South Sudan is preparing to join, it is better to nip this issue in the bud before it explodes into a bigger thing. This is the spirit in which I raise this matter here. We have great love for the people of South Sudan; we have assisted them in many troubles, why should they pay us back in bad currency? We should be friends. They should remember what we have done for them and what they have done to us in the past.

GEN. MOSES ALI: This issue is recurrent and it has been on for some time. I am glad that hon. Fungaroo has mentioned everything. The visit of the two heads of state - both of them allayed fears of the public on both sides. They said that they should not worry because this is an international border and the issue will be solved amicably. They have a lot of things to do rather than bickering on this border, which was not determined by them. The technical team will be sent there to finalise the matter peacefully.

Fungaroo has also confirmed that the team from Kampala, comprising ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defence and others, went there purposely to meet their counterparts from Sudan. This means that our side has taken action and it is taking action on the promise of the two Presidents when they were there. 

I think another arrangement will be made for them to come again and meet. What I want to say and advise is that the people on both sides should take things easy. I am saying this as Government. You people alone cannot solve this thing; this is Government to Government and action is being taken. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is very clear, as we talk now, there is tension. So, is there something that you are going to say about how to deal with this present tension? 

GEN. ALI: I want to appeal for calm. Secondly, action is being taken even as we speak now, but we will have to realize -(Interruption)

MR ALERO: As I talk now, more than 10 children are in captivity in Sudan; over 50 farmers were displaced as they were digging in their gardens in Laufori sub-county; four farmers were shot dead during broad day light inside Uganda. 

Right now, my birth place of Pamujo Village in Moyo, is being claimed by the Sudanese. Where are we going and who will rescue us? Is it in order for my dear to say that we should remain calm when people are dying? –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, the matters being raised are very serious and just like I stated earlier, there are things happening that may require some action as of now. Hon. Prime Minister, you may need to make a clear statement on what steps will be taken to deal with the current situation and not just appealing. Anybody can appeal. 

GEN. MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, as a General -(Laughter)– we are not going to act in panic. Generals never act in panic. Secondly, I want to assess the extent of the problem. How much force does it need? Is it going to require Defence or the Police? We must be given time, but we shall take action. We promise to take the necessary action to curb this matter. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I will use my authority under Rule 22 to amend the Order Paper to move straight to the Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and from there, we will see how to progress. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

3.36
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for a second time. 

The object of this Bill is to amend the schedule to the Stamps Act Cap. 342, to exempt an acknowledgement of a loan not exceeding Shs 2 million from stamp duty. I beg to move.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker and colleagues, the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Stamps (Amendment) Bill 2011. 

The Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011” was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development under rules 113 and 161(c) of the Rules of Procedure for consideration. 

In accordance with Article 9 of the Constitution and rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of the Parliament of Uganda, the committee has considered the Bill in detail and hereby presents its report.

Method of work

The committee held consultative discussions with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under the Uganda Revenue Authority. Their submissions informed the content of the report.

The object of the Bill is to amend the Schedule to the Stamps Act Cap. 342, to exempt an acknowledgement of a loan not exceeding Shs 2 million from stamps duty. 

Observations 

The committee welcomes the spirit of the amendment, which is to reduce transaction costs of accessing credit, especially in microfinance institutions. The committee, however, proposes that given the value of the shilling today, the threshold should be increased to benefit more people. I beg to move, Mr Speaker, and we will move an amendment later on. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read the second time. I propose the question for debate, the debate is open. If, however, there are no debates, we would then proceed to raise issues at the amendment time because that would also be a good time to raise these matters, unless there are substantial matters of principle that you need to raise on the Bill. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, this is just a simple clarification I would like from the committee. The committee agrees with the proposal by the Minister of Finance and they propose that the threshold be raised from Shs 2 million, but they don’t propose any figure – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I am saying the amendment will come at the appropriate time. 

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am still looking at that issue on page 2 and I would like to comment. Parliament prohibits us from passing issues in anticipation and if that is the case, when you bring a report, you give the observations and make recommendations. We are reading this Bill for the second time; the first recommendation or observation is that you exempt tax to the tune of Shs 2 million. Why don’t you, for example, put it that the threshold is this, so that before we read it for the third time, we at least have it on ground? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that is why it is an amendment. But that will not be a matter for the Bill right now. Mr Chairman, do you want to say something about this?

MR TUMWEBAZE: We have an amendment to that effect and we will justify why we are making that observation and at the next level, Mr Speaker, Members know the procedures. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this debate may be better at the stage of the actual amendment. Can I put the question so that we move to the next stage?

Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the second time. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, on the amendment of the Schedule of the Stamps Act on chargeable instruments 1, we have proposed to insert the words “in the first part” between the words “amended” and “by”.

(ii.) Substitute for “two” the word “three”.

Our justification for part 1 is that the amendment is only in the first part of the Schedule and to increase the threshold to allow more people access credit easily at the microfinance level. In other words, we are moving from Shs 2 million to Shs 3 million. I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, that is the amendment proposed by the committee. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I beg to propose an amendment to clause 2 to substitute for “two” the word “twenty” and I would like to move the following justification. In substituting for two, the committee is proposing three; I am proposing 20. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us put it this way. You are, therefore, proposing an amendment to his amendment. So, you are proposing that you amend from three to 20 million. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe he will agree to it. Chairman, do you agree to that?

DR EPETAIT: I thought I would first move my justification -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If he agrees to it then you do not have to justify. Do you agree to this?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we have to be realistic and know the financial institutions we are talking about. These are village banks are small microfinance institutions. We know their portfolios. I have not heard of a microfinance that can process loans of Shs 20 million or Shs 30 million. If they do, then why should you exempt that from Stamps Duty? What we are looking at are two or three people who are taking school fees loans. So, I do not accept that amendment. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, by the time somebody wakes up to go to a bank, this person must be really in dire need and we should try to reduce the cost of transactions. By subjecting a borrower to a Stamps Duty even for such a little amount of money is like trying to milk from an ailing animal - an already broke person. 

I think we need to appreciate – indeed, the committee pointed out a very good justification, that in light of the depreciating value of our shilling, actually, for one to be subjected to stamps duty even for a low borrowing of up to Shs 3 million, I think is expecting too much. It would be fairer to save the borrowers from further misery and raise that money to 20 million. That is the justification I am making. Mr Chairman I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The government opposes this latest proposal on the grounds that a loan of Shs 20 million is beyond the normal realm of a microfinance institution and is well within the realm of a commercial loan. At this rate, it would lead to unforeseen revenue loss for the government. Thank you. 

MR TANNA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance and the committee for a job very well done. However, I remember that by the time the thought process on this issue started, the dollar was sitting at about Shs 1,800 per dollar. Today, the dollar is sitting at close to Shs 3,000 - Shs 2,880. It has depreciated by a thousand shillings. 

Likewise, I would like to propose an amendment that considering the tedious nature of amendments; the tedious process that we have to go through, we amend -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, we now need to resolve this. We have spoken about this matter a few times now. Only two sets of amendments are permitted. You do a first rank amendment, which has been proposed by the committee, and then the next line of amendment that is allowed; the second rank, which has been proposed by the hon. Dr Epetait. We need to resolve those first before any amendment on this particular area can be accommodated. So, hon. Members, maybe we first dispose of this amendment, and then we see how to move forward, or do you want to speak to the Shs 20 million and the Shs 3 million? That is what is on the Floor.

MR TANNA: Mr Chairman, I had wanted to propose a middle figure. I was explaining -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, if the two proposed amendments are still standing then you will have no place to put another amendment. That is why I am saying, maybe we deal with one amendment, so that there could be space for you to make your proposal.

MR TANNA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you for your guidance. I would like to object to the amendments on Shs 20 million. Following the justifications that have been given by the honourable minister and the honourable chairperson, and my own experiences of village banks and the institutions that lend money and the targeted beneficiaries, personally I do not think that Shs 20 million would be a good figure. However, I would also object to the Shs 3 million as well, as being low. Thank you, Mr Chair.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. As hon. Epetait says, the reason why people go to the bank is because they need money. We do not want to discourage people to borrow for investment. Even if somebody is borrowing little money, he is going to invest and employ people in one way or another. It is wrong for the Chairman of the committee to say that this money is from microfinance. The law is talking about Shs 2 million. Even if you went to the commercial bank, you would be exempted. So, it does not mean that we are going to make a loss.

Mr Chairman, to register for VAT, your income must be Shs 50 million and above -(Interjections)– yes, Shs 50 million and above. Why? That means you are entitled to trade up to 49 million and something without being registered. If that is the basis, there was a reasoning that this would be cumbersome for people who have little money to be registered for VAT, and that should be in the same line. 

If it was me who had proposed, I would also say that the threshold should match with VAT. But since they have brought it up to 20, Mr Chairman, people should be allowed to borrow money. And if they should be allowed to borrow money, they will be able to invest; and when they invest, they will create employment; and when they create employment, you will tax Pay-As-You-Earn; and if you tax Pay-As-You-Earn, if they consume sugar or whatever, you will get indirect taxes. So, the Shs 20 million, Madam minister, will help you to create jobs; it will help you to get more indirect taxes; and you will compensate for the Shs 2 million you are talking about, which you say will be lost. 

Mr Chairman, if you go to the bank nowadays, there is what you call commitment fee, which is 3 percent or something like that. There will be insurance. There will be the processing fee - administration. By the time you borrow the money, you are already at about 10 -(Interjections)- exactly, because already the cost of the money is at 7 percent and you pay that one upfront. So, the Shs 2 million you are going to get will be even less. That is why we are trying to say that you borrow Shs 20 million, you leave Shs 2 million, and you have Shs 18 million to transact business for sometime and earn money so that people can be in a better position.

Mr Chairman, the people who borrow are not only those teachers. There are even small traders in the market who are busy borrowing, and they have lost their property because of the cost of money. I think we should do this to assist them. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I note the concerns my colleagues have about the proposals made by the committee. However, when I look at the Shs 20 million, it seems to be in the extreme -(Hon. Wadri rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, are you a Member of this committee?

MR MUSASIZI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then let us have hon. Mujuni. 

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with these proposals, but I want to raise two issues. First of all, I object to the threshold of Shs 20 million on the following grounds: 

As a Parliament, we are raising double standards. The principle we are setting is that even those people that do not have collateral security, but can get to the banks, either a commercial bank or a microfinance institution, can go and borrow tax free. We are now increasing the threshold to the level that hon. Nandala-Mafabi will do multiple borrowing because he has the collateral and security in terms of land and a vehicle log book; so, he will go to UCB, UBA and get Shs 20 million stamp free.

I want to propose that whereas the limit of Shs 3 million is also too low, Shs 20 million is too high. So, the principle objective of the government, and in this case the minister, will have been lost.

Secondly, as a Parliament, we really need to move beyond politicking. The other day we were saying we need prudent monetary policies. Now, the Bank of Uganda has increased the Central Bank rate and the commercial banks are increasing the lending rate.

We are saying for heaven’s sake, our people should actually have a threshold. Like they said, Shs 3 million is little, but Shs 20 million is too much, and we shall have lost the whole principle. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I actually needed your guidance on how we should proceed, if we are members of the committee. I understand that the issue on the Floor is now an amendment to the committee’s position; that would allow committee Members to either defend or oppose the new amendment on the Floor.

But it seemed to be that we were responding to hon. Henry Rubanda, and we were saying that he cannot speak to the amendment on the Floor because he is a member of the committee. So, I needed you to guide us so that we know how we can behave.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Alaso, a committee member has every right to give further information once a report of that committee is being debated. If the honourable member rises to begin debate without volunteering the information he wants to give or without saying, “We took this position in the committee because of the following reasons”, he removes himself from the protection that the rules would have accorded him.

So, if you are a member of the committee, you rise and declare your interests and state the reason you want to participate in the debate, which would guide the House in understanding your position. You cannot just come and begin debating when you have signed the report.

So, if you are a member of the committee, hon. Alaso, I would advise that you do not start speaking as if you are contributing to the debate, but you state the basis on which you come as a member of the committee to explain the position you took in the committee. That would be permissible.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the latter amendment by Dr Epetait concerning the Shs 20 million threshold on the following grounds: Members are behaving as if they do not know the current economic situation. This month the inflation rate has gone to 21.4 percent, and what does that mean if we are to leave the stamp duty as it is?

In my economic understanding, that means the Ugandan currency has lost value. If you borrowed Shs 1.0 million to pay school fees - and the honourable Minister for Education is here - most schools are actually thinking of closing down because they can no longer afford the price of food items! So, for a parent to borrow for school fees, he or she needs to borrow more than what she borrowed last term.

So, the current economic situation must also dictate how we behave, and I think that is why this Bill is coming on the Floor. We must treat this matter with the technicality that it deserves. I am sure a farmer or microfinance borrower in my constituency of Ayivu County, who used to borrow Shs 10 million, now needs more than that to do business.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, would you like to close your contribution?

MR ATIKU: Yes. So, I am begging honourable members to really look at the economic situation on the ground as justified by hon. Epetait, in order to promote business and enable Government to continue earning some taxes from the trickledown effect. I think it would be wise for us to raise the threshold to Shs 20 million or something slightly near to that. Thank you.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, I think we have to make up our minds on how we want to move with the economy of this country. First of all, we all agree that Uganda’s tax base is still small. For somebody to move an amendment that we should raise the threshold to Shs 20 million, means that there will be no stamp duty even for loans that you get in commercial banks. At the same time, you are concerned about the tax base, I really do not understand.

First, I think you are trying to address the fact that we do not want to tax the lower group that is borrowing from a microfinance, but we should tax the MPs. By the way, an MP gets a loan of Shs 20 million and he does not pay tax; and we get many of those loans. We are trying to make that amendment even for ourselves.

Secondly, I have got statistics from these microfinance institutions. Over 90 percent of the people who borrow, borrow between Shs 0.5 million and less than Shs 2 million. Therefore, for the chairperson and the committee to have lifted it to Shs 3 million - if you checked the statistics of those who borrow at that level, you will find that hardly anybody borrows more than Shs 3 million.

Thirdly, this Bill comes year after year and there is a chance to amend it. I think we have catered for the small borrowers and they are not going to pay tax from the statistics you have. Therefore, I wanted to appeal to the House that we keep this Shs 3 million and we check it in a year’s time. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I will now have to deal with the matter for proposal for Shs 20 million raised by hon. Epetait. I will put the question to that amendment unless the honourable member would wish to withdraw it so that we can move forward.

I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Dr Epetait that the threshold be raised to Shs 20 million.

(Question put and negatived.)

The next amendment is on Shs 3 million. Hon. Sanjay Tanna had risen on an amendment, let him raise it.

MR TANNA: I would like to once again thank the chair for giving me the opportunity. I would like to propose an amendment that instead of Shs 2 million, we raise it to at least Shs 5million.

The justification I have is that we have referred to the target group that we are targeting to benefit from this. We have looked at the exchange rate vis-a-vis the inflation that is currently raging in the country. Personally, looking at the rate at which one can borrow for building himself or herself from the very microfinance institutions, I think the statistics that the honourable minister has just quoted were probably of two years ago. But the most recent ones, at least the microfinance institutions and SACCOs that I have visited and I am part of, on an odd day, would definitely lend up to Shs 5 million, regularly. So, I would like to propose that it is amended to at least accommodate Shs 5 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The committee chairperson, you had proposed Shs 3 million; can you change it to Shs 5 million?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we remember that the Shs 5 million was the first position the committee had. We debated it and we learnt two things; that stamp duty is not as prohibitive as any other tax; it is only one percent. It is mainly for processing costs. Now, my persuasion to Members, and which is in good faith, is that let us look at other areas of tax relief and we stop wasting time with stamp duty. Let us stick to Shs 3 million. Just take that counsel. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Should I put a question? -[Mr Ekanya: “Information”.]- Information to who?

MR EKANYA: To Government, as Shadow Minister of Finance. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Shadow Minister, there is nobody you are going to inform because nobody is holding the Floor; unless you just want to contribute – in that case, you cannot rise on a point of information. Please make your contribution.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will take your guidance. By the time these Bills were drafted, when Government brought Shs 2 million in July, when the Minister of Finance read the budget speech, our inflation figure was about 13 percent. But as we speak now - Mr Chairman, I want to thank and welcome you back from Tororo. When you were in Tororo over the weekend, a kilogramme of sugar was Shs 5,000; today it is Shs 7,000! 

Therefore, I want to inform the committee chairperson, the finance minister, and all of us, that according to the information available to Government, and which it might not accept, if we do not take drastic action to reduce public administration expenditure, and we only allow Bank of Uganda to continue with its interest rate, within the next two months, the central bank will raise the interest rate to 20 percent, in order to curb inflation. The minister is aware of this! I did not want to bring all this to the public domain because some information is classified. (Laughter) Yes, colleagues, as a Shadow Minister of Finance, I get a lot of information from Government people, the private sector and some of it, if I release, will cause speculation. 

Therefore, I ask the minister and all of us to take Shs 5 million because Government will not lose revenue.  It is prudent that we take that figure because people will borrow it and re-invest, especially the women who are honest re-payers of debts. With Shs 5 million, they pay back one percent plus administration – Mr Chairman, if you go to a microfinance institution, you will be asked for insurance, management, appraisal and processing fees, which are all mandatory. So, by the time somebody gets the loan, he or she leaves with about Shs 4 million. I really beg you to consider my position. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We now have the original position of Shs 2 million from the Bill; the committee position of Shs 3 million; and the position raised by hon. Sanjay Tanna of Shs 5 million.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The government agrees with the committee’s recommendation of Shs 3 million. Let me give a little bit of history. Our proposal of Shs 2 million was discussed with the microfinance players at which time we established that most people – 90 percent - borrow between Shs 200,000 to Shs 2 million from microfinance institutions. If you take Shs 5 million, you are definitely within the realm of a commercial bank. 

The proposal made by Government was done after careful consideration. The proposal by the Opposition to go first of all for Shs 20 million is based on trying to reduce costs of borrowing. But as the shadow minister has just mentioned, inflation is not fought by encouraging borrowing. So, our concern in this respect is for the small microfinance consumers. Thereby, Government agrees with the committee’s proposal of Shs 3 million.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members, I will – 

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I disagree with the minister because if her argument is that Shs 3 million would broaden the tax base – first of all, if you are talking about creating employment in terms of borrowing and investing, then how many people can be employed when somebody invests Shs 3 million? It is just prudent that we take it to Shs 5 million because retaining it at Shs 3 million is unjustifiable. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put this matter to vote. We will vote on the Shs 5 million first because the amended agreed position between the author of the Bill and the committee chairperson is Shs 3 million. So, that is the new threshold that has been proposed. The only amendment that will require our decision as Parliament is the proposal of putting it at Shs 5 million. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

I now put the question that the threshold be raised from Shs 2 million to Shs 3 million.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.12
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011” and has passed it with the amendment that the threshold be Shs 3 million. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING 

THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

4.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamps (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE STAMPS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations! The next business.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

4.15
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Secondment, hon. Minister.

MRS KIWANUKA: The objective of the Bill is to:
a)	Amend the Value Added Tax ACT CAP 349;
b)	to repeal the words, “thermal and electrical energy, heating gas, refrigeration, air-conditioning and water”; 
c)	to repeal the words, “In Uganda” in Section 4(a);
d)	to substitute Section 5(c) with a new paragraph to cater for supply of imported services; 
e)	to substitute Section 15 of the Act with a new section to provide place of supply of goods; 
f)	to substitute Section 16 of the Act with a new section to provide place of supply of services;
g)	to provide for VAT representatives of non-resident persons; and

h)	to provide for amendment of the Second Schedule to the VAT Act:
(i)	In paragraph LF by deleting the word, “Sale”;
(ii)	In paragraph LQ by inserting immediately after the word, “equipment,” the words, “and ambulances”; 
(iii)	Inserting immediately after paragraph LF, a new paragraph providing for the supply of power generated by solar; and
(iv)	Repealing paragraphs GG and JJ. I beg to move. 

4.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development under rules 113 and 161(c) of the Rules of Procedure for consideration. 

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and rules 133 and 161 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, the committee has considered the Bill in detail and we hereby present the content of the report.

The committee held consultative discussions with the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Uganda Revenue Authority. Their submissions informed the content of this report.

Object of the Bill 

The object of the Bill is to amend Value Added Tax Cap. 349:

•	To provide for place of supply of goods in Uganda; 
•	to provide for place of supply of services, including telecommunications services and electronic services;  and
•	to provide for VAT representatives of non-resident persons; and for other related matters.

Observations

The committee makes the following observations:

1.	VAT on biodegradable packaging materials 

Clause 12, paragraph (e), seeks to reinstate VAT on the supply of biodegradable packaging materials. The Committee notes that there is need to promote the use of biodegradable materials, since Government has put a ban on the use of polythene bags commonly known as buveera. It is, therefore, not wise to reinstate VAT on biodegradable materials just after one year of exemption, yet we are still promoting their usage as an alternative to buveera. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that VAT on the supply of biodegradable packaging materials should not be reinstated.

2. VAT on gaming, betting and games of chance

The committee observes that gaming, betting and other games of chance has increasingly become very lucrative in Uganda, and urges Government to look at this sector as a potential source of increased revenue.

Therefore, the committee recommends that VAT be reinstated on these activities because they are currently under the exempt schedule.

3. VAT on sale of immovable property

Here you can talk of houses and so on. Clause 12, paragraph (a), seeks to reinstate VAT on the sale of immovable property. The committee, however, notes that this measure will make properties very expensive since VAT is borne by the final consumer and makes property buyers subject to manipulation by property developers, since prices on the market are determined by market forces of demand and supply. I beg to move and we will bring amendments later on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we will limit the general debate to 10 minutes – do you need more time? 1O minutes; two minutes each. 

4.20 
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee and the minister. VAT on biodegradable packaging materials would encourage the “death” of our soil.

As the committee rightly states, it is an expectation of any Ugandan, who knows the menace of kaveera on our soil and environment, that kaveera should one day be something of the past. There is no need to impose a tax on biodegradable packaging materials that would effectively replace kaveera and are safe in far as the environment is concerned. I think the ministry should be thinking of even refusing any other tax imposed on biodegradable material. I, therefore, would like to submit that the way forward is for this VAT to be avoided all together so as to save our environment. 

The second issue is that Government should not only impose VAT, but also put more taxes on gaming and gambling. I think this is where you can make up for the tax that would be lost in taxing biodegradable materials.

Gambling and these other forms of game are actually for the rich people. I do not know how many Members of Parliament go gambling. I know you are not rich and you will probably not venture into the casinos. It is for the petty bourgeoisie. Now that we are looking for people who have money to tax, this is an area to tax beyond VAT. Impose VAT on gambling and also look for additional taxes. Since we are trying to expand our revenue base, I would like to support the committee on this particular recommendation. I thank you.

6.23
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support the committee on VAT on gaming, betting and games of chance. I think the essence of taxing the rich is to bridge the gap between the rich and the poor. Yesterday, we were debating the Finance Act, and one of the reasons why the tax rate of wines and other commodities, which are luxurious, is because they are not used by the poor. The moment you say that you are removing gaming for the rich and looking for taxes, you are contradicting yourself.

I would like to support the proposal of the committee that honestly, we bridge the gap between the poor and the rich. What are the target groups we are looking for? These are the people who have the money. If you leave them and you do not tax them, what is the essence? 

Some of the canons of taxation are just easy, affordable and accommodative. So, if you remove this person, who is able to pay, and you can collect tax from him, how do you go to the poor who cannot afford? I would like Members, in the same spirit that we debated the Finance Act and increased the tax rate on wines and luxurious goods, that we should also tax the gaming and planning for these people so that we can collect more revenue to bridge the gap for the public services in the public domain. Thank you very much.

4.25
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some of us are spending sleepless nights watching what this committee wants to bring here. My proposal on VAT on sale of immovable property would basically be - some people are struggling to get money in order to purchase houses for accommodation. I propose that instead of saying that VAT should be put on all immovable property, we could easily say, “Commercial” and also advise the Minister of Finance to go the Kenyan style. In Kenya, there are supermarkets with machines such that everyone who buys something at least pays VAT, so that we save these people who are buying houses for accommodation. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.27
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with the committee on VAT on gaming, betting and games of chance. That is a clear case, because it is only the rich with idle resources who go gambling. That is acceptable.

But when it comes to immovable property, we do not have a definition of what these immovable properties are. It would be better if we specified what an immovable property is that we want to tax, so that even the collection is specified; that we are going to tax A, B, C, D that are immovable property.

When you talk about exempting taxes on those who are investing in the biodegradable packaging materials, first of all, the committee has not told us what the investment portfolio is about and those investors on this, because some people actually want to evade taxes based on these kinds of arguments. Besides, the usage of kaveera has not been totally stopped; so what are you doing? 

Government is losing on both sides because the kaveera is still at play and then you are asking us to exempt taxes. The argument that once you exempt taxes, there will be more usage of these bio-gradable materials does not hold, given the amount of kaveera which is being disposed in our environment. 

So, unless there is reason enough to say our investment portfolios are A, B, C, D, then we can be able to exempt this kind of thing. Otherwise, this is an area that must be taxed because this is an investment portfolio, which is not defined. So, I would rather be happy to know how much investment has gone into these bio-gradable materials before I agree that we should tax them. Thank you.

4.29
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I support most of the things they have presented. But I would like to know from the minister concerned about buveera, is this law on buveera still in existence? If it is still in existence, why is it that the government makes laws which they can never enforce? I am sure hon. Members, all of us are aware that nothing has ever happened to buveera. Wherever we buy things, the buveera are there. Some of us try to refuse as environmentalists, to carry buveera. The paper bags came for a short time and they eventually disappeared. These are the biodegradable materials, and business people say, they cannot afford paper bags; so they are expensive. 

Therefore, I find it ridiculous that the minister would want to put tax on biodegradable material, when buveera have refused to go away, and these materials are very expensive. I think the minister should not think of putting tax on these biodegradable materials, but also, the minister in charge of buveera - it used to be hon. Otafiire - Minister for Trade, is it? There was a fight over buveera at one time, that they enforce this law; that we phase out buveera, and Government is given a specific period of time within which they must phase out buveera from this country. It is not a laughing matter and it is not a joking matter. It is a serious matter because the buveera is destroying our environment, killing animals, spoiling soil, but Government does not seem to care, and yet they made the law. Thank you very much.

4.31
MS IDAH NANTABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on page 3, the third paragraph - sale of immovable property. I just want the minister to clarify and to make it specific, because my mum is residing on a five-acre piece of land on which her house is situated, and where she is cultivating her food. So, is her land subject to this tax? I just want to know which kind of immovable property; because land is immovable property. So, let me know whether my mum has to also face this tax? Thank you.

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just need to inform the honourable members that on VAT on sell of immovable properties, if you read this report properly, the committee did not recommend that Government should impose VAT on immovable properties for reasons that were well stated in the committee and with our consultations with the ministry and Uganda Revenue Authority. 

One of the very painful reasons we noted was that immovable properties are very few. Land is one and housing is another. Other than that, the rest - and maybe wealth and other things. For instance, in reference to houses especially, we realised that while constructing a house, the constructor always pays VAT, either indirectly or directly, through the purchase of materials used for construction of a house.

Therefore, it would be double jeopardy for such a property to be taxed at the end of the construction. 
On the issue of land, we realise that the very nature of our land tenure system – Uganda does not have a uniform land tenure system. Two; our Constitution, which is the primary law, states that land belongs to the people. Therefore, imposing a tax on transfer of land could in itself cause many problems. People will start hiding property or be scared of owning property.

The committee recommends that the ministry and URA should consider not imposing VAT on these two items. The committee position is very clear and I request Members to read the document clearly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issues are fairly clear, in terms of the principles of the Bill. The issues that are debatable might be on the actual provisions of the Bill, which we will be dealing with at an appropriate stage. 

On the principles of the Bill, I think we have had sufficient debate to inform the House and everybody is agreeable that the principle of the Bill is acceptable. 

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX, (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

 4.35 
Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, they are repealing some words: “Thermo and electrical energy, heating, gas refrigeration, air conditioning and water”. If I get this well, it means that these will cease to be goods and that they are making them a supply of services, yet they are not defining it in the interpretation clause. 

This worries me because if we are repealing it, then there is no need for us to reinstate it anywhere else in the Bill. So, I seek clarification from the minister, why do you repeal it and reinstate it without interpreting it? 

In the VAT Act which you read, under interpretation, it says, “Goods include all kinds of movable and immovable properties, thermo and electrical energy, heating, gas, refrigeration, air conditioning and water, but does not include money”. So, you want to delete those items from “thermo” up to “water”. But when you do so, it means you remove them from Section 10 of the principal Act –(Interjections)– I wish somebody gives the minister the law. 

You want to repeal these from Section 10 of the parent law, and introduce them under Section 12, without defining them under the interpretation clause. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, hon. Nandala-Mafabi says that under Section 1, which is the definition section of the terms referred to in the VAT Act, paragraph 8 of that section, there are definitions relating to the word “Good”.

Now, you want to remove these particular words, “Thermo, and electrical energy, heating, gas, refrigeration, air conditioning and water” – they want to remove those. At the same time, those issues were dealt with under Section 10 of the Act, according to hon. Nandala-Mafabi. You are now seeking to re-introduce these particular words which you are proposing to delete from the definition clause; you are proposing to provide for them under an amendment to Section 11 under the proposed “d”. That is the provision of “thermo and electrical energy, heating, gas, refrigeration, air conditioning and water.” In other words, what do these now mean?

MRS KIWANUKA: “Thermo and electrical energy, heating, gas, refrigeration, air conditioning and water” are being made a supply of services. A service is anything that is not a good or money. Therefore, there is no need to re-state that water is a service. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The minister has now answered me. That means that if we delete it from here and delete it from Section 10, then there is no need for you to introduce it under Section 11. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairman, did you look at these issues while in the committee –(Interjections)– hon. Members, we will stand over Clause 2 while we consult. 

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5 agreed to.

Clause 6

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we repeal this on the other side, it means we do not what to include tax for the electricity bills which we get at home; it means we will be billed power without VAT. That means that Clause 6 should not be part of the Bill because as we said, the minister has repealed, which is a good thing because we will not tax water and so on. Therefore, Clause 6 should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I propose that we stand over clause 6.

Clause 7

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9 agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend Clause 12 that seeks to put VAT in immovable property, and I request that you allow me to also give a brief clarification to Hon. Bako, who earlier asked a question related to this. Immovable property basically comprises land, buildings and any other things that you cannot move. Those are the things that will attract VAT.

MS BAKO: Now that you have defined it, it then boils back. If I have a grass-thatched house down in Terego, is it subject to this VAT?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, it is for that reason that I am moving this amendment. It is intended to help that grass-thatched house in Terego. 

We accordingly move that we delete paragraph (a) of Clause 12. Our justification is that reinstating or levying VAT on sale of immovable property makes such property expensive. It will also subject property buyers to manipulation by property developers since prices on the market are determined by market forces of demand and supply. You will have added 18 percent of the value of that property; the buyer will be the final consumer to do tax.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Government is agreeable with the committee on the VAT on the sale of residential houses to be exempted because a residential house is a basic right. (Applause) When I say residential, I mean own-dwelling, where it is owner-occupied.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Hon. Minister, would this exemption also include land for agricultural purposes?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I would like to ask the minister to clarify on property that is residential, but commercial. When you go to little towns like Kumi, you will find a house used for both commercial and family dwelling purposes; that Indian style of houses. So, when the minister says that Government will exempt VAT on houses for residential, what does she mean? 

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In addition to what my colleague has said, currently, as an example, when the President came to suspend the collection of property rates on residential houses – now a problem about the definition of a residential house has come up. What would you call a house in which somebody sleeps behind while using part it infront for a business? In this case, if we take it the way the minister has said, it will cause problems to our people. There should be clarification on what she calls a residential house and the land thereon.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My clarification is about commercial buildings. For example, I could be having a commercial building in Koboko, but I may want to sell it off because I need money to pay school fees. That is one type of commercial buildings. 

But there are also companies like Akright that are doing business in real estate, but also transacting in residential houses. Do we let them free of this tax or we tax them too? That is the clarification I would like the minister to make. Thank you.

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The minister, in changing the position, said that the exemption will be on residential property. What about undeveloped land? Would you like to apply the VAT on it too or not?
 
Then there is the issue of Kampala – when that issue of property rates exemption came up in Kampala, even people who had residential houses for rent also said that those houses were owner-occupied. There was no way of verifying such information. What I am saying is that the proposal of the minister runs the risk of being very difficult to implement because there will be difficulties in defining a residential house, especially now that some people build houses for commercial purposes, especially those building estates.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When we talk about a residential house, that definition just appears in the main Act called the Income Tax Act. So, that VAT is only collected from rented houses. If you are residing in any part of a building as well as doing business, then it is incumbent upon the tax official to do proper assessment. That is why, when you look at the URA advert today in the newspapers, it is indicative of a rental charge that is levied on the income from such a building. If you do not get any income from that building, the tax official will not charge you and the definition of that tax appears in the main VAT Act.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I would like to confess that the matter on the Floor is very technical. My ability to follow has been heavily challenged. Therefore, if I ask what you think is not very straight, please, bear with me, hon. Members. 

In the circumstances, I would like to know whether the land that we are talking about as immovable property includes the customary land for the people of Serere. I am asking this question to enable me to immediately declare that I will not be party to this decision because the minister has clearly clarified about residential buildings and I also know that land cannot be shifted. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like to be educated on this matter. Is this thing we are talking about – taxing land - inclusive of that village land for people who are food insecure like those in Serere?

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The VAT we are talking about is on sale of a residential house that is used by the owner. If your house is partly for residential and partly for commercial business, then URA will determine whether it is majorly for residential purposes or for commercial. A practice note will be issued in regard to this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the clarification which we must clear is this; given an example of Hon. Kiyonga and Company who do construction and sale of houses and these houses are bought by say a Member of Parliament who goes and stays in them; is such a person exempt from VAT? You must clear that first. 

National Housing constructs flats; and it sells them to people who will sleep in them. (Interjections) It is not National Housing which will pay, but the buyer. So, we are saying, if they are residential, they are the ones we are saying should be exempted from paying VAT. If that is true, then the land on it also does not pay VAT. 

For commercial buildings, definitely, somebody who has a commercial building, say on Kampala Road, will be registered for VAT. If he sells it, with VAT inclusive, he will claim his VAT in normal transactions of business, but they normally do not sell. 

What I want to propose is that the minister comes clear and says all residential houses are zero-rated. So that, the one who has put in his money can claim his VAT. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: We must clear one thing and I beg the indulgence of the minister. The proposal in her Bill is VAT on immovable property. Immovable property is defined and I can give you the summary of the definition. It includes land, buildings, be it commercial or residential. The minister is saying, let us exempt and hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying let us zero-rate. I do not mind, but I am totally lost. How will you classify a residential house? A residential house today in Ntinda can be a commercial house. Even when you let it, it becomes commercial. I request the minister to concede to our amendment. (Applause)

MRS KIWANUKA: I will need some time on that, Mr Chairman. I have been reminded that I did not clarify on the sale of customary land. The sale of customary land does not attract VAT. The second schedule to the VAT Act provides that such a supply is exempt. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you. The intention of Parliament should be, and I think it is, to make laws which are clear. When we are making laws, we all know that we have an objective. In this case, customary land, in my ordinary thinking of the word, remains immovable property. The clarification from the minister is that customary land is not subject to VAT. How about when we go to Mailo land and other tenure systems in Uganda? I may appreciate the narrow tax base of revenue collection in Uganda, but are we really ready for this kind of legislation at this time. Thank you.

MR WAIRA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I need to be guided further. How different is this tax from the land tax which we threw out yesterday. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, we did not throw out anything yesterday. (Laughter)

MS KABAALE: Thank you. I am interested in this VAT because I remember that before I started voting, they introduced VAT at one time. In Iganga, people closed shops and waited for policemen. Some of them started taking measurements to find out how much a commercial building should pay. 

I would like to give you information, Mr Chairman. I have been making consultations here and they are saying the Budget Committee had thrown out this thing. It is coming in another form. We beg that before it comes again, they define what they want to tax for VAT before we pass it. Thank you. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much. I have a conviction that this august House is fully packed with people with brains that work very well. Yesterday we refused this thing on land and I am seeing that in immovable objects, land is inclusive. Actually, this is a cousin of what we threw out yesterday. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, for the second time and to correct the Hansard, there was nothing thrown out yesterday. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Much obliged. Let me withdraw my statement. I am submitting that what we are going to determine in this House is going to affect our electorate back in the villages and even me. I can assure everybody here that to pay tax on my father’s land that he left with me, beats my understanding. And I can tell you, even the people in Mbarara Municipality who are watching me on TV, will support me. This is very wrong and I urge this House to refuse it. (Applause)  

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I heard the minister say that it is URA to determine whether a building is commercial or residential. That is not true, because when these buildings are being approved, unless you are talking about illegal buildings, it is indicated whether the building under approval is commercial or residential. 

So, if a building is approved as residential, whether you put in commercial activities, it remains a residential building. At the same time, we are talking about VAT on selling a building. There are so many buildings that are illegal, but under sale. So, when you get tax of 18 percent from sale of an illegal building that was not approved, you are indirectly legalising the building. Indirectly, someone can produce the evidence of paying VAT, which is a legal tax on an illegal building. 

Aren’t we encouraging corruption by saying that it is URA to determine whether the building is residential or commercial? You can give a kickback and they call it residential so that you do not pay. Someone will come next year and do the same using a tipoff from a friend who was there before. We shall encourage corruption by giving URA the powers to determine whether the building is residential or commercial.

MR NGANDA: Part of the problem that I have seen in our reports is that they are too general. Both the committee and the minister are not telling us how much money Government wants to raise.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you are taking us back. We are now on the specific amendments that are being proposed.

MR NGANDA: Yes, as a result, we have a problem appreciating what problem we shall have created when we pass or if we do not. Let me urge Parliament not to pass this proposal by the minister. First of all, it is very ambiguous, and it is left to the implementers to decide what they should tax and what they should not.

You are talking about exempting customary land. If I have a registered interest in land, is that a crime? Or you are looking for the cheapest way of revenue collection, that whoever presents a title for transfer must be taxed. 

Most of the transactions on land are not happening in the normal offices in Kampala. There are many transactions going on in the villages, and actually, that defeats the definition of immovable property, because you are looking at people who have titles.

This contradicts Government policy; you want to encourage investment, you want the construction industry to grow, but you are at the same time discouraging transactions on land. People are trying to raise money to buy land, but you are saying that before you raise yours, you must also raise ours. In a nutshell, you are actually discouraging transactions on land.

MRS KIWANUKA: After consultation, the Government accepts the committee’s proposal on immovable properties.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I was happy for the concession I got, but I have more amendments on Clause 12. This is about the games of chance; we beg to move an amendment on Clause 12 to insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (c) to read as follows - by repealing paragraph (j). It provides for the supply of betting, lotteries and games of chance to be exempted from VAT. Our justification is that gaming and betting activities are a lucrative source of increased revenue for Government. Since the consumers of these activities are high and voluntary spenders, therefore, VAT on the supply of these services should be reinstated.

Delete paragraph e(iii), justification; there is need to promote the use of biodegradable materials as an alternative to the use polythene bags, since Government has put a ban on the use of “buveera”. I beg to move on Clause 12. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, Government position is that the proposal of the finance committee is good, but it may be difficult to define value added and the tax base. The tax base may not be easily defined. On definition; VAT is on supply; modern VAT statutes tax many games of chance in some jurisdictions, except gambling, and instead subject it to a separate tax in this case.

The best practice for taxation of gambling depends on the scope of legal gambling in the country, such as Uganda, to the extent to which a registered person offers it. 

The following are some of the tax policies on which Government is now reviewing the gaming law in order to align it with best practices internationally:
 
1.	Should transactions involved in a game of chance be taxable or exempt from VAT? This decision may depend in part on whether gambling operators are subject to separate gambling levies. In Uganda, for example, we do not tax gambling, but subject it to a separate tax, which is 15 percent of gross payments. Therefore, imposing another tax may make it very expensive. 

2.	If games of chance are taxed, should it extend to all or only some forms of gambling? How can VAT imposed on a game of chance be calculated, especially if the bets placed and the winning paid are mixed up? Should non monetary prizes be accounted for? When a casino is only part of a larger enterprise conducted by a registered personal company, how should that person or company account for the provisions to players of services rendered by another part of the business, say a restaurant or Hotel? 

With such policy issues, Government has decided to conduct a review of the gaming law and we suggest to this august House to wait for the outcome of this review exercise. All the issues which have been raised today will be and have already been raised as part of the review.

The outcome of the review will inform the budget debate that will be starting very soon for the next financial year.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I appreciate the dilemma the honourable minister is in, because she is fed by the technical people. I want to inform this House that two years ago, the Minister of Finance decided to even lower corporation tax on gaming and betting, because under the law, she can use a statutory instrument. That helped the people in casino business to make abnormal profits.

We queried the minister two years ago and by now, the law should have been here. I do not want to know the reason why she decided to lower the tax. We have done research and found that countries like UK pay 17 percent VAT on gaming, betting and gambling. In Ireland, it is 17.5 percent and this matter has even gone to the European court of justice for a ruling on the matter of VAT on betting and gambling. 

I would like to summarise the ruling of the judge; additionally, Leo Libra argued that the principal of physical neutrality was breached by application of VAT to a limited number of services. 
However, the court rejected this argument stating that gambling services, which are in competition with each other, must not be treated differently for VAT purposes. 

The court further declared that if two forms of gambling are not in competition with each other, then one can be exempted from VAT while the other is not, since member states retain discretionary power to decide how VAT is applied. So, the point on which I wish to agree with the minister is that the state can apply VAT in the way it wants, but for you to say that countries in the world do not charge VAT is not totally true. I really accuse you because you are being fed and this was an argument that your people gave. 

Mr Chairperson, I went to the Internet, and in so many countries in the world, gambling is taxed at 15 percent. A UK-based operator pays 15 percent – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that VAT?

MR EKANYA: No, these are the other taxes on which she was arguing that you can only charge them on gambling and betting. While the UK also charges VAT of 17 percent, they also charge UK-based operators 15 percent generally on betting duty or remote gambling. It was discovered in Europe that these gambling companies resorted to using telephones. So, they decided to go off shores, but even there, the laws were amended to the effect that if there is gambling on phone, you still have to pay all the taxes across the board. 

They also pay corporation tax on their taxable profit between 21 percent and 28 percent, and it continues. In other taxes, there was an increase of 13 percent. Gambling companies incorporated with or which have a permanent establishment in Italy are subjected to the Italy Corporation Tax, which is currently levied at a rate of 27 percent, but in Uganda, it is I think at 8 percent. This was done unilaterally and yet even in Italy, they pay VAT. So, I want to request the minister to allow us pass the law and go and make an administrative arrangement to collect because, if you move around this city, for sports betting, the youths are in the halls from morning to evening betting on sports. Sports betting is now gambling and it is causing insecurity. If you go to casinos - the former MD of the NSSF, my dear friend Jamwa, gambled part of government money –(Interjections)- I went with my colleague somewhere – he is a lawyer and I don’t want to mention him here. He gambled and made a lot of profit but was taxed. He paid VAT and the others. So, hon. Minister, we want to beg you - you want money and this Parliament is saying, let people pay VAT - and it is applicable in other countries of the world. Thank you. 

MRS KIWANUKA: This is a point of clarification. The honourable member mentioned eight percent; which tax was that?

DR EPATAIT: First of all, I would like to thank the minister for her maximum cooperation. The chairman of the committee has proposed an amendment and now the minister is telling us that they are going to review the law on gaming and betting. We are not going to legislate in anticipation. We have the duty to pass this law now and, therefore, I would like to propose that the honourable minister continues with her maximum cooperation and have this paragraph (j) repealed or deleted and we move forward as we wait for the review that you are talking about. Thank you. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, the intention of our amendment, and really if I may explain taxation; I am not an expert, but I fairly understand the principle. Taxation isn’t to raise revenue, it is to inhibit a certain practice that discourages another sector from growing, or it is to promote that sector. Our reasoning – and even in our previous report of the other financial year, for which I was privileged to be the chairperson - we commented about casinos and gaming. The fear of the minister is how the implementation will be. That can be found. If there are challenges, every year we amend these Bills; it can be reviewed. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman of the committee, what happens in gambling is that you do not put money there; they buy tokens –(Interjections)- am I lying, hon. Kiyonga? (Laughter) They buy coins and what we are saying is if you have been selling a coin at Shs 1,000, then you will put the coin at a cost that includes the 18 percent. So, at the point of buying the coins, you will be paying VAT. The minister is just being complicated and I want to tell you that when it was being formed in 1996 - we know the people who lobbied for this law. Dr Kiyonga you know them; now they have made money and we should tax them. (Applause)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, hon. Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Even the operators of the casinos would not be suffering with this VAT. It is the voluntary consumer of the activities of gambling who incurs it. This casino person will have it as an input and output pack. So, really, this is where we need to make a deal and you concede.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we are losing the point because if you say that you are looking for money to bridge the gap between the poor and the rich, and this is the principle of taxation, then you cannot leave somebody with a high earning out of the bracket and then you go for the poor. What would be the essence of taxation? People who go to casinos are the rich; there is no poor person from Nakasongola or Kabula that will go to a casino. The moment you make a profit and go to a casino, it means you have money for surplus. Why doesn’t Government target these big people?

If you are saying that you are looking to widen the tax base, then why leave out the people who you could tax? Are you going to go for the farmers? These are the right people to be taxed. I would like Members to support this proposal of the committee. Why should we remove them? The revenue which has been collected has been subject to the budget we have passed. Why should we repeal it?

We have allowed Government to reinstate the VAT percentage and now we are saying we should not collect. Yesterday, we passed a Finance Bill saying that we should highly tax the luxurious goods. A casino game is a luxurious good; why leave it out? I would like Members to support the committee and we reinstate VAT and get increased revenue collection. 

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, since we seem to be in agreement, I would like to move a motion that the question be put.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, when a motion of this nature is moved, my hands are tied and I have to put the question. Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee that VAT be imposed on gaming and other related matters. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The Chairman had moved another amendment on the issue of biodegradable materials that they should be VAT exempted. Did you say that? Yes, hon. Minister. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The government proposes to reinstate VAT on biodegradable packaging materials. This is also at the request of the industry. If it is VAT exempt, the entrepreneurs cannot claim VAT on their own transactions where they are paying VAT. As those of you who run businesses know, when you make your VAT returns to URA, you deduct those VAT expenses that you have yourself incurred and you may call it washing VAT. So, the industry would like to get their VAT reinstated on the packaging materials so that they can also benefit from it. It is called -(Interjections)- so I am saying that that is why the government plans to reinstate VAT on biodegradable materials in order to encourage supply of these materials.

MR YAGUMA: I support the committee that we should not tax biodegradable materials. We very well remember the menace the “buveera” caused and continue to cause to this country, and to the cleanliness of our city and our other towns. Now, if you tax the biodegradable materials, you are making them less competitive and you are actually attracting the “buveera” which we are trying to get rid of. So, I request my colleagues to support the committee and we make the biodegradable materials VAT exempt. Thank you. (Applause)

MS BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand to support the committee that we should not impose VAT on biodegradable materials. We are already hurt. Personally, I feel the Ministry of Finance is a bit insensitive. Already, we are dissatisfied with the way they are imposing the ban. Now, they are making us feel bad the more by imposing a tax on what we thought was going to be a solution to the problem.

I call upon Members in this Parliament to uphold the view of the committee so that “buveera” can be challenged and be competed with and done away with. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the honourable minister. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not insensitive. We are very sensitive. We concede to the committee’s proposal. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the amendment proposed by the committee is that the VAT should be removed from biodegradable materials and that is the amendment now that has been conceded to. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have to be very careful. There is where you say, “Zero-rated.” That is very dangerous. That means it is taxable, but the rate is zero. And then there is “exempt” and exempt means that the input tax is not claimed. And sometimes we have to be careful with these things. So, we wanted the Chairperson to help us. I hope you are saying it is exempted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you are saying, “Exempt,” you are right. So, you should say, “Exempt.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is what he said. Hon. Members, I put the question that the proposal by the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, allow me to propose another amendment by inserting a new clause immediately after Clause 12 as follows: 

“13: Amendment of the Third Schedule of the VAT Act. The principle Act is amended in the Third Schedule by inserting, immediately after paragraph (h), the following: h(a) the supply of water excluding mineral water and aerated water containing sweetening matter or flavours.” 

The justification is that basic water for consumption supplied to an average person, including a rural person, for domestic use, should be zero-rated. I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The supply of piped water is not like that of boreholes, springs or standpipes. It has an input cost just like power generation or telecoms. Zero-rating of the supply of piped water - we are talking of piped water here – which means that Government will have to forego revenue now of about 14 billion a year. On the other hand, as part of support to the water sub-sector, the government has invested a lot in this sub-sector of piped water by allowing reinvestment of on-lent loans instead of repayment. 

Mr Chairman and this august House, we propose that the piped water be recognised for the utility that it is, just like power generation or telecom services, and we propose that the supply of piped water not be zero-rated. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable colleagues if you went to the Hansard of this Parliament, you will find that for the last five years, this House has adopted the report of the Committee on Natural Resources that piped water be zero-rated. Because Government is now extending piped water to rural areas, there is a study which shows that because of VAT, people go to rivers to get dirty water and in turn the cost of disease is very high. And because we have the gravity scheme all over, it is all piped water and it attracts VAT. So, it is very costly. Instead of people consuming clean water - especially women and children - they consume dirty water and the cost in -Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. Mr Chairman and dear colleagues, the issue of removing VAT from piped water is something which we should consider. In Kampala, we have had a programme of water for the urban poor, but a jerrycan of water has remained high, and the answer from National Water has always been, you will always keep paying highly because of VAT.

In East Africa, it is only Uganda that levies VAT on water. In consideration of that, I urge my colleagues that we remove the tax so that we make water cheaper for our people.

MR EKANYA: Mr Minister, you have talked of Shs 14 billion. The amendment we have passed here - by the way, we have raised over Shs 200 billion. From betting and gambling, we have saved a lot of money. You had made a proposal that people who are building houses should reclaim input VAT. The House has said no; let them transfer the VAT. So, we have saved a lot of money.

We have really given you money and I am very happy that you have conceded. As a mother, hon. Minister, I want to appeal to your heart that we are ready to pay VAT, even if you increase it to 40 percent on bottled water, but the poor children in Tororo, Bugisu and Karamoja, Kisoro, Kapchorwa who are getting water -Colleagues, you know that we now have districts in every town and there is piped water in the rural growth centres, but with VAT, our people cannot manage this water. No wonder most of the water projects in most of the urban centres are now white elephants. Thank you very much.

MR KATWIREMU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Water is life and I have had the privilege of being in the Water Sector for the last ten years. If there is anything that we can do for our people, whether it means that the government subsidises, we should provide water at the lowest possible cost. 

I am also aware and mindful that we must also raise revenue, but there are other ways of raising revenue. We have been here haggling with the minister on going slow on raising money from casino operators who are stinking rich. This should not even cause a debate and the minister has said we are losing about Shs 14 billion as opposed to providing water for our people. 

In any case, we can easily lose the Shs 14 billion in health by people going to unclean sources of water. We will pick up the bill from hospitals as a result of people falling sick. So, that Shs 14 billion is not a lot of money, considering that we would be improving on the health services of our people.

It is on record that this Parliament has recommended, several times, that this VAT should be dropped. In the Natural Resources Committee, where I am a member, we sat with the Water Sector and debated this matter thoroughly. We agreed with them that this was one of the ways we would contribute towards the health and well-being of our people. We were waiting for this opportunity to remove this VAT from the backs of our people.

I would like to plead with the minister that you concede and agree with the recommendation of the committee and we have a fantastic and happy day. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to get a little practical. All of us came here on probably very good campaign slogans like, “I will struggle to provide water to the constituency.” I want to give an example of Nebbi Town Council, which happens to be in my constituency. There was a very laborious project to supply water and connections, but as I speak, all the taps are closed simply because there are too many charges on a jerrycan of water, which is almost Shs 200-300. Then there are connection fees and so on. So, I think VAT on water, especially to the rural poor, is uncalled for.

I went to Kabale Municipality and my friend here can testify -(Laughter)- -(Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The situation in Kabale Municipality and Kabale as a whole is alarming. You know the terrain of where we come from; the hills that we have. Our dear mothers and fathers can no longer move from up the hills down to the streams to fetch water.

Most of the taps in Kabale have been closed because they do not have money to facilitate them. During my campaigns, wherever I moved, they told me, “We do not have water in our constituency and homes.” You find a very old lady of 60 years or 80 years having to go over one mile to collect water.

Sincerely, the best gift we can give to our people is making sure we give them enough piped water such that everyone can collect water from his or her home and with low tax ofcourse, because it is proving to be very expensive. Thank you.

MR ACHILE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was here ten years ago and had sabbatical leave - what we are talking about is a very serious matter. It is not one to be taken lightly because water is life. When we talk about water, it covers the entire country. I do not think there is a single district or constituency here that is not affected because of the issue at hand.

Take, for instance, Yumbe, where water has become a problem. What my people are drinking - I would say even the colour of milk is better. They are drinking mud.

Because of lack of piped water, you find women going with babies to fetch water at night exposing them to the risk of pneumonia and malaria attacks. They leave their houses and spouses in the cold -(Laughter)- this is a serious matter, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, you rose on a point of information.

MR ACHILE: Mr Chairman, the information I was giving is that this is a serious matter. Thank you (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please wind up.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Chairman, with this wealth of information, my work is simple; I wish to move a motion to conclude this discussion about – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, let me first hear from the minister.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to point out that there are several factors we must consider and as quickly as we can this evening. First of all, the water sector is highly subsidised by the government. This subsidy comes from application of the money provided by VAT back into the sector plus other money that Government gets from elsewhere. Removal of VAT means that the government would lose much money to invest in the sector. In addition, there would be agitation by other utility companies like power generation and telecoms to have similar treatment. Removal of VAT would not reduce the cost of water because the National Water and Sewerage Corporation charges about Shs 35 per 20-litre jerrycan, including VAT. It is the retailers who charge Shs 150 plus. 

Mr Chairman, the problem we have here is lack of supply; we need to push out the supply of piped water to ensure that more and more people can access it –(Interruption)

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I want to inform you that it looks like Government is defeating its own programmes that it is trying to set up. In my own village of Gweri, there is supposed to be water for the rural people – the installation has already started, but the question people are asking is, how about the tax? And so, everybody is avoiding connection. We think we are making progress but we are not. I urge the minister to please concede. Thank you.

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, the honourable member has just proved my point; people are asking, “What about the tax?” As I mentioned earlier, National Water and Sewerage Corporation charges about Shs 35 per jerrycan. It is the retailers who are making high profits. I reiterate that we must increase the supply of clean water and roll out the system. Please hon. Members, assist in the measure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I am left with no option but to put the question to the proposal. I put the question that a new clause be inserted immediately after Clause 12 as stated by the committee chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 13 agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you will recall that we stood over two clauses of the Bill; clauses 2 and 6. What is the update on the two clauses, hon. Minister?

Clause 2

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I take it that under Clause 2, it is the issue of the definition. Having repealed the words “thermal and electrical energy”, “heating”, “gas”, “refrigeration”, “air conditioning” and “water” from the definition in (h), the question is, if it is to be subsumed, the definition of services, as the minister in my opinion rightly states that, “Services means anything that is not goods or money.” Is this enough? In my opinion, it is because you need to read further in part (iv) of the Act which deals with supply of goods and services. I have carefully studied this part and I have found out that indeed the definition of services is adequate. 

Sometimes the problem is the drafting style; the Commonwealth - Mr Chairman, as you are aware, for instance in the UK, they have marginal notes to every section and they come out also in the main Act. But in our Acts, the explanation is done in the memorandum and it remains on record, although it does not form part of the law. Now, in this case, if one had to be a little bit clearer, that would have been covered in the memorandum under (a) “To repeal the words “thermal and electrical energy”, “heating”, “gas”, “refrigeration”, “air conditioning” and “water” because they are subsumed in the definition of services.” That would make it clearer because, for instance, if you look at Section 11, hon. Nandala-Mafabi - Supply of services, it says: “Except as otherwise provided under this Act, supply of services means any supply which is not a supply of goods or money, including the performance of services for another person, the making available of any facility or advantage or the toleration of any situation or the refraining from the doing of any activity.” Now, they even go further and talk about mixed supply, supply by agent and so on. I have found this exhaustive to cover what is actually being repealed from the definition in (h). Thank you.

MS BAKO: Mr Chairman, I find it very disturbing for this House to continue; if you look at the Frontbench on the government side, you find the Attorney-General – the matters we are considering are very crucial. It only shows the way the Frontbench undermines this institution. Is it procedurally right for us to continue talking to ourselves when Government is almost absent and the Prime Minister is more than relaxed to accommodate more? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, we have the Leader of Government Business, the Minister who has proposed the Bill, the learned Attorney-General, and the Leader of the Opposition. And secondly, we are aware that we are running two concurrent important businesses at this moment. Some of the ministers are holed up in a meeting with the Budget Committee to try and bring business back to this House. I can see hon. D’Ujanga and hon. Akiror there; please hon. Ministers, take your rightful places so that you are visible. (Laughter) So, procedurally, I think we are covered.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I thank the Attorney-General. A “good” is something you feel. For example, you can feel water because you turn on a tap and wash your hands. Anyway, we cannot – you see it is tangible. But we must be realistic; you are the Attorney-General but sometimes – having said that –(Interjections)- since we have talked about water - I am one of those who were saying water should be zero-rated since it is one of the items, I am comfortable with. Now, the only thing that I want to put the Minister of Finance on notice is that next year we are going to consider removing VAT on electricity. (Applause) We would have done it today, but for now, let us leave it and we do it next year because electricity is one of the reasons why there are a lot of losses. Instead of people having electricity regularly, they have to steal. In fact, the moment you remove taxes, you will make it cheaper and many people, instead stealing, will put it in their houses and you will cut on debt.

Likewise, I want to tell the minister to look at the definition better to further define these items. For now, we can allow it, but what you have done is in bad faith. (Applause)

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 2 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 6 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Title do stand the Title to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.55
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.55
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” and has passed it with amendments. I beg to report.       

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.56
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
THIRD READING

“THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011”

5.56
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Minister. Mr Chairman, I thank you. (Laughter) There is a notice here to all the honourable members: 

“This is to inform you that Parliament is organising the 13th National Prayer Breakfast which will take place on Saturday, 8 October 2011. The venue will be Hotel Africana starting at 7.30 a.m. The Chief Guest will be His Excellency, General Salva Kiir, the President of Southern Sudan and the chief host will be His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. The host will be the Rt. Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga. The Guest Speaker will be Ambassador Dr Inonge Lewanika and also Zambia’s Ambassador to Belgium. This lady was a presidential candidate and she now serves her country as an ambassador in Belgium. Please arrange to attend the function and further details regarding invitation cards and the rest will be communicated to you by the organising committee. 

Hon. Members, I thank you very much for today. We have one Bill which is pending, and based on the report that I have not been able to receive on the state of the consultation that has transpired between the committee and the ministry; I will defer the Bill for tomorrow’s meeting. The House stands adjourned to tomorrow 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 September 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 

