Thursday, 3 September 2009

Parliament met at 10.13 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to this morning’s meeting. I want to remind you that today we are dealing with the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs in the morning. We shall deal with the Committee on Infrastructure in the afternoon. Tomorrow morning we shall deal with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Thank you.

10.15
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I stand here to raise an issue of national importance. Some of you might have come across the newspapers of today and yesterday, which reported that there is a border problem between the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of Sudan in Moyo district. 

This has been due to the persistent harassment, which the citizens of Uganda, particularly residents of Moyo district have faced in the sub-counties of Lefoli, Moyo and Dufile, which are along the border. Having on a number of occasions raised the matter, but without receiving any help from the Government of the Republic of Uganda, the people of Moyo as of yesterday demonstrated in the town and their demonstration took the form of blocking the road linking Uganda with Sudan at the Afogi border. 

As I speak, the border is closed just as the shops of Sudanese traders in Moyo town. There were also threats by the locals to go and pull out Sudanese patients from Moyo Hospital. However, we the local leaders of the district tried to cool the situation. We restrained the people and the UPDF has deployed at the border point where the problem is. The Brigade Commander for the UPDF in the West Nile region has gone to West Nile and he is trying to cool the situation as well. 

However, this is a matter of importance. I would like to call upon this House to look into the issue critically. What the people showed yesterday is a sense of despair seeing that the government is not coming to their aid. We have had border conflicts in other areas, the Migingo case for example. The Government of the Republic of Uganda did not leave the people the way ours have been left. If we do not restrain the people and act to solve this matter amicably, it is going to spoil the good relationship that ever existed between the local people in Uganda and those on the other side. 

This is a conflict between governments because the SPLA is an instrument of Government. As such, our Government should not leave our people to move alone, but should come in. We have tried our best, as local leaders, to keep the people together and now the government should take action. I call upon this Parliament to intervene in that issue so that our people are left in peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know how Parliament can intervene, but I will ask the minister in charge of the borders, hon. Matia Kasaija.

10.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable members, we are very much aware of what is taking place at the border between ourselves and Southern Sudan in Moyo district. Yesterday, when I heard about the fracas, I got in touch with the DPC so that he could give me an update of what is taking place there.

What my brother hon. Fungaroo has said is true. Some SPLA soldiers came into the territory of Uganda and chased away our farmers who were busy harvesting. Not only did they chase them away, but they also picked the groundnuts that had been collected from the gardens and this infuriated the population.

The population retreated, mobilised and they wanted to go and also do something similar across but the Police acted very fast together with the RDC and the political leaders. I talked to the Chairman LC V and we diffused the situation. As we speak, there is calm. I want to assure my colleague, hon. Fungaroo, this House and the country, that at the moment, there is total calm. 

However, that does not mean that the problem has been sorted out. The wanainchi are still unhappy and I want to assure this House that as Government, all steps will be taken to ensure that this matter is sorted out once and for all, just like we are handling the Rukwanzi issue, the Mutukula issue and the Migingo issue. This issue will also be sorted out. 

My appeal is calmness. The relationship between Uganda and Southern Sudan is so smooth that we should never allow an incident like that to destroy ii. I appeal to my fellow leaders to calm down the people as we sort this out between Uganda and the Government of Southern Sudan. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

10.20
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Samuel Abura Pirir): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs considered the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and Internal Affairs for the financial year 2009/2010.

In accordance with Articles 90 and 150, Clause 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The report covers the following votes:

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence
Vote 009 - Internal Affairs Headquarters
Vote 144 - Uganda Police
Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons

Vote 004 - The Ministry of Defence 

Overview of the budget performance for the financial year 2008/2009 and the budget projection for the financial year 2009/2010.

The total sector budget approved for the financial year 2008/2009 announced, amounted to Shs 470,610 billion for Ministry of Defence. However, in the course of the financial year 2008/2009, Parliament approved a supplementary of Shs 48 billion for purposes of capability enhancement. 

Another Shs 47 billion was sought and given to cater for a special military operation undertaken in Garamba. This pushed the total budget for the Ministry of Defence to Shs 542.775 billion, leading to an overall budget performance of 121%. 

This financial year, 2009/2010, the total budget allocated to the Ministry of Defence is Shs 464.946 billion of which Shs 25.090 billion is for development, and Shs 200.063 billion for wages.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I just want to urge the chairperson to read these figures correctly because when he refers to Shs 25, 090,000,000 and he just reads Shs 25.090 - like Shs 200,630,000,000 and he reads Shs 200.63 billion. So, he should be specific with the figures. Otherwise, after the billion, the rest are not captured correctly.

MR ABURA: Thank you for the correction. Madam Speaker, I beg to repeat. As the Member has remarked, the shillings I have maybe mispronounced. I now say Shs 25,009,000,000 for development; and Shs 200.3 billion for wages. Shs 231.075 billion for non-wages - recurrent expenditure.

The key outputs for the Ministry of Defence for the year 2008/2009.

i)The computerised UPDF payroll system -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, you can leave out those, the Members will read them. Just go to the observations and recommendations. You do not have to read all the outputs; they are very many. You go to the observations and recommendations. 

MR ABURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, the report is a book. It is not a mere report, it is 45 pages. Thank you for ruling. Now I go to the heading, the key words.
 
3.2 Key outputs of the Ministry of Defence for the financial year 2008/2009.  As you can see.

3.3 Planned output, Vote 004 for the financial year 2009/2010.

4.0 The observations and recommendations for the supplementary budget requests. That is what 4.0 and 4.1 detail in the programme.

Domestic arrears -(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to know the report my vice-chairperson is reading. I am a member of the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee. I have two copies here. I have what I would call the original copy and I have another copy I think which has been circulated right now. The reason as to why I would like to request for your indulgence is that on the original copy, the copy that I vividly remember, there were some key policy issues that you were supposed to clarify before we could start debating the Defence budget. 

I ask for your indulgence to point out these two points that required your intervention before we proceed. In our original copy, they were opening remarks and you were supposed to rule before we could continue. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, I know you are a member of the committee; why don’t you allow the Member to finish? If there is something he has left out, you will bring it up. I will give you an opportunity.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, by making sure that it is one of the opening remarks, we wanted your intervention before we could continue because there are key policy issues that you have to rule on before we continue. And it is on the front page on our original copy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am not a member of your committee. I have only one copy and I do not know which report you are talking about. I do not know which copy is original because I am not part of you.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I imagine this is what he is saying. I am a member of that committee and I do not know whether he attended the very last meeting. But in that meeting, those issues were handled and on page 14, that issue is captured. That was the issue of hon. J.J. Odongo which is well captured in the report. The issue of UPDF is also well captured in the report. 

The issue is that when we were reconsidering the report, we were advised by the clerk to the committee that there was a format that was given. So, those were later captured in observations other than as key issues at the opening of our report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebaggala, if at the end of the presentation those issues are not captured, I will ask you to speak about them. Let us proceed.

MR ABURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague who raised the issue is a member of the committee. As you can see in the appendix, he did not sign on this copy.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I would want hon. Sebaggala to clarify to this House. As a Member of Parliament, when you hear of the “Original” report and yet we have another one here, it means we have two reports. So, before we continue, let him lay on Table the copy he purports to be the original and we verify it, because at the end of the day, we may be dealing with a photo copy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For me, I have only one report. Hon. Chairperson, please present your report.

MR ABURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We were on domestic arrears, 4.2 covers land use and 4.4 is for enhancing the production of the UPDF. 4.5 is National Enterprise and Corporation (NEC). Then 4.5.1 NEC industries; 4.6 is construction of barracks in the UPDF, rationalisation of resources; 4.7 is UPDF operations in Somalia –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very reluctant to disrupt the colleague while presenting, but we have just received this report. Wouldn’t it be good that at least he reads the recommendations because from the way he is summarising, it is hard for us to know their recommendations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, what I did not want you to go into are the outputs, planned outputs – those are not necessary. So, start from 4.1, the observations and the recommendations. (Mr Sebaggala rose_)Hon. Sebaggala, allow the Chair to present.

MR ABURA: Madam Speaker, that is what we face when we are in the committee. There are controversial members. 

4.1 supplementary budgets 

The committee was informed that this year has been a hectic one from the security point of view, which made the ministry spend beyond its budget by over Shs 95 billion. This was due to increased military activities, mainly operations against LRA and increased operational levels. 

However, the committee noted that supplementary requests have become a major source of budget distortions since every year, the Ministry of Defence comes up with a supplementary request some of which are not emergencies. Despite the supplementary expenditure provided to the sector the last financial year 2008/09, this year’s budget has been increased, which implies the likelihood of another supplementary request. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Defence should adequately budget for the operations, and supplementary requests in the future could only be approved for emergencies. 

Government should also ensure the provision of adequate funds through a regular budgetary process, to reduce the incidences of supplementary funding.

        4.2     Domestic Arrears and, 
        4.3     Land under use

The committee recommended that resources be available to the UPDF Land Board to expedite the process of surveying and titling all the UPDF land. 

The status of the UPDF is provided in the attachment of the annex and covers Kisekka, Mbuya and Kitante lands for disposal by the UPDF.

        4.4 The committee was in agreement with the swapping of the Kitante land for the Mombasa land for the purpose of facilitating exports and imports for our country. 

There was a serious concern over the alleged private claimant of the ownership of this Kitante land by Mr Sudhir Ruparelia.

The committee recommends that Government should clear the ownership status of Kitante land so that a swapping process could be finalised. 

The committee, however, was not in agreement with the ministry over the sale of the Mbuya land considering the prime nature of this land.

After visiting the various barracks and having examined the budget of the Ministry of Defence, the Committee appreciated the need for an enhancement of the development budget for the sector. 

However, the committee recommended that rather than dispose of the prime pieces of land, the government should instead directly increase the development budget to meet these needs.

        4.5 Enhancing productivity of the UPDF 

The committee noted that there is need to engage the UPDF in more production ventures now that the combat operations in the country have subsided because this will not only improve their welfare, but also make good use of the vast land available in the barracks, and save this land from encroachers. 

This will also be in line with the government policy of Prosperity-For-All, and to ensure sufficient food production to prevent the occurrence of food shortages currently being experienced in various parts of the country. This will also reduce on the general redundancy of soldiers as they will be more productively utilised.

The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Defence works hand-in-hand with the various ministries to ensure that the UPDF units are engaged in productive ventures like road construction, agriculture, disaster management and supplement work of these sectors.   

The Ministry of Defence should rationalise the use of the NEC tractors and improve on the soldiers’ welfare by way of engaging them in productive agriculture. 

        4.6 	National Enterprises Corporation (NEC)
 
            4.6.1 NEC Industries

The committee was informed that NEC has three subsidiary companies and four joint venture companies.

The subsidiaries are Luwero industries Ltd, NEC Firm Katonga Ltd and NEC Construction Engineering Ltd.

The joint ventures are Ugiran Ltd, NEC Health World Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Uganda National Security Forces Holding Ltd and the Military Vehicle Centre.

The committee noted with concern that ever since its establishment in 1989, and subsequent legalisation in 1995, as a commercial enterprise for the purposes of carrying out profitable business for the UPDF, NEC has never broken even but instead, continues to survive on subvention from the Ministry of Finance.

NEC management attributed their failure to make profits to the following;

    i. Big asset base leading to a high depreciation cost of over Shs 1.3 billion.

    ii. Lack of business from the mother ministry.

    i. Big salary bill especially for Luwero Industries Ltd, which has to maintain the staff as it is costly to train new staff.

    i. Unreliable power supply for Luwero Industries Ltd which affects production.

The committee was informed that since its inception in 1989, NEC has never broken even despite the government injecting money in the enterprise every year.

The committee was further informed that despite NEC having capacity like in the area of engineering and construction, there exists a similar structure called the Engineering Brigade in the Army which carries out engineering works in the Army, and has created idle capacity, contributing to overall losses.

The Committee further noted that despite the various industries NEC has, the Ministry of Defence has continued to outsource most of the services which could have been provided by the NEC. For example, vehicle repair and maintenance which accounted for Shs 13.431 billion in the financial year 2008/2009 and provision of uniforms among others.

The Ministry of Defence informed the committee that the process of restructuring NEC and the Engineering Brigade is underway, and that this would clearly spell out the roles of the two units.

The government has continued to invest in NEC annually. In addition, NEC has been generating revenue from its activities and recently Government passed them a grant in form of tractors which it is currently selling.

The committee was not satisfied with the explanation on how the money is being used. It has requested for an explanation in respect of the internally generated funds. 

In the meantime, the committee strongly recommends that whatever capacity NEC has, should be utilised by the ministry and the Army, and that the planned rationalisation and restructuring of NEC and the Engineering Brigade should be expedited. 

The committee also recommends that the ministry should ensure that NEC is given the business in areas where they have capacity, and should be shielded from competing with private service providers. These include repair of vehicles, construction and supply of uniforms. This will help NEC generate profits.

It is also our recommendation that the ministry expedites the plans of restructuring NEC and the Engineering Brigade, and rationalises the use of resources to avoid continued duplication of roles. There is also need for the harmonisation of the budget for NEC and the Engineering Brigade.

Ministry of Defence should also increase the productivity of UPDF in strategic sectors using NEC, since this was the cardinal objective for its establishment.

Construction of barracks in the UPDF/Rationalisation of resource use

The committee subsequently recommends that savings made as a result of reduced combat operations be utilised to improve the well-being of combatants, and build army barracks, which are currently in a sorry state.

In addition, Government should increase substantially, the development budget to take care of the infrastructure needs of the Army.

The committee further recommends that MoD rationalises resource use by considering efficiency measures like purchase of hydro foam machines, which are cheap. Providing these to army units will enable them make their own bricks for construction of houses.  

UPDF operations in Somalia

The committee was informed that the African Union does not contribute to the Ministry of Defence Budget, but that it channels the allowances and maintenance funds for the cost of the Force in Somalia through it. 

The committee was further informed that the participation of AMISOM is budget neutral - the funding is provided by the African Union. 

The committee observed that despite the commitment by other African countries to send troops to Somalia, apart from Uganda and Burundi, none has done so. This implies that UPDF presence in Somalia is generally minimal, which places Ugandan troops in Somalia at high risk of vulnerability to attacks from insurgents.

On the side of Somalia, although the Federal Government and Parliament were further broad-based, the extremists of the Islamic Courts Union have stepped up attacks against the Government and African Union Peace Keeping Forces. 

Following the withdrawal of the Ethiopian National Defence Forces, Uganda increased its contingent by one battalion. The Republic of Burundi will also soon deploy an additional battalion. This will bring the total forces to about 5,000 troops. However, this will still be short of the 8,000 troops that the African Union intended to deploy. 

Other African countries that had pledged troops are yet to bring them into Mogadishu. In the meantime, both Burundi and Uganda contingents give sustained protection of the TFG and its institutions.

The committee notes that the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) adopted Resolution 1863 on 16 January 2009, in which it expressed its intent to transform AMISOM into a United Nations Peace Keeping Operation in Somalia. This intention is yet to be realised. In the meantime, the UNSC took concrete steps to assist AMISOM by approving in-kind, assistance to AMISOM, through:

    i.  the transfer of assets, following liquidation of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE);  

    ii. a United Nations logistical support package to AMISOM including equipment and services amounting to about US$ 72 million;

    iii. establishment of the Trust Fund to provide the financial support to AMISOM until a United Nations peace keeping operation is deployed to assist in the establishment of training and retention of all-inclusive Somali security forces. 

The European Union has also stepped up support to AMISOM and TFG. In regard to the work of building African standby force, commendable progress is being made. This fiscal year a command based exercise was performed in Nairobi by EASIBRIG. At the East African Community level, field based exercises will take place in the fiscal year 2009/2010.

The UPDF operations in the Democratic Republic of Congo 

Since 16 March 2009, the overall command of the operation shifted from UPDF to the DRC military, FARDC while the UPDF is mainly managing intelligence. Accordingly, although the main force of the UPDF withdrew on 15 March 2009, intelligence squads remained behind to continue participating in the operations.

Operations against the LRA have made significant achievements. By the middle of June 2009, the following achievements among others had been made:

    • Five camps destroyed
    • 298 abductees rescued
    • 29 LRA fighters taken captive
    • 179 LRA fighters put out of action
    • 143 rifles recovered.

Another battalion has been added and the UN has availed more funds to the support of this mission in Somalia.

The committee was informed that the role of the UPDF in Somalia is to guard the airport, escort the VIPs, protect the presidency and guard the major military installations in the country.

The committee recommends that the mandate of the Somali operations be reviewed in view of the current situation to safeguard our soldiers from the wrath of the insurgents.

Government should seek the indulgence of the AU in encouraging other countries to honor their promises of sending peacekeepers in Somalia.

The Government of Uganda should also work hand in hand with bodies like the AU, UN and other countries to build capacity and enhance the skills of Somalia forces so that they can gradually take charge of their own affairs. More facilitation is needed to boost the operations in Somalia.

Disarmament in Karamoja

The committee was informed that the disarmament process is going on well with most parts of Karamoja including the road networks secured. The security of the neighbouring districts has greatly improved and there are no more incursions. However, there are some pockets of insecurity which is still persisting within Karamoja.

The government should ensure adequate protection of the Karimojong now that they are disarmed and therefore vulnerable to attacks from some other remaining armed warriors.

The committee recommends that a regional disarmament exercise be carried out in consultation with the neighbouring countries to avoid cross border incursions.

The government should also increase the presence of other JLOS institutions like Police to carry out the civic engagements in the populations so that they can improve their livelihoods.

Payment of the Auxiliary Forces

Government has paid out Shs 17,104,760,480 to 40,205 auxiliary forces. The committee observed that whereas the attempts are being made to clear all demobilised auxiliary forces in Acholi sub-regions where LDUs were retained, there were some complaints of non-payment. The committee appreciates efforts taken to pay all arrears.

However, in view of the security threats imposed by the demobilised soldiers, the committee recommends that the local authorities together with area members of parliament work with the military to clear any outstanding obligations.

The committee also notes the need to assist some of the ex-combatants who were part of the military forces and lost their limbs during combat. Such ex-combatants, the committee recommends, should be facilitated to get artificial limbs.

Observations

The status of hon. Jeje Odongo

Madam Speaker, you recall your letter to his Excellency the President over the appointment of Gen. Jeje Odong as a Minister of State for Defence in which you deferred his approval until an opinion of the Attorney-General is sought. To date, the committee remains unaware of the outcome. As such the committee is constrained in appropriating resources for a minister who is not yet sworn in as an ex-officio Member of Parliament. We, therefore, recommend that his status be cleared as soon as possible.

Concerns about Promotions in the UPDF

In addition, there were concerns about the structures and promotions within the Army. For security reasons, a sub-committee has been established to look into this matter.

Ministry of Internal Affairs

The committee met the ministers of Internal Affairs with their teams, which included officials from the following institutions:

    • Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters
    • Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force
    • Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Authority

The Overview of Budget Performance

The total sector budget approved for the Financial Year 2008/2009 amounted to Shs 13.158 billion –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Chairperson, you can skip that and go to page 18. The Members will read. 

MR ABURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 17 are the budget allocations for Vote 009 - Ministry Headquarters at Shs 13.158 billion, Vote 044 - Uganda Police at Shs 133.714 billion and Vote 045 - Prisons at Shs 44.282 billion. For the Financial Year 2009/2010 Shs 16.977 is allocated for the Ministry Headquarters; Shs 191.865 billion is for Uganda Police and Shs 48.423 billion for Prisons. The increase for the Ministry Headquarters was Shs 3.819 billion which is at 22 percent – 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry I had already stood up but the chairperson of the committee is really not guiding this House. Since you are summarising, you can tell us the page number and we move with you. You should really guide us on this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, please start with the observations. Read the sub-title and the recommendations.   

MR ABURA: Madam Speaker, I know there is a difference in the page numbering because others are saying page 18 and others are saying page 17. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You start with the observations and recommendations on Ministry of Internal Affairs and that is 6.0. 

MR ABURA: Thank you very much.  

	Observations and Recommendations: Ministry of Internal Affairs Headquarters

Domestic Arrears

The committee noted with concern the huge backlog of domestic arrears accumulated by the sector over the years despite the fact that government is currently implementing the Commitment Control System. It was reported that the total domestic arrears for the entire sector stand at over Shs 56 billion, of which Shs 41 billion is for the Police, Shs 13.994 billion for Prisons and the rest is for the ministry headquarters. Some of these arrears date as far back as 1999 which has led many suppliers to run out of business.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should ensure the clearance of these arrears so that those who provided government with goods and services are not suffocated out of business.

National Identity Cards Project

In the last financial year, Parliament recommended harmonisation of the roadmap for the National ID project. This was to bring on board other stakeholders including the Electoral Commission, UBOS and the ICT Ministry. The committee was further informed that His Excellency the President directed that the Ministry of Internal Affairs works with the Electoral Commission such that during the process of voter registration, the Electoral Commission captures all the data about the people it will register such that after the elections, the Ministry of Internal Affairs can start from where the Electoral Commission will have stopped. 

Currently, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is coordinating with different stakeholders to develop a framework of working with the Electoral Commission.

The committee observed that because government has been lacking identity cards, this has led to the influx of many foreigners disguised as Ugandans. The committee believes that having national IDs is of paramount importance and should be given first priority.

The committee recommends that the process of harmonisation should be fast tracked to enable Ugandans acquire identity cards.

Work permits

The committee noted with concern the high influx of foreigners who are provided with work permits hence out-competing Ugandans even for jobs that do not require unique expertise. The committee was further informed that the ministry coordinates with the Uganda Investment Authority to issue work permits. 

The committee was informed that the ministry carries out regular inspections and several foreigners have been arrested when found to be carrying out illegal activities. The ministry further informed the committee that a Migration Liaison Officer sits at UIA to handle permits. The committee was informed that UIA licenses potential investors and specifies the number and categories of expatriates required. 

    i) The committee recommends that stringent measures should be established in providing work permits so that foreigners without expert knowledge are not availed work permits in order to save jobs for the nationals.

    ii) Work permits already issued to aliens who do not meet set qualification standards should be revoked at renewal stage.

Non-Governmental Organisations

The NGO board secretariat developed draft policy guidelines which are currently before Cabinet, registered 350 NGOs, renewed 900 permits and carried out monitoring visits to enhance NGO compliance to government policies and programmes. Two NGOs were de-registered. 

The committee observed that despite the ministry’s renewal of 900 permits for NGOs, some quack NGOs still persist in the country exploiting Ugandans and doing other illegal activities. 

The committee recommended that the ministry should intensify the monitoring and inspection of NGOs and serious close scrutiny should be carried out before these NGOs are registered. Furthermore, punitive measures should be taken on NGOs which are found to be violating the mandate for which they will have been registered. 

Amnesty Commission/Settlement of Reporters

The committee was informed that the Amnesty Commission enabled reporters in the West Nile to set up 108 projects, supported 100 ex-child combatants from the LRA to access formal education and sent 22 reporters, formerly child mothers, to Community Based Organisations in Gulu for Vocational skills training

The committee observed that although the amnesty compensation has been granted to various reporters, the victims of these reporters have never been assisted. Some of the victims lost legs and limbs and cannot do anything productive for themselves.

The committee recommends that the activities of the Amnesty Commission should include the victims.

Construction of DCIC Building

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is planning to construct a new building to house the Directorate of Citizenship, Immigration and Control (DCIC). The project is a result of a bilateral understanding between the Government of the United Kingdom, Northern Ireland and the Government of Uganda. A Memorandum of Understanding was signed on the 2 June 2009. The British Government committed US $1 million towards the project. Under the MoU, the ministry shall provide additional funds for completion of the project.

The committee strongly supports the project and recommends that the counterpart funds from Government of Uganda should be availed in time so that the project does not stall as currently the DCIC is housed in dilapidated structures.

Uganda Prisons Service

Budget performance for Financial Year 2008/209 and budget resources for the Financial Year 2009/2010: Uganda Prisons is projected to receive Shs 48.423 billion this financial year compared to Shs 44.282 in the last financial year. This amounts to an increase of 9 percent or Shs 4.41 billion over and above the Financial Year 2008/2009. 

The committee was informed that the additional resources will cater for the following:  

Purchase of prisoners’ food, prisons staff duty free shop mainly for construction materials and enhancement of prison warders’ salaries. The achievements of Vote 144 during the Financial Year 2008/09 include looking after the daily average of 43,240 prisoners in 222 prisons spread country wide and reduced escape rate from 15 to 10 per 1,000 held offenders; continued with the integration process of Local Administration Prisons (LAP) into the central system particularly by training 1,082 staff in rights awareness; and renovated/constructed various prisons including Gulu in which congestion was reduced by 50 percent, while renovations are undergoing in Moroto and Luzira women prisons. Renovation of Kitalya prisons has started.

Observations and Recommendations

Relocation of Kigo Prisons and arrears owed to Buganda Kingdom; Uganda Prisons owes Shs 8.4 billion to Buganda Kingdom as part of the rent in arrears. The committee was informed that the kingdom is threatening to take Uganda Prisons to court for continuing to default in paying rent. This is not only and embarrassing situation -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I think you should help us by reading the title when you reach a point like this: “Relocation of Kigo Prisons and arrears owed to Buganda Kingdom”, and you go straight to the recommendations. Please, read the subheading and then the recommendations. For the narrative, Members will read. 

MR ABURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee recommends that a process of acquiring land in Wakiso should be expeditiously handled to relieve prisons from accumulating more debts accruing from the rent arrears.

The committee also recommends that the Ministry of Finance should avail the resources to offset the debt owed to Buganda Kingdom as soon as possible.

Costs of keeping prisoners in jail: the committee recommends that an alternative justice system should be devised to avoid congestion in the prisons. The prison authorities should endeavor to separate hardcore criminals from petty offenders. A timeframe for the committal of offenders should be set at not more than one year in order to prevent delaying justice and prison congestion.

Prisons Land: the committee recommends that a proper inventory be carried out to determine the total acreage of the land and the land should be surveyed and titled.

Integration of local administration of prisons; the committee noted with concern the challenges faced by the prisons as a result of integration of LAPs. The committee was informed that the integration of 174 LAPs has been done in a phased approach as follows:

The first step was passing the law; Uganda Prisons Service (UPS) conducted a verification exercise for all the staff assets and liabilities.

The second step was integration of the payroll of LAP staff with central payroll including payroll clean up and management.

The third step was to draw a merger and management plan for unification of prisons.

The fourth step was the implementation of the merger and management plan for running the unified prison system.

However, surveying the land in some districts such as Bukedea, Serere and other areas has not been easy and most of the local governments are not willing to hand over the land and other assets that belong to the LAPs.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should harmonise this position with the Ministry of Local Government to ensure a smooth integration process. All the assets of LAPs should be ascertained and the matters harmonised to a logical conclusion.

Transport for prisoners: the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance allocates more resources to the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS). Sector Wide Approach (SWAP) should be introduced to aid the transportation of the prisoners since it is uneconomical to keep prisoners without taking them to court yet they have to be fed and congestion has to be mitigated.

The committee further recommends that transport provision should be prioritised in the next budget cycle to ensure that all regions are adequately covered to avoid delayed justice and congestion in prisons. 

Housing and Construction of Accommodation
The committee recommends that the Prisons authorities should explore the possibility of cost saving measures like purchasing hydro foam machines for the units to construct low-cost houses. 

Children in prisons

The committee is concerned about the lives and the health of children in prisons. The committee was informed that the policy of the department is to have all children above the age of 18 months taken out of prisons as per the Prisons Act, 2006, section 59.

The committee was further informed that some stations with female prisoners have zero grazing animals to provide milk to children in the prisons. However, during the field visit, the committee established that some prisons have children above 18 months. Actually, in one of the women prisons in Mbale, children found there had to cry and scamper for their lives at the sight of men. These children perhaps have never seen men in their lives.

On the basis of the above, the committee recommends that special attention and resources be earmarked for children of imprisoned mothers. They are not criminals but victims of circumstances. Their rights should be protected.

Vote 144 - Uganda Police
Budget Performance in the Financial Year 2008/2009 
Table 4 shows the budget resources: recurrent, wages, non-wages, development, total, arrears and taxes.

The committee was informed that the increment of this year’s budget is to cater for the following:

    • Wages and salary enhancement of constables and Special Police Constables
    • Purchase of uniforms
    • Training 
    • Rent for Police headquarters
    • Maintenance 
    • Transport
    • Major renovation of the barracks
    • Completion of CID Wing

Key achievements of Vote 144 budget during the Financial Year 2008/2009:

    i) Increase of the police presence in Northern Uganda -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you can skip those please. Members will read that. Go to the observations and recommendations - they are well laid out.

MR ABURA: Thank you, Madam. 

Observations and Recommendations 

The committee was concerned with the huge domestic arrears accumulated by the Police. See table 5.

The committee was informed that these arrears resulted from inadequate funds released to Police over the previous year.

Unfortunately, the allocation of this Financial Year 2009/2010 is only Shs 13.9 billion which will service arrears for rent, Namboole Stadium, Police posts, water and electricity. This therefore implies that the majority of the supplies for goods and services will remain unpaid.

The committee recommends that government should endeavour to clear all these outstanding arrears as many people especially the small scale suppliers have been forced out of the business because of this non-payment.

Rent for Police Headquarters 

The committee recommends that Uganda Police be allowed to rent for only one more year before shifting to their headquarters, as a cost saving measure. 

Accommodation of Police officers

The committee therefore recommends that UPF rationalises resource use by considering efficiency measures like purchase of hydro foam machines which are cheap. With these, district police stations can make their own bricks for construction of houses.

Private-Public Partnership

The committee recommends that the project should be developed with full participation of Parliament in all stages to avoid controversies that have been experienced in the past with certain big undertakings by government.

In addition, to enable a nation-wide roll-out, the committee recommends the adoption of low cost appropriate technology in housing construction like hydro foam block making machines.

Training and Recruitment

The committee noted with concern the recent trend in the way the Uganda Police has transacted its business especially the newly recruited constables and the absorbed LDUs. There has been public outcry over the unprofessional behaviour of some police officers which requires immediate attention in form of training and re-training. 

There is also concern about the manner of Police recruitment and training especially now that the Police structure has been comprehensively changed and expanded, by among others, the creation of the Professional Standards Unit.

The committee recommends that regular training and in-service training be carried out so that the Uganda Police regains its lost glory.

Handling of Security Firearms/Guns

The committee recommended that a strong regulatory mechanism be put in place to ensure that only licensed and/or authorised persons move with guns. Otherwise the situation may get out of control.

The UPF should be involved in recruiting, training and monitoring of the recruits of private security companies.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, in view of the above, the committee would like to conclude as follows: 

Land for all the ministries under the committee’s supervision, inter alia, Defence, Police and Prisons should be surveyed, titled and cleared of any encumbrances.

Domestic arrears for the entire sector should be cleared by Government to save the private businesses from collapsing.

We appreciate the achievements in securing the entire country. We do appeal to government to continuously avail more resources towards the improved welfare and accommodation of all the sectors by increasing the allocation for infrastructural development.

We pray that Parliament approves these budgetary figures for the sectors - the votes are under Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs and the institutions attached therein.  

There is also an attachment of the programme where the Police Force has a plan for constructing houses. Thank you. I beg to move

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. I have not seen the text of what you are going to present, so I will give you five minutes each. But please, try to summarise. 

11.41
THE SHADOW MINISTER, DEFENCE AND SECURITY (Mr Charles Angiro Gutomoi): Thank you. Madam Speaker, it is my honour to present the Opposition’s response to the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Defence for the Financial Year 2009/10.

In the process of considering the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates of the Ministry of Defence for FY 2009/10 by the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, you may be aware that for lack of proper information, ministry officials were sent back twice. 

As evidence of lack of cooperation, a sub-committee of the committee was formed through consultation with the Office of the Speaker. This was as a result of lack of confidence in some committee members by the ministry officials. This caused some of us to think that the ministry’s operations are wanting. More so, we deserve an apology from the CDF of the UPDF because he told us that they will resist our attempts to get the information that the committee was demanding for. This was intimidation to the committee and it caused two Members, hon. Hussein Kyanjo and I, to walk out of the third committee meeting until an apology is made to us by the CDF. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, we have not got copies. Naturally, we should get copies. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are the copies?  

MR ANGIRO: Copies were produced and they are being distributed -(Interjection)- let us bear with the situation now because they have gone for more copies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we use the same rules for both sides of the House. Where are the copies for the members?

MR ANGIRO: Madam Speaker, I sent the report to the printery and told them to produce 333 copies.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, some of us have not received the committee’s report. I have been asking for the committee report and I have not got one, but as usual we decided to listen. As always when the majority have reports, we just listen but when it came to the issue of the report of the shadow minister, the majority had reports but you ruled that everybody should have the report before we proceed. So, can we who also do not have the committee report be provided with it before we proceed? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, you were not here at 10.00 a.m. when the reports were distributed. Those members who were here are not complaining.

MR ANGIRO: I beg to proceed. I said that this was intimidation to the committee and it resulted in two Members, hon. Hussein Kyanjo and I, walking out of the third committee meeting. 

The people of Uganda should be taken more sensitively than the Ministry of Defence does. This was unfortunate but we still demand to know the status of the imbalances in the Ministry of Defence and the UPDF. 

I feel more embarrassed because some issues, which are pertinent as stated below, may not be taken seriously by Ministry of Defence officials yet policy issues are always subjected to checks and balances by the committees.

This has resulted into two reports. In the first report, which Hon. Latif Sebaggala was demanding - I beg your indulgence so that I read that part, which is in the first report, page 2, No. 2.1, under key policy issues.

Before I present the report to you, as a committee we have two major challenges that require your attention –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I do not have the intention of interrupting my colleague but the document that he is reading was disowned at the beginning of this session. I urge him to read his report. If he wants, he can make an addendum but taking us to the purported original report is not procedurally right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is the Shadow Minister for Defence.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I intend to lay this on the Table.

You recall your letter to His Excellency the President over the appointment of Gen. Jeje Odongo as Minister of State for Defence in which you deferred his approval until an opinion of the Attorney-General is sought. To date, the committee remains unaware of that outcome. As such, the committee is constrained in appropriating resources for a minister who is not yet sworn in as an ex-officio Member of Parliament. We, therefore, recommend that his status be cleared as soon as possible.

Second is the issue related to the Defence Policy Review: the review, the basis of which the Ministry of Defence draws plans for implementation and therefore budgets, has not been discussed and approved by Parliament. The committee, therefore, proposes that it is debated and approved by Parliament. These were the pertinent issues that were raised -(Honourable members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is the Shadow Minister of Defence; let him make his statement. What is it?

MS NAMAYANJA: I am concerned about what the honourable shadow minister referred to as the Defence Policy Review document. I want to find out because as far as I know, there is no document referred to as the Defence Policy Review. Maybe he can clarify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe that is how he understands it. Proceed.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my report number two, the appointment of Gen. Jeje Odongo as Minister of State for Defence made the committee constrained in appropriating resources for the minister who is not yet sworn in as an ex-officio Member of Parliament. Does the appointing authority know that the act is illegal or is Jeje Odongo not subject to approval?

The Opposition, therefore, recommends that his status be cleared before approving the ministry’s budget for FY 2009/2010.

The Defence Policy Review 
This has not been discussed and approved by Parliament and yet it is on this basis that Ministry of Defence draws plans for implementing its budgets to run the ministry. 

The Opposition views that as lack of seriousness and suggests that it be debated and approved by Parliament first and foremost. How long will it take to process and present it?

Employees of the Ministry of Defence 

Statistics show that there should be about 140 appointed officers and support staff but only about 114 vacancies have been filled leaving 26 vacant positions. It was unfortunate that during the committee meetings, 13 out of 15 officials were from Western Uganda. Analysis shows that the ministry’s staff distribution is as follows: Western 41, Central 32, Eastern 36 and Northern Uganda 5. These were mainly employed after the liberation war. 

The Opposition is concerned about the fate of those who were employed before the end of the 1986 NRA war. This imbalance portrays a bad image for national unity and equity hence dictatorship. What measures are being put in place to address it? 

Imbalances in Recruitment, Training, Deployment, Promotion, Retirement and Payment of Pensions  

Before and after the NRA liberation war, do we know how many soldiers were/are there and their recruitment, training, promotion, deployment and retirement benefits? How many Generals are in Uganda now? Is Kony also a General? 

Through the theatre of war in Northern Uganda, many officers have acquired different ranks and if the war continues, 50 percent of the soldiers in Uganda will likely become Generals. It is also true that some young officers are getting promotions faster than their qualified senior officers. Who are the members of the promotions board? The Opposition would like to know this. 

The Opposition would also like to suggest that the imbalance in the Army be addressed through proper and special recruitment, training, promotion and deployment, a position which is resisted. The Opposition views this as lack of seriousness and suggests that this should be debated and approved by Parliament first and foremost. 

Widows and Orphans 

How many widows and orphans do we have as a result of some soldiers having fallen during the combat machines, due to illnesses like HIV/AIDS and in the changes of governments in Uganda by the gun? Are they benefiting from the SACCOs and pensions? What is happening regarding the alleged army fraud highlighted by the Sunday Monitor newspaper of March 20th 2009? The headline read: “Top Officers Stealing from Dead Soldiers”. Out of the Shs 53 billion, about Shs 10 billion was paid out by the army paymasters but 95 percent of the widows and orphans and retired soldiers got air.

The matter was raised by Brig. Charles Angina, Chief of Staff, Land Forces but his investigations have reached a dead end because they tried to make the issue a public concern. All the widows, orphans and retired soldiers who served in the army under all the different regimes should be our national concern and they are important. 

The Opposition recommends that the issue be re-investigated by the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, or a select committee of Parliament. It may mean that the paymasters were instructed to act as such.

All the widows, orphans and retired soldiers should be given equal treatment in their pay this Financial Year 2009/10. It should cover both the past and the current administrations.

What is the fate of the Second World War Veterans? This should not wait until the 2011 elections are near then we think of them because of votes.

Supplementary Budget Requests

The ministry’s budget for FY 2008/09 was beyond by –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really did not want to disrupt my colleague but I am rising on a point of procedure. The honourable shadow minister stated on the first page that he walked out of the committee meetings, meaning that he lacked the opportunity to ask the basic questions. My understanding of the response from the shadow minister would be to interrogate the policy and give approved policy measures from the Opposition. However, what we are getting are the basic questions which should have been asked in the committee and answers provided. 

Is it procedurally right for the member to take most of our time asking just basic questions, which could have been answered in the committee, instead of giving policy measures that the Opposition wants to present to Ugandans, so that we compare the government policies and the Opposition policies? He is just raising basic questions which the committee should have handled. Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, part of the problem is with our Rules Committee. One year ago I instructed them to help us rationalise how we can use the time in this House and rationalise the role of the Members of the Opposition who are part of the committee. I have not heard this, and this is one year ago. So now I do not know what to do. I wrote to them in August last year. Now we are obliged to sit here and hear presentations of two hours, responses from the Opposition of one hour, and the balance of the time is shared by all the members. Let us proceed. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Supplementary Budget Request 

The Opposition suggests that this must stop so that the issue of a productive army is addressed. There are plans already for more supplementary budgets, which should not be accepted, as the 2011 countdown draws near. 

Uganda cannot be attacked by any of our neighbours at all for many good reasons. 

Domestic Arrears

When you go through our national budget, domestic arrears have crippled the country and the total is not known. Can the Minister of Defence come out with the final list, from the biggest to the smallest, for the final assault? There are some who do not need courts and retiring them should be done by the Ministry of Defence to avoid court costs. 

The Opposition suggests that the domestic arrears be properly verified and addressed because they may be suspiciously claimed and not verified by the proper authorities. 

Land Issues 

The issues of Kiseka, Kitante and barracks lands, lack of land titles and proper handling of most of the lands gives the impression that seriousness in the Ministry of Defence is wanting. Where have the funds of the sold lands gone? 

The Opposition suggests that Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Lands address this issue before 2011 because encroachers are causing conflicts and misunderstandings. In most cases, influence peddling by some army officers has been reported in the claims. Why should the ministry sale the land anyway?

NEC Industries 

These comprise of three subsidiary companies and four joint venture companies. Some of them are not known and the Ministry of Defence cannot manage them due to many factors. Since they are not profit motivated companies, their management has become difficult. 

The Opposition, therefore, suggests that new management be put in place or the industries be transferred to the private sector to manage them and the proceeds be used to rehabilitate/build barracks. 

Operations of UPDF outside Uganda

This is a welcome venture, but in the case of Somalia we are not certain when the operations will end. Other African countries have failed to send troops to Somalia, except Uganda and Burundi, and African Union has not been contributing to the Ministry of Defence budget. 

The Opposition, therefore, suggests that the African Union addresses the Somalia problem by all countries contributing to bring peace to Somalia. A timeframe should be given for serious business, and effective commitment should be made by the countries concerned. 

The allowances for our soldiers should also be increased. 

Karamoja Disarmament

This has been partly successful, but how long the exercise should take remains a big challenge. 

The Opposition, therefore, suggests that the operation should end before the 2011 general election to leave Karamoja sub-region free for the electoral processes to be carried out in a free and fair manner. The Karimojong themselves should be recruited and trained to run and man the exercise actively and efficiently. They should be involved in the planning and implementation processes. 

We also note that they should be able to prioritise their development plans and programmes.

Payment of Auxiliary Forces

Yes, this exercise was carried out, but we observe that it needs redress, which should involve all the stakeholders at all levels. 

The Opposition, therefore, suggests that the number of the auxiliary forces be compiled per region, county and sub-county and those who were paid and unpaid be verified and the latter paid.

We further suggest that Auxiliary Forces should be allowed to form groups per sub-county for further assistance in things like agriculture, business, technical and vocation training opportunities aimed at improving their household incomes and livelihoods.

Army Involvement in the Electoral Process

It is our considered opinion that this matter be addressed with the seriousness it deserves, to avoid misunderstandings come 2011 general elections.

The Opposition suggests that the Army should not be involved in the electoral process but that they can vote from where they have been registered, which the Electoral Commission has abused already. 

Movement of the armed forces to some constituencies should be avoided by 2011. 

Imaginary rebel/bandit groups should not be planned. Opposition members should not be called terrorists.

Security Situation

The votes for this sector have been increasing to the enjoyment of the implementers but at the expense of the poor citizens of this country.

The main functions of the budget have been for the coordination of the security sector - internal and external security organisations - which have utilised the votes, and in crosscutting sectors like gender and equity, HIV/AIDS and environment. The arrears have been big in both internal and external security operations. 

The sector has shown more releases made outside the approved budget without proper explanations. Non-tax revenue has not been shown under vote 159, External Security Organisation. 

While the budgets should have been utilised for the benefit of the citizens out there, the safe house owners are still the main beneficiaries. They are the order of the day and are being used for torturing members of the Opposition. We notice that phone tapping is causing ill feelings among the users and adding no value. The operations of Mr Kakooza Mutale remain wanting and the cause of great fear and shame come 2010 general elections.

Our position is that the operations of the security organisations have resulted into serious human rights abuses and they should be addressed because peace is not just given but it is a God-given right for the people of Uganda. Many people have been killed, injured and forced to change their political affiliations and alliances against their will. This should stop for the sake of peace for all.

We recommend that the imbalance in recruitment, training, deployment and promotion in the security ministry and its organisations should be addressed by special balancing attention, because it has a picture of a family operation and not of a national character. When shall we get rid of the word “dictatorship” from our vocabulary?

Conclusion 

The ministry has got enough funds for development purposes if management and implementation of the planned budgets would comply with the planned targets. The imbalances in recruitment, training, deployment, promotion, retirement and payment of pensions should be addressed appropriately. That is when the professionalisation plan of the army would get the blessing of the people of Uganda.

The committees’ roles should be respected when exercising their responsibilities with a view to improving service delivery. Our motto should be “security and freedom for all but not a few.”

In summary, in Lango we have a saying that what kills a he-dog blocks his nose. The “what” is corruption and the he-dog is the government. The whole world is watching, with the Opposition at a corner. For God and my country! Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs, but for only five minutes.

12.09
THE SHADOW MINISTER, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Hussein Kyanjo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. From the start I will beg for your indulgence to just add me two more minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it should be only five.

MR KYANJO: Thank you. I would like to thank my colleagues who have already spoken to this report. However, I kindly request the Government Chief Whip that it is not a bad idea to liaise with the officers from your side who usually prepare these reports a day before they are presented on the Floor for ease of communication. I just request you to do it next time.

I deliberately decided not to write a specific report because I largely associate with the issues in the Ministry of Internal Affairs that are part of this report. However, there are four components over which we have differences on policy.

Before I continue, allow me make a correction on page 10 of the report –(Interruption)

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance on procedure. There is a standing practice in the House that as much as possible, members of the respective committees should not contribute to their reports. I do not know whether we are now deviating from that practice or there are special issues that hon. Kyanjo is raising. I am only seeking guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you should be the last the person to ask me that question. (Laughter) You were the chairperson of the Rules Committee but when I instructed you to give us guidance on whether we should amend the rules so as to rationalise the existence of the members of the Opposition and what their roles would be, you did not do that.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, much as I am overwhelmed by joy over your ruling, I would like to add that I congratulate my colleague for having been appointed a minister.

I refer to page 10 of the report, which talks about the extremism of the Islamic Courts Union. It is not true that these guys have stepped up attacks against the government. This would send a wrong image to this House. The correct position is that those who are battling with the government and AU Forces in Somalia are the Al Shabaab. To prove that it is not the Islamic Courts Union, the President of Somalia today, Sheik Sharif, was the head of the Islamic Courts Union and what I can tell you is that they reached an agreement. So, I do not know whether this was an error or it was because they were rushing to have a new report. Anyway, that should be corrected. 

Let me make a simple comment on some issues that appear on page 14. My comment will be on the issue of imbalances in the army. The House will recall that last year it was I who stood up and said that we had agreed with the Ministry of Defence on how we were going to resolve this matter in camera. However, I would like to report that when we went to do it that way, it still became very impossible for us to resolve it; the ministry could not divulge this information.

Our findings as the Opposition are to the effect that probably this information is not available, although there are no reasons to support its unavailability. I would like to warn Ugandans to be careful. This system is being designed systematically and the results will affect everybody. They told us that for security reasons, they could not divulge this information, but what is so special about knowing that out of the 10 UPDF officers who are Members of Parliament, seven are from one region? What is there to hide? What we need is only an explanation.

Let me now go to internal affairs as reported on page 19, and I will start with identity cards. Our position is different from the recommendations from the government side. The idea of co-ordinating efforts among interested government departments is excellent. However, the view that the Electoral Commission should be given the funds for that is erroneous. 

First, the Electoral Commission is not the primary user of national data; it is the Ministry of Internal affairs. The Electoral Commission is only interested in people who are interested in registering as voters. This is not mandatory, and component two is that all interested persons must be of age 18 and above. If the Electoral Commission is only interested in those components, it would be wrong to put all efforts in respect of this exercise to the Electoral Commission. Our recommendation is that this arrangement of national identity cards should primarily be resident at the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

On page 21, the report talks about the Amnesty Commission. Until now, the proper explanation for the Amnesty Commission has not been convincing either to the committee or the nation. This is because the activities of CMI have continued to encumber the decisions of the Amnesty Commission –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, time is up. You had no prepared text so you got only five minutes like any other member.

12.16
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you very much –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we started he wanted to raise some issues but I asked him to wait and raise them if they do not appear in the report.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your usual wise ruling. I would like to say that my issues are quite different from what the Shadow Minister for Defence has raised, although some of them are similar. Mine is on the committee report.

In my considered opinion as a member of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, the report that has been read by the vice-chairperson of the committee, whom I respect a lot, is a doctored one; it is not the original report. I have the original report that was given to us a week ago. If you read these two reports, you will realise that there are so many recommendations that were deleted, even the wording totally differs.

Madam Speaker, I would request that you institute a commission of inquiry into these two reports. Who doctored this report? I suspect that there was some interference, and that is why I am calling upon your office to investigate to establish where the new report came from and why it differs from the original one. 

I believe even the vice-chairperson has not been organised as usual because he just received the report. There are so many so things that we did not agree upon regarding the presentation in the new report.

Madam Speaker, as said before, I request your office to institute a commission of inquiry because I think there must have been some interference somewhere in regard to this report. On that basis, I would like to state that I disown the report that has been presented to the members.

MR ABURA: Madam Speaker, I stood up on a point of order. The honourable member is a regular attendant of the committee, but on reaching here he denies his own input by saying that this is a new report! This report was distributed here and all over us got copies, including him. (Laughter) So, is it in order for the honourable member of the committee to say that I was not able to be consistent in figures, that is if it is a matter relating to figures because I believe the language was okay?  Is he in order to deny his own input in the committee as a fulltime participant? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going around in circles. Can I ask Hon. Peter Nyombi, the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules to resolve this issue? This is the instruction I gave last year because of this kind of thing. Members of the committee attend and they do not sign, and they change positions, while shadow ministers who are also on the committee come here with their statements. This is what I wanted you to resolve a year ago. Can you please help me and solve this by giving us an amendment to the Rules?

12.20
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Peter Nyombi): Madam Speaker, since I became the chairperson of the committee a few months ago, we have come out with a programme for completing the outstanding business and this is one of the issues we are going to handle as soon as we are through with the budget. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, this totally differs from my point. I have stood as a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs who has the original report. This is not the report that we agreed upon. The issue is not about debating it or being a member of the committee; the issue is about producing different reports. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is also the issue of reports which are not signed. You attend meetings but do not sign the report. This is what I am asking hon. Nyombi to help me resolve. Are you a member or are you not a member of the committee? Do you attend meetings? Which meetings do you attend and which don’t you attend?

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, this is why I am raising this concern. I attended the meetings and this is the report, and I would like to lay it on Table. The report which has been presented is not the original report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But did you sign the report? 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I did not sign this new report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the old one?

MR SEBAGGALA: The old one was presented to us to go and read as members so that we could come back and agree, and we have just seen this new report today in the morning. It has been doctored, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will not get involved with your internal workings as a committee, but I will inquire because I do not see your drafts and if I do not see your signature, then you did not sign the report. 

MR ATUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point raised by Hon. Latif Sebaggala is not only interesting but a little bit ridiculous, and very unparliamentary. What we have before us is a report that has just been duly presented by the chairperson of the committee. It has been read to the House and it has been responded to by the Shadow Minister of Defence. The Shadow Minister, who is of very high calibre, higher than that of Latif Sebagala –(Laughter)- never did at any one point dispute this report. The Shadow Minister who is extremely respected in this House never raised any issue on this report. We are here to legislate on behalf of the people of Uganda and if an issue of that type is raised, I would like that as you dismiss it, do so with the seriousness and contempt it deserves because it is taking us back yet we are dealing with very serious ministries; the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Internal Affairs - ministries that make my hon. Member of Parliament very happy and safe in this country. Thank you very much. 

12.24
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD, Central Region): Madam Speaker, I wanted to raise a point of both order and procedure, but I thought I should avoid being rude. There are two issues to address. One, how does a report of a committee become authentic? I will answer it. By being signed or having an attachment indicating that there was a quorum when this report was being considered. If you look at the attachment, it is quite clear that there was quorum in this committee when the report was adopted. 

Secondly, who in this Parliament or who on behalf of the committee has the power to tell this House that we have an authentic report or a fake report? It is either the chairperson or the deputy chairperson of a committee. No other member of the committee can stand here and say “this is not the right report.” Therefore, whoever stands here and says, “this is not the correct report of the committee” is not in order. 

12.26
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity and I thank the committee for this report. I have three points to address myself to.

On page 5 the committee talked about enhancing productivity of the UPDF. Today, UPDF is a very modern Force in Uganda, but being a large Force that protects the people and the properties of Ugandans, it has not got enough land to be productive in the country. Since the end of the LRA war, UPDF should have been given large areas of land for production. At the moment, there are a lot of desertions in the UPDF –(Interruption) 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, it seems the hon. Member is debating and yet my issue has not been cleared. I request for your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Latif Sebaggala, I am proceeding with the debate. I told you that I would investigate your matter, but I am proceeding with the debate. 

MR PIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I speak about the productivity in the UPDF because once a large Force like the UPDF is not engaged in productivity, there will be a lot of desertions and the private security service providers will take advantage of these expensively trained UPDF officers and employ them in the private sector, yet the taxpayers have paid a lot of money to train these gallant soldiers. Therefore, it is very important for the government to acquire productive farming land to engage our soldiers who are not actively engaged in war activities, in production. 

My other point is on page 10, about the operations in Somalia. I commend the work being done by the UPDF in Somalia, despite all the challenges they are facing there. This is totally the Pan African spirit. We should really commend UPDF activities in Somalia.

However, while UPDF serve other sister countries which have internal problems, I think, first of all, as mandated by the Constitution, UPDF should really strive to protect the lives, property and the territorial integrity of our country Uganda. I am saying this because I read yesterday and I have read today in the newspapers that the Madi sub-region of Moyo District has been invaded by SPLA soldiers from Southern Sudan, and they have driven away innocent humble civilians from their gardens.

And although I heard over the radio that UPDF have reacted, we have always complained here that the borders along Sudan and Congo are porous. They have not been sealed off by UPDF. I think the ministry, particularly, the army, should take it very seriously to protect the people of these countries other than leaving the borders porous and having the local people suffer at the hands of armies from other neighbouring countries.

My third point is on domestic arrears. I really commend the work of the committee. On page 4, they say that this tradition of accumulating a lot of domestic arrears is not good. It has been a tradition in UPDF and even previously for the Uganda Army, it would take ten years before they paid suppliers. For the people in the private sector, who are also the suppliers and service providers, it is not good because you weaken the capital of the person you trade with.

I would like, on that point also, to comment on the gratuity arrears which have been around for a long time - (Member timed out_)

12.31
MR IDDI LUBYAYI KISIKI (NRM, Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for delivering this wonderful report. I am happy about the discipline that is prevailing among the soldiers of UPDF. 

However, there is a problem of one soldier who I do not actually think is still an army officer of UPDF. The soldier is called Nuwe Kyepaka. This Maj. Nuwe Kyepaka is a wealthy man with many farms in Masaka District. The workers on his farms are armed and they terrorise the peasants during the day and at night. The herdsmen hold guns on their shoulders and terrorise and torture peasants. This problem was reported to the RDC in Masaka District in 2008. I also communicated to the Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Armed Forces, the President, and gave copies to the Ministry of Defence and to the colleagues here in Parliament, but nothing has been done about the situation.

Madam Speaker, I am really worried. The District Defence Committee of Masaka has already done its work and this man has been summoned several times to attend this committee in order to find a remedy for this situation, but to no avail. I am wondering if this Maj. Nuwe Kyepake is still an active army officer in the UPDF. 

I have got no response from the Minister of Defence up to now even though I communicated to him -(Interjections)- I have no response and the RDC has no response whatsoever. I do not know what we should do about this situation. Rains are approaching, but 1,720 peasants are scared of planting crops because the cattle are just feeding on the crops. I do not know whether this situation can be handled or whether I can get any response from the Defence Minister right now.

I pray something be done to this army officer to save the situation. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members I have been trying to rationalise those who contributed yesterday in the morning, then I see those who did not contribute in the afternoon. I will come to you, but let me start with those who have not yet - like hon. Mugyenyi and hon. Angufiru have not spoken - 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, when you think of somebody who comes out of nowhere to come and present himself and then go away, I think it is proper and fitting that Members who come to the House are given chance to talk and those visitors are not given a chance. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, who are the visitors? 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, it is important, proper and fitting that we give this House the honour it deserves. You are supposed to be here and attend these budget debates. But my colleagues and even ministers have made it a habit to just come in the House, present and run away. All of them should be here to listen to each other so that we are able to have a good Budget. 

Some Members have just appeared now. Yesterday, someone asked who the new Member was because he had never seen that Member of Parliament. So, let us be serious. Let us come here in Parliament and those who attend regularly, like me, should be given opportunity to contribute. This gentleman was, for example, talking about non-issues; issues that only concern him in the constituency. We are discussing policy matters and budgetary issues and you bring in personal and constituency matters here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member has been here since Monday. I have been seeing him. Anyway, I have taken note of your concerns. The ones who are not regular will not get the same opportunity as the regular ones. 

12.38
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for a precise report that is clear and addresses many of the areas that would be of concern to Parliament. 

As you are aware, I attend the African Parliament and our forces in Somalia have been commended several times at the continental level for a job well done. (Applause) I also want to take the opportunity to say that the UPDF is living to the expectations of the African continent in terms of giving good service where it is needed. 

I also want to commend the leadership of the UPDF and the Head of State for making a pledge to the continent and honouring it; because as you will remember, there were several African Heads of State who pledged to send forces to Somalia for the cause of liberating Somalia and they never honoured that pledge. We know our forces are overstretched, but we also know that the cause of liberating the continent is part of our responsibility. So, I commend you.

However, I have one concern. When our forces go outside and by some bad fortune one of them falls, as expected, there is a lot of ceremony that I see around a soldier who has fallen while in service abroad. I think we have all witnessed, say, British soldiers or American soldiers who have died in service, say, in Afghanistan or Iraq. There is a lot of ceremony and respect that goes to those gallant citizens of those countries. What I think is lacking is to see honour and respect nationally. In fact, we should make it a national event to receive, honour, respect and recognise those who have fallen while serving abroad. I think this is missing right now; I stand to be corrected.

Secondly, I happen to live within the neighbourhood of a barracks. Again, I would like to commend the discipline of the UPDF. My neighbours are soldiers and I have not had any incident of anyone jumping over my fence or doing anything bad. This shows that these are soldiers living in harmony with civilians. I am sure many of us have witnessed this. 

However, I see a lot of poverty around our armed people. For example, I see women carrying firewood to the barracks. I see women sometimes carrying water. I see poverty in the midst of our city and that is partly why I commend them. 

How could they live with that kind of poverty? I want to give an example of when I invited women, when I had ferried some trees in my yard, I offered these trees to these women to collect as firewood, but they told me that that would be considered as indiscipline so they could not come to my yard to collect firewood. So, I think we need to attend to the poverty within our armed forces. 

The other thing is that we continue to get comments about those men and women who serve for a long time in wars. I do not know the term you use. For example, those who have been in Sudan and Congo for a long time; do they really get an opportunity to access promotions, particularly the very junior ones who have been walking the bushes and living in forests for so long? 

The comments you sometimes get is that these are individuals who do not easily access opportunities for training and, therefore, do not have equal opportunity for promotion and growing in the Force. I thank you.

12.43
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you. I rise up to support the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. I want to agree with whatever they have said, but I have a few issues to raise. 

The domestic arrears which have already been verified should be a priority for the government to pay these people. Instead of us allocating a lot of money to people who are already very rich, like Basajjabalaba - Shs 4 billion, we should have used this money to pay those who have provided services to the people of Uganda. 

I want to talk a bit about work permits. Work permits have been given to many foreigners, and in Arua, the native business community is almost collapsing because there are very many Indians and Chinese who have taken over most businesses in the town. The poor business community that is engaged in small businesses are left helpless. I do not know what Uganda Investment Authority is planning to do for the people who are doing small businesses. 

I also want to talk about NGOs. There are very many fake NGOs in Uganda today. There is an NGO called ACID that has been cheating our people in Arua. They came to Arua properly registered and they collected a lot of money from the poor people and deceived them saying that they would receive training and that after training they would get jobs. But when they were invited to come to Africana just last week, the people were not there. The people who came from Arua were informed that the Europeans who organised the workshop were not there. These people got stranded and many of them came to my home and I had to give them transport. When the committee says that NGOs should be monitored and thoroughly scrutinised, they are right.

I also want to say something little about identity cards. We Ugandans have no identity. When you go to Kenya, you cannot move freely without an identity card. They have their identity cards. Why can’t we in Uganda make identity cards for each and every Ugandan so that we can identify ourselves? 

We have so many foreigners particularly in Arua. The number of Sudanese in Arua town is overwhelming. Now they have bought a lot of land in Arua town and in Ayivu. Their behaviour is very hostile and they do not know how to live in harmony with others. What are we going to do with these Sudanese who are so many and do not respect Ugandans? Most of our business people who go to Sudan are harassed and the women are raped. What is the Government of Uganda doing about this? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Angufiru, I am seeking clarification. Did you say that ACID is still operating?

MS ANGUFIRU: Madam Speaker, the NGO is called ACID. They pretend to be in Mengo and whenever they come to Arua, they collect money from the indigenous people. I do not know whether they exist but there is a fake group of people who are getting a lot of money from the poor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why I am saying I am shocked is because seven months ago, we asked the government to deal with groups like DUTCH International; ACID. I am shocked to hear that they are still there.

MS ANGUFIRU: Madam Speaker, what I am saying just happened two weeks ago. The people were invited to Hotel Africana. How can you invite poor miserable people to Hotel Africana? They contributed Shs 200,000 per person and they were told that they were going to be trained and given jobs. In the end, they got nothing and the people ran away.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the minister will answer.

12.49
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the committee for the report. I have worries about this report. While the country has a wave of killings and theft of vehicles, which should be the mandate of the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs, I see the budget almost minimal. I am worried. When I look at, for example, arrears plus the usual supplementary requests from Defence, I would think that the Ministry of Defence and Internal Affairs would be very clear to the Minister of Finance and we would make defence a priority. 

Some of us who are slightly above 45 years have seen the armies in this country. I feel that it is good to repackage our defence forces and give them the money so that they can be able to render services to this country. This is because when I see our soldiers now, they are in a desperate situation and are really naked in every sense, yet we continue to vote little money for them and they come back for supplementaries.  (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Hon. Byanyima, I have very reliable information that our soldiers and police go naked because most of the police officers have not received their salaries for June, July and August. The same applies to the UPDF. It is a very serious matter. You find that they cannot pay fees for their children and that is why they go naked.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Ekanya. When you look at the Police in the report and their accommodation, I think this Government of ours should consider paying them very handsomely -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it a distortion on payment?

DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this country and as far as I know, the first public officers to be paid their regular salaries is UPDF. So, I would like any member who is saying there are soldiers who are not being paid to substantiate this. Otherwise, they should withdraw the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, can you substantiate that June, July and August salaries have not been paid?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, yesterday I received a call from officers that they have not been paid. I have 119 officers in Abim district out of 195 who have not received their July and August salaries and I have the record.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Army or Police?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I will give you the information confidentially because the officer sent me the message on my phone. It will be tracked and his life will be in danger. I have it here and I will give it to you.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, my concern was the UPDF being treated like other soldiers in the previous regimes. 

Secondly, when I look at accommodation for the Police, I think our Government does not really put priority on housing ministries. We cannot afford to see our Police, which has enormous work and challenges, without accommodation. We would rather put accommodation as a priority. 

On Internal Affairs, we recently passed a law here where Ministry of Internal Affairs will be appropriating on source so that they can take half of whatever money they get. We used to get little money from passports, but today, the money is paid directly to the bank. That means we are doing very well concerning passports. The Budget Committee advised the Ministry of Internal Affairs to revise the price of a passport so that it should not be seen as a Parliament advocating for more funds, but not providing to widen the tax base. But up to now, I have not seen the revision on the passport. 

When you go to Ministry of Internal Affairs, look at the Immigration Department; it is appalling. One of these days a trailer will run into those officers. We cannot afford to see our officers in ramshackle offices yet they are generating a lot of money. Ministry of Internal Affairs used to collect up to Shs 4 billion. But they are now collecting about Shs 21 billion. So, we feel Ministry of Internal Affairs should be given a chance to spend money at source so that they can be able to put up good offices and whoever wants a passport or a work permit can meet them in a good environment.

Lastly, is the general welfare of the prisons. How can we continue using our prisoners on private work? Why can’t we make our prisoners do constructive work? It is sort of a wakeup bell. The income generated is not put in the coffers of Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on this issue of the salaries, yesterday, the Shadow Minister of Finance said that the August salaries for the civil servants have not been paid. The Minister of Public Service told us that within 48 hours, it would be paid. But if it is becoming bigger, that now it is June, July and August, for the forces, I think we would want a statement this afternoon. It is very serious. So, we want a statement this afternoon.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true the Shadow Minister for Finance raised the issue of salaries for the civil servants yesterday and the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister gave a response and indicated that due to changes in technology - the configurations of the payroll, it was taking slightly longer to ensure that data is correctly inputed so that people receive what is due to them in the banks where the money is supposed to go from Bank of Uganda, and that it would take 48 hours. We shall provide a progress report on that. 

Regarding the issue of UPDF soldiers not being paid for the months of June, July and August, the Minister of Defence challenged hon. Ekanya to substantiate the assertion he has come up with.  Fortunately, we also happen to have a number of senior UPDF officers here in Parliament. Unless the information that hon. Ekanya has passed to you can be read out to the House, so that the officers who are responsible for the forces can have a basis to take action. I beg to propose that this be withdrawn. At any rate, our approach to such issues is that we follow-up on everything that comes up on the floor of this House. I strongly suggest that until this matter is substantiated - because it will send out a wrong message to the general public and the soldiers - let hon. Ekanya withdraw this. 

12.59
MR ALBERT ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, it is not in contest, at least from yesterday up to now, that civil servants have not been paid. The Minister of Public Service yesterday accepted that they have not been paid and gave us 48 hours. At least as far as August is concerned, we can be sure that civil servants have not been paid. That is information that we can deal with in its own right. 

However, let me say this; as to why civil servants have not been paid, the reason we were given is that the system is being transformed from a manual system into the Electronic Funds Transfer System. We dealt with this EFT issue long time ago, about two years ago. All public servants and public suppliers are being paid through it. I am not sure how this problem of EFT has started again in this month of August that has just passed. 

We are not considering that as a good reason. There might be something different that we need to explore and that might lead us to the scenario of hon. Ekanya of June and July not being paid. So, let us not take EFT as the reason for non-payment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not grouse over this issue. Let us establish, have people been paid? I have a message here; I will not disclose the source but it says, “Out of 195 officers, 116 have not been paid July and August salary, we are starving”. I will not read more.

So, honourable members, we are dealing with human beings. Can we establish whether they have or have not been paid? I am not only talking about the Army. I am also aware that the parliamentary staff have not yet been paid. So, can the Minister of Public Service inform us this afternoon what is happening about the salary?

1.02
GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I do not know what is being talked about in the change of system that has delayed payments, but in this House, in the lower gallery, there are two officers who are directly responsible for paying soldiers of the UPDF. One is the acting permanent secretary and she is here. The other one is the chief controller of finances. I can, and they can confirm to you that we do not have any unpaid soldiers; they have all been paid. But in case you have some names for ghost soldiers who desert and go away, then say so. 

I can also tell you that we have made our payroll electronic. We no longer have paymasters running around with cash in their pockets – one would think that they are still somewhere and haven’t arrived to a particular place. The system is that every soldier today only has business with his/her bank. We do not have any problems with payments.

My second comment is about an outrageous statement which came from an hon. Member of Parliament who said UPDF soldiers walk naked. I would like to make it clear that we do not have any soldiers, from private to general, walking naked. We have uniforms from Somalia to DRC.

Thirdly, let me thank hon. Mary Mugyenyi for that commendation. Thank you very much. But as for that lady – maybe she is so much in love with her food being cooked by firewood. Otherwise, we have introduced energy-saving stoves. We no longer – unless you are so remote – you cannot imagine a soldier – I know where you stay, you cannot be seen around Summit View carrying firewood. We now use energy-saving stoves. Anyway, what I want to say is that the welfare of our soldiers is catered for at two levels. Level one is what we are given by government –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I wonder whether the hon. Member is in order – several Members have complained about phone messages that have said no payments have been made yet. This is not the first time hon. Aronda is denying claims. I know that every time a claim goes to him, he denies. So is he in order to deny such allegations before doing investigations? From my constituency, I can produce names of soldiers who have not been paid. Last year we placed names of soldiers who had not – soldiers are now selling firewood in my constituency because they are not being paid. So, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Public service should come here this afternoon and let us know what has happened to the salaries of those in the civil service, and all those who are complaining. Okay, let us have hon. Kiboijana.

1.07
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My submission will start with issues relating to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

On the NGOs, I would like to submit that they are serious briefcase entities. They have conned people and donors. I agree with the recommendation of the committee that the Ministry of Internal Affairs steps up its effort of monitoring these NGOs. And should any of them fail to follow the guidelines, they should be deregistered immediately. That should be put in the press for the benefit of the general public.

I wish to submit that issues of victims should be seriously addressed because the report shows that some of them have lost limbs and so cannot do anything productive. Therefore, it is my opinion that government should compensate the victims of the insurgence.

The other issue I would like to talk about is in regard to police accommodation. The report highlights that most of the police barracks are not fit for human occupation and that the houses there should be condemned. I would like to emphasise that this is very true, because I am sure before the committee made this recommendation; the Members did serious visits to these places. It is my opinion that this issue should be expeditiously addressed. The housing and office accommodation of the police should be given top priority in the allocation of funds for the Police budget.

Related to that is the remuneration of police officers who earn around Shs 200,000 per month yet they are expected to take their children to school and feed other members of their families. They also fall sick like any of us. This money is very little to sustain these police officers, especially when they are expected to take charge of the security of those rich citizens who have a lot of money. Actually a number of them are deployed at banks to take charge of the security of the monies in there. If we do not remunerate them properly, Madam Speaker, we will be exposing them to temptations.

My last issue relates to NEC as outlined in page 7 of the report. According to the report, the committee was informed that despite the fact that NEC has the capacity to compete in the areas of engineering and construction, there exist similar structures in the Army and the private sector that out compete too. It is my submission that the Ministry of Defence should ensure that NEC is given priority business in its areas of competence to shield it from the competition from the private service providers.

Before I end my contribution, let me say something about Kigo Prisons. I can read from the report that some 425 acres of land have been secured in Wakiso. My submission is that priority should be given to the purchase of land and this Shs 2.9 billion should be secured so that we get land for Kigo Prison. This Parliament and the Ministry of Finance should similarly approve more funds so that construction of the new Kigo Prison takes course.

On the issue of the money that we owe to the Buganda Kingdom, I wish to submit that this Parliament approves of this money so that we can offset this money owed to the Kingdom of Buganda; so that we can depend on our own as we construct our own prison for our officers. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.12
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. 

The issue of housing in the three institutions: the Army, the Prisons and the Police has come up again, and I have observed that in prescribing a cure, the committee has recommended that construction should go on using a new technology which I am not very familiar with; the Hydra form type of bricks. These problems of housing and the existing accommodation facilities have come about simply because there has not been any maintenance and renovation fund. I would like to pose a question to the ministers responsible for defence and internal affairs that how much money in this budget or your annual budgets is voted for maintenance of these structures? It does not help to build more without maintaining what already exists. You will be creating a similar shortage and a similar problem. 

So, I request that as Parliament, we insist that when budgeting, these institutions should put in a provision for the maintenance and renovation of what already exists. That is how we shall put up a sustainable environment for our people. 

Secondly, we have been informed that the prisons have got a large chunk of land which is even being encroached upon and at the same time, we are voting funds for the purchase of food for prisons. I think it would be more prudent if this chunk of land was put to use because we have got the manpower in form of human resources and the technology available like the instructors in NEC who we have been talked of. In this case, we could even be getting a surplus of food supply from the prisons if this land were put to use. 

Can I request the Minister of Internal Affairs to let us know how much it requires to put this chunk of land to use so that we can save the scarce resources that we had budgeted to buy food for these people instead of producing it themselves? 

Finally, the issue of transport of the prisoners: the prisons department, as I know, is one of the departments that maintain vehicles very well. You find them driving vehicles, which have run for 10 to 15 years but are very well looked after. I do not know whether the ministry or the government is taking advantage of the carefulness of this institution by not giving them more? Can I suggest that these vehicles be replaced annually so that we assist these people with at least that important facility? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.16
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to page 19 of the committee report, under work permits, which is leading in a high influx of foreigners under the disguise of foreign investment in this country. This is a critical area that this Parliament should really debate, because it is also a policy area. 

Whereas I support the idea of encouraging foreign investment in this country with the ultimate goal of generating employment opportunities for the young people, my point of departure is on the issue of the high influx of foreigners. It is a fact beyond reasonable doubt that most of the foreign owned investments in this country have not attracted the high number of jobs, especially for the indigenous human resource that we have in this country. I think this is an area that must be addressed. 

It is also a fact beyond reasonable doubt that we have surplus human resources in this country yet we leave these foreign investors to bring their own people from their countries to work here. In my considered opinion, work permits should only be given out to foreigners in the event that there are no Ugandans qualified for such a job. 

In my home district alone, there are people under the disguise of foreign investors dealing in popcorn -(Interjection)– yes, there are Chinese nationals in Lira selling popcorn and others are dealing in doughnuts and we call them foreign investors! We are opening up a number of foreign investments in Uganda but I think the issue of employing our indigenous people must be critical and priority number one. 

In my culture, there is a saying that you cannot organise a party at home knowing so well that you have chicken and you invite eagles. We have our own young people floating on the streets of Kampala and all the big towns of this country without jobs. Why do we continue encouraging these people to come and invest and we leave them to even provide jobs to their own people? I think we are doing a big disservice to our young people in this nation -(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I want to inform the hon. Member that when we examined the policy statements we realised that last year alone, the Ministry of Internal Affairs gave out 48,000 work permits and service permits –(Interjections)- 48,000 and the question would be, how many jobs does government create annually, because even in these new supermarkets you find cashiers from foreign countries? I thank you. 

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, that qualifies the magnitude of my submission. There are even allegations to the effect that there are foreigners who sneak into this country, pay money and they are given temporary work permits and at the end of the day they qualify to get the real work permits. This is an issue that we should take up. 

I remember at one point when you were chairing you said to one of the ministers, “Go to Nakumatt which was opened recently and see how many jobs have been created and are in the hands of our indigenous young people of Uganda.” This is a critical area and I think the minister should give us a comprehensive position because unemployment is very rampant and that is what is leading to even the high rate of crime. Young people are just redundant. The Bible says, “An idle mind is the devil’s workshop.” That was my only submission. I thank you for the opportunity.

1.21
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a detailed report. I also want to thank the Minister of Defence and the UPDF in particular for having improved the security situation in the North. (Applause)

I would have loved the committee to have assisted the ministry; we have reduced the combat operations but when you look at the recurrent budget of the ministry, it has not changed. That implies that some money is going to be misused -(Interjections)- yeah! This is obvious. You have been having a war and the war is not there - we want to improve the welfare of this army. 

The army commanders asserted that the welfare is excellent, but for us who meet them in our constituencies we know that there is a lot to be desired. (Applause) It will cost us nothing if we can just reallocate Shs 50 billion from the wage and transfer it to welfare and housing. This is our country. So, I want to urge the Minister, in the subsequent budgets, to place more emphasis on improving the welfare of the army and housing sector because there are no more operations; and we pray that the situation continues. 

I want to go on to the issue of domestic arrears. Domestic arrears correlate with pension arrears and the UPDF has a lot of arrears just like Internal Affairs and even prisons. And if we borrow the Movement slogan of “Prosperity-for-All” and you compare it with government’s failure to clear domestic arrears, it is like a vicious cycle of poverty because those who are rich are made poor and those who are poor are promoted to become rich and when they supply government they are also made poor. So at the end of the day there is no work done. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. What puzzles me most is that the Ministry of Finance has a bulk of domestic arrears but before the end of the financial year, they clear the arrears and start from zero. Why doesn’t the Ministry of Finance also consider the other ministries so that they also start with a clean plate? Now they have problems. How will they get more supplies when they still have domestic arrears? Please, Ministry of Finance stop being selfish. Give the money to those people so that they can also start from a clean plate.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I want to urge the Minister of Defence to make sure that they clear the arrears with the Buganda Government. We all know that ebyaffe is still on the table being demanded for. So the Shs 8.4 billion which has been verified should be paid and the alternative land in Wakiso should be bought. Instead of incurring a billion every year, why don’t you pay for land of Shs 2.9 billion? 

A lot has been said about every ministry concerning improving the housing sector, and they have been recommending Hydra form machines. But there is a building which I saw in Seeta and another perimeter wall for the former Vice-President; that technology has not captured many Ugandans. I want to urge the ministry - because if a peasant cannot pick it that implies that it is not the best technology. Hydra form technology has not picked up in Uganda’s housing sector. So I just want to urge the ministry either to come up with a low-cost housing scheme, but this Hydro form - Madam Speaker, if you are to count houses, they are very few so it might not be the best -(Interjections)- hon. Minister for national Guidance, you will have time to guide the whole nation - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I think on the issue of Hydra form we shall ask the Minister for Housing; he knows and he is the owner of that machine. He will give us -

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I want to conclude with the issue of prisoners. I feel embarrassed when I meet prisoners being taken in private cars to work in people’s gardens completely naked -(Member timed out_)

1.27
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank the committee for its report. And Madam Speaker, I also want to thank you for giving chance to those of us who are always in the House. (Laughter) 

I want to thank the committee and I want to support their recommendation on page 6 that the Ministry of Defence should work hand in hand with the various ministries to ensure that the UPDF units are engaged in other productive ventures like roads, agriculture, disaster management and others. This is because when we talk about Prosperity-for-All, it is really Prosperity-for-All, and it should be Prosperity-for-All, including the UPDF. 

I support their recommendation because there is no way they can prosper if they are left just to cocoon within the Ministry of Defence without interfacing with other ministries that are service providers. Besides, we know that what a soldier gets is not enough to meet other needs. So, when they are brought on board to include other sectors that are productive, I believe they can be able to supplement their meager pay.

The committee, on page 13, also observed that disarmament is going on very well in Karamoja. I want to commend government for this because Karamoja is better than it used to be. 

During the Sixth Parliament, I was privileged to represent the greater Kotido which is now Kaabong, Abim and Kotido districts. At that time I used to be escorted heavily to mobilise my constituencies. One time I even had to be transported in an APC but now you can move freely in Karamoja and do business. So, I want to encourage all the government ministries and departments and even the ministers who have been fearing to go to Karamoja that the place is now very secure; you can come and also make us have all the services that the rest of Ugandans are enjoying. We just have a few thieves who run up and down stealing goats.

And I thank the Ministry of Defence for what it is doing especially for my district. Sometime last month, I communicated to this House that we were at it again because there were some raids and when the complaints came in the ministry moved in very fast to secure us.

The auxiliary forces’ payment has already been talked about. There are complaints on the ground that some of the auxiliary forces have not been paid. I think some names had disappeared from the payroll - that is for my district. But when I tried to consult with the chairperson, I was told that there is a major problem in Stanbic bank. I do not know what goes wrong there but some names have not come out and that is why there are complaints especially in Abim District.

On the issue of prisons, I think we need to do a lot about the prison services. It is a shame when we read that in the whole of the Northern region there is only Tata lorry. If there is only one Tata lorry in the entire Northern region, then the people of Karamoja are just on foot. So, I think we need to think a lot about this department of prisons because it is equally important.

I am also happy about the achievements during the last financial year, especially on the renovations of prisons. But I want to seek clarification: when are we going to renovate the rest of the prisons? -(Member timed out_)

1.32
COL PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this debate. I also wish to thank the committee for a very good report and for the many good proposals they have advanced, including suggesting that this House should pass the modest budget, which has been presented before the House and which I would like to inform the Members in this House that it is essentially a peace time budget. 

We have never had a war time budget in spite of the insurgencies we have had over so many years. So, while you are thinking of some peace dividends which may accrue because of the reduced operations, the budget has actually been a peace time budget. Therefore, this is the time when the UPDF soldier may begin to feel a bit comfortable with the resources which can enable him to cope with the peace time situation.

I want to welcome the committee’s suggestion that we should engage in production now that we have a lull in the operation situations. However, I wish to appeal to the Members of the House not to limit the UPDF to only primary level production, that is, the growing of primary crops. We wish to also move to a level of agro-processing. We need to move to levels of tertiary productions and we need to move into manufacturing. Indeed -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, during the discussion where committees meet ministries, Members of the UPDF are privileged. They come and attend and they are the sponsors of the policy statements that subsequently come to be discussed in committees. Now they are here eating up the time of others who did not contribute. Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are also members of this House and they are not members of the committee. 

COL KATIRIMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that very wise ruling.  I was appealing to the Members that they should not just leave us to concentrate on primary level production. They should allow the UPDF, given its energy, expertise and professionalism, to engage in higher levels of production, including agro-processing and other tertiary levels of production and manufacturing.

Indeed we are already engaged in some level of production and manufacturing. We are already engaged in some level of manufacturing in the industries in Luweero. Given that we are landlocked, this Parliament should take big strides in enabling us enhance and consolidate our capacity at the level of manufacturing so that we can guarantee national security without having to depend a lot on people out there. 

In the area of primary production, Members have mentioned that the UPDF has got a lot of land. However, I want to put it to the House that the UPDF invariably has inadequate pieces of land in barracks which we occupy, because even if you took a whole square mile of 640 hectares of land when we know very well that a unit of UPDF has 700 plus officers and men, it automatically works out that an officer would have less than an acre. Still, we have to allow for infrastructure, buildings, roads and many others. So, the available piece of land in a unit of the UPDF is invariably small. And given that position, it is our considered opinion that this little land should be reserved for welfare purposes so that the officers and men of the UPDF can work towards Prosperity-for-All. 

There are efforts now geared towards enhancing their capacity to increase their understanding of the primary methods of production so that they can take advantage of this land and improve their welfare and the production for income generation - for the institution could be left at the level of processing and manufacturing.

1.38
MR HUSSEIN AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you. I also want to thank the committee for bringing this report. The issues that I will assert myself on include the Ministry of Defence budget, which has still remained one of the highest in this country despite the fact that military operations have reduced. 

The Army Members of Parliament, who are here, including the CDF, are free to challenge this. The recent Operation Lightening Thunder, everybody knows and I have an authentic report that 60 percent of that war was funded by the United States of America in areas of providing intelligence, provision of satellite phones, and fuel for helicopters. We are looking at the budget allocated for the Ministry of Defence -(Interruption)- he wants to give information. Let me give him the data and then he will report through the relevant minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you have distorted something.

MR GODI: Madam Speaker, I concede.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: The Member might not have followed up with things because he was somewhere else for some time. Operation Lightening Thunder is an operation of the UPDF authorised by this Parliament. We earned our own budget. Of course we have a working relationship with the United States, like we have with France, Britain and others, but the 60 percent figure is a strange figure and it does not exist. But this is still our operation.

MR GODI: Since he has not given the percentage, I am going to challenge him by availing him what was provided to support that operation and he will give me the calculations when it comes to percentages. 

We are looking at reducing costs. Under this same Ministry of Defence, they have the engineering department - I would even want to challenge the CDF at a later stage to tell this House – when they procure vehicles for use, especially for the commanders at his rank, how long are those vehicles supposed to be used by such commanders before new ones are procured? There are some senior UPDF officers who have been complaining that they were given vehicles in 2002 and now the vehicles are breaking down every time they go for operations and yet there are some officers who get vehicles every year. 

There are very many UPDF vehicles, still in army colours, that are lying idle in many garages in Kampala. The parts of these vehicles are being sold as spare parts. We do not know how the UPDF usually disposes of these vehicles. We do not know whether they auction them, and if they are auctioned, how does the Ministry of Defence get the proceeds?

I now want to move on to the issue of keeping prisoners in jail. I have been in prison and I have an experience that I want to share with this House. In Luzira Prison, there are prisoners who have been committed and have overstayed in prison. There is a prisoner, a friend called Mayanja, who was committed in 2002 but up to now he has never been produced in court. 

And then there is the issue of 13 prisoners who are on Minister’s Order. Minister’s Order is a situation whereby if you are convicted and you are a minor, you are sentenced and taken to prison. While there your fate is left to the Minister, who is the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General can either pronounce himself by setting you free or by sentencing you.    

Of those 13 prisoners on Minister’s Order, some of them have been in prison since 1987. There is one boy called Herbert Biriyo, he comes from Fort Portal. He says that he was convicted in a High Court sitting in Fort Portal for armed robbery, a crime which he committed with a UPDF officer. The UPDF officer, not being a minor, served his sentence of 13 years and is now free. This man who has been on the Minister’s Order, is still in Luzira up to now. He is still awaiting pronouncement by the Attorney-General. 

The situation is very serious. Since I came out on bail, I have been consulting with other NGOs who have been friendly to the Uganda Prisons Service, I am happy that there is an officer who is here listening to this. The fate of those 13 prisoners just awaits a response from the Attorney-General. 

1.44
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I want to start my submission by quoting the national Constitution which guides this country. 

“The Democratic Principle of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy 
ii. All the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels, subject to the Constitution. 

iv. The composition of Government shall be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country.

National unity and stability: Every effort shall be made to integrate all the peoples of Uganda while at the same time recognising the existence of their ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversity.” 

This brings me to the fact that when we sit here, we sit as Ugandans, but we are appropriating a budget, and the imbalances which the committee recognises in their report, should have been highlighted, as well as a way to address them. The hon. Minister of Defence, while appearing on CBS, attempted to justify this. According to him, the reason why there are the so called imbalances is because promotion is determined by seniority, courses attended and level of education.

Let me quote some statistics. Of the generals that we have in this country, all the five come from Ankole. Of the 19 major generals, nine are from Ankole, two from Kigezi making 11 from the West and eight from other regions of this country. Of the 30 brigadiers, 14 are from Ankole, one from Kigezi and the other 16 are from the rest of the country. Of the Members of Parliament in this House, seven out of ten come from the West and only three come from the rest of the country.

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR DENNIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, those who have been closely following the events in this country are aware that recently, a team of lawyers under the Advocate Pro Bono Group and two human rights activists petitioned the Constitutional Court challenging the criteria and national character that is used in recruitment, promotion, training and deployment in the UPDF. 

As far as I am concerned, this case is still pending in the Constitutional Court. Two, our Rules of Procedure and particularly Rule 60 is about subjudice. Rule 60 says: “Reference shall not be made to any matter on which judicial decision is pending, in such a way as may, in the opinion of the Speaker, prejudice the interest of any party to the action.” 

I know the Constitutional Court will declare their position on this matter, because we all feel that we are affected, but now that the matter is in court, and it is still pending, is it procedurally right for us to continue debating this issue, yet the petitioners in this case are challenging the same issue being raised on training, recruitment, promotion and deployment in the UPDF?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if the matter is in court, then leave it and deal with others, because we might influence the outcome of the court.

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you. I have made my point. The committee did not tell us in their report that the matter was subjudice, so I was and I am debating the committee report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, now that you have been informed that the matter is in court, let us leave it there.

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I want to –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The rule my honourable colleague has just raised is not absolute. It says we shall not debate in a manner which is likely to prejudice any of the parties to the matter before court. The guidance we are seeking here is, which party is likely to be prejudiced by this debate? It is not an absolute bar. Actually, it says in the opinion of the Speaker, if there are parties that are likely to be prejudiced. 

So, may we be guided as to the parties that are going to be prejudiced if this information is given at such a crucial moment when we are talking about the budget for the Force, which is here, and the parties are here also to defend themselves? If the Army is likely to be prejudiced, it is represented here. I can see the number here is overwhelming and unprecedented. There are several officers here who can defend themselves here. They cannot be prejudiced in my opinion. So we are seeking guidance on that, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we continue that debate, other Members will also be forced to answer and that is why, in my opinion, it is prejudicial to what is in the court. Deal with other matters, hon. Amongi.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The second issue I want to raise is that the Rules of Procedure gives you power to guide this House and I want you to guide this House as the committee observed on page 14, on the status of J. J. Odongo who is now camouflaging –(Member timed out_)

1.52
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the report. I will also give personal thanks to some of the officers who are in this House, starting with the Commander of the UPDF for the special interface we have had with him in Lango in the course of combating the incursion by LRA. He did the job like a human being; he was very humane and friendly; and we came to a very good conclusion. For that, I must thank General Aronda Nyakairima, the Commander of the UPDF.

Secondly, if nobody has given appreciation to the contribution made by Major General Francis Okello in Somalia, I must personally give my appreciation to him. I might not have been here when the expression of appreciation was being made; so this is to add to whatever my colleagues may have said.

Madam Speaker, you have been grappling with how we can handle the multiparty dispensation in this House; how do we treat the response from the committees and the response from the Opposition. I think this is something you need to assist us on. Uganda is now chairing the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth practices a multiparty parliamentary system. CPA is where our involvement has been recognised tremendously and we have visited a number of other parliaments. How do they treat the two sides of the House? We need the guidance from you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odit, I could have done it, but we want to amend the rules with the agreement and consensus of the whole House. 

MR ODIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance, and I hope we are not considering that we are still in a single party system. I want to raise a few questions for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to handle. One is that the report of the committee makes it very clear that the combat situation is over. So, we should be able to enhance the productivity of UPDF. Now, we still have high involvement in Somalia. And it appears like the situation is getting from peace keeping to something related to combat. I do not know if this will constitute part of the observation of the committee; that the combat situation is over and, therefore, we should invest in productive areas.

Secondly, the matter of the DRC. Whereas the officers and men of UPDF have done an excellent job, the same army has also plunged the country into a most expensive adventure. That is on the question of war reparation which is apparently costing us US$ 10 billion because the Government of DRC took us to the Security Council and to the International Court. 

We want to know how UPDF as a lead agency in that activity is handling this very sensitive subject, because we are being assured that there are no more combat situations. But the after mirth activities – I think the minister will handle it.

1.58
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. In the Seventh Parliament, Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo was appointed a minister of state along with other ministers. The rest of the ministers were given their portfolio and Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo remained as a minister of state without any specific docket. It took us a lot of time and effort to keep following up the appointing authority on what Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo was going to do as a minister. After along effort, he was made Minister of State for Environment. 

Again, Gen. Jeje Odongo is a point of controversy; some Members have even gone to the extent of calling him a masquerading minister of state. I think there is need for Government to come out clearly. We have held meetings even with the Head of State at State House trying to follow up the same matter. It is painful for Lt Gen. Odongo to be a point of contention all the time.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the pension for ex-servicemen, the old men who rendered dedicated service to this country have undergone a lot of suffering. Their suffering follows a given pattern; towards election time, they are encouraged to open up bank accounts for their money to be paid there, only for the banks to eat up the little deposits in bank charges. Many of them have had to travel long distances from Arua and Kaabong to Bombo. That is a very ugly scenario. 

I would like to see a situation where the issues of the ex-servicemen are being decentralised to avoid those people from moving to one destination of the army headquarters. 

Madam Speaker, on the prisons, I am extremely concerned about the slow implementation of the community service. I need some information from the Minister of Internal Affairs on how far we have gone with the implementation of the community service. I thought we came up with that principle in a bid to avoid over congestion in prisons. 

Again, in the committee report, very little is said about improving the living conditions of the inmates; improving on the accommodation. Remember, all of us are potential jail birds. When we appropriate money and do not make living conditions there good, time will come when you will regret the omission; if you happened to get there - hon. Kasaija, when you become a jail bird. 

Again, we talked about causes of increased crime thus the over-congestion in prisons. One of them is that of drug abuse in this country. Most of those inmates commit those crimes under the influence of drugs. In my response, I thanked Government for tabling the Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Control Bill, which has been lying with the committee for over two years. 

Madam Speaker, I want to request your Chair to direct the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to expeditiously deal with this Bill, so that we get to control these substances, including alcohol. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm that the security situation in Karamoja has greatly improved. One can travel without having a lot of fear of being ambushed. 

However, in Karamoja, a number of people have had to flee their villages, and are now sleeping in trading centres because the insecurity there is no longer related to cattle rustling; it is now about stealing things like saucepans, relief food, chicken and so on. In fact, I would like to bring to the attention of this House that if you laboured to take census of the street children in most of these towns – 

2.03
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the recommendation of the committee in respect of prisons land. The report says this land has got no proper inventory and that it is not titled.

I think this is extremely pertinent in urban areas and municipalities like Masaka, which I represent. The prisons own land, but the size and dimensions are not known. It is a planning area, but nobody knows the size of that land. Actually, the people living in the neighbourhood have started encroaching on this land by applying for it so they can put it to use. This puts pressure on the local leaders because people want to encroach on it by say, building schools or making a football pitch. My point is that prisons should come up and make plans to get titles for its land. 

But while I say that to the prisons, I should also say it to the police in respect of police barracks. We have police barracks in municipalities that are constant eyesores. The one in Masaka is right in the middle of town. A lot of good development is taking place around it, but the miserable buildings remain in between. It even reduces the respect for the people who live there. I pray that the police also takes responsibly of planning for its land so they can own it for development purposes.

Secondly, we talked about NGOs and the numbers registered so far. One of the most unfortunate thing is that the legal framework within which these NGOs operate is not known. Consequently, the NGOs themselves do not know how to operate. The information I have is, much as they are fleecing people, Ugandans are actually also coning them. People go and relate with these NGOs and end up coning them of money. 

Anyway, the question is, who is allowed to come here and operate an NGO, and who are they supposed to relate with and within which legal framework? It is pretty necessary that we get to know how these things operate. NGOs keep having problems with labour officers, arising from the people they employ, and in the end, money is taken from them. 

Let me make a comment about what hon. Lubyayi has said about an officer who is operating in an area and he appears to be answerable to nobody. This is something that Government should take up seriously. There is a feeling in this country that there is a set of people who are above the law; that they can go into an area, acquire land and are not answerable to anybody. 

That scenario is not limited only to UPDF officers; it even extends to powerful people. Some people call themselves presidential advisors – they do whatever they want with nobody within the legal framework to control them. 

So, if hon. Lubyayi has it in his constituency, there are many of us who are facing similar issues. So, unless it is handled, it gives false information that some people live above the law in this country, which is not good. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed, let me introduce guests in the public gallery who are a delegation from Maracha. They are here to witness our proceedings and represented by hon. Onzima and hon. Abia. You are welcome! (Applause)

MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue concerning the status of Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo is a serious matter. Our fundamental obligation as Parliament under Article 79 of the Constitution is to defend and protect that Constitution. 

In this report, I read that the committee is constrained in appropriating resources to a minister who is not yet sworn in as an Ex-Officio Member of Parliament. The report recommends that his status be cleared as soon as possible.

Madam Speaker, Article 115 of the Constitution provides as follows: “A minister shall not, before assuming the duties of office, take and subscribe the Oath of Allegiance and the Oath of Minister specified in the Fourth Schedule of this Constitution.” If it is true that Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo is serving as State Minister for Defence before taking this oath, then he is violating the Constitution. And as Parliament, we should agree to that constitutional abrogation.

Article 113(4) provides thus: “A minister shall not hold any office of profit or emolument likely to compromise his/her office.” The same provision is reflected in Section 37 of the UPDF Act. So, if Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo is cleared by the UPDF, he cannot serve in the civilian authority called Cabinet; it will be a violation of the Constitution. The statement here is quite instructive. 

I would suggest that we hold the budget until we get a clear position on whether he is a serving minister or not. We cannot allow him to disburse and appropriate funds from the Consolidated Fund unconstitutionally. We should make a firm stand.

The same applies to the committee, which was established to investigate into the matters of imbalances. It is stated here on page 14. But what is the fate of that committee now that we are going ahead with this debate? What are the results of the committee?


I will hurriedly proceed to page 13 on payments to auxiliary forces. It is indicated that government has paid Shs 17 billion to auxiliary forces as indicated in Appendix 1. This is amazing! If you look at this annex, you would see an element on deserters where 3,500 of them have been paid Shs 746 million. The same report further says that another Shs 3500 deserters were paid Shs 1 billion. Where did you get these deserters and you paid them? Under what law? How can you pay money to people who have committed crimes and are subject to prosecution in courts of law? 

And the same applies to other items here –(Interjection)-Madam Speaker, I have limited time. 

The Shs 8.4billion owed to the Buganda Kingdom? (Mr Kiyonga rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is information from the Minister of Defence.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether I will be compensated for the time, but I am most obliged.

DR CRISPUS KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Lukwago for finally giving way. The word “deserter” in this context has a definition. For regular officers and soldiers in the Army, if they desert as you have said, that would be a crime, but when it refers to brothers and sisters who were working alongside the Army, the auxiliary forces, the LDUs, the Arrow Boys etc, it means those people who could not stay helping the army because they had difficulties at home or because their salaries were not coming regularly. So, these were known and we had guidance from the local leaders. There was verification of that. So, when we say deserters, there are the people we are referring to and they were well verified. So, these are not criminals. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, honourable minister, for that ingenuity of coming up with a new meaning of the word “deserter”. (Laughter) My dictionary understanding of the word “deserter” has never changed and there are those other forces which you say were demobilised and so on and so forth. 

Anyway, I was talking about the Shs 8.4 billion which you owe the Kingdom of Buganda. For heaven’s sake, how can this money accumulate to that magnitude? How much was supposed to be paid monthly? Why haven’t you been paying and how sure are we this time round that this money is going to be cleared, given the fact that Parliament has made recommendations time and again that we clear these arrears? Does it even attract interest?

Finally, on the issue of NEC, it is reported here that NEC has been making losses since 1989 when it was established, and now we are getting reports and information that it is going to be restructured to make wonders. I cannot believe this kind of information! My only recommendation would be that it be scrapped because the UPDF is not even giving it business. It is redundant and just taking our money for no good reason. Please, wind it up just like you have sold all these other enterprises. You have sold many of these companies, but what business do you have to retain NEC, which is an encumbrance on the taxpayer and the Consolidated Fund? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.14
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for enabling us discuss this report. But I was concerned when I read about the accommodation of the Police Force or the police officers in this country. I do not know whether we are all living in the same country. If you move around as you go to Ntinda and you pass by Ntinda Police Barracks, and if you see the state of accommodation and sanitation system there, you may think twice. The police officers there actually almost eat in their latrines because the pit latrines are dug only two to three metres from their houses. With all the smell and all these other sanitation requirements, you cannot imagine a country operating in such a manner and dealing with human beings and public servants. 

Madam Speaker, the committee 	recommends that the district police offices should be given hydrofoam machines to make their own bricks. Is it really the duty of the police force to make bricks and construct their own houses? I think it is high time that we all collectively became realistic and consider institutions of Government. Seriously, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces have a whole arm of the construction unit and they do construction everywhere in the country. Why can’t we have the same unit in the Uganda Police Force? If that unit is there, what is the unit doing? It is not the duty of the Police Force to construct their accommodation. This should even have been taken to the Ministry of Works to plan and appropriate for it. 

On the issue of land underused by the UPDF on page 4, during the insurgency in the North, the UPDF occupied several communal lands, and at certain stages, individual lands; and when the war ended, the UPDF have continually occupied some of this land. I have a case in point of the Azida Group Farm. I do not know whether some of this land is really gazetted for Government barracks. Even the issue of Baraligi in Otuke County, I do not know and I do not think Baraligi is land that is gazetted for the UPDF to occupy. 

Madam Speaker, I am requesting the Minister of Defence to provide a list of gazetted barracks to this Parliament, and also with clear acreage of this land, and equally to the Prison Force because as I speak, we have a big prison farm in Lorro, but we do not know the size of the land. We do not know where the boundaries of the land that belong to the Uganda Prisons Force end, and we cannot tell. This should be made clear and known to the public so that land which is used by the UPDF, the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Force is clearly earmarked and gazetted because it is causing a lot of conflict between the community and the institutions of Government. 

Madam Speaker, we have our troops in Somalia, and indeed, we supported the decision to send them because it was for the cause of peace for the whole of Africa and the world. But we have been getting information which is quite disturbing to our communities. You hear of a UPDF officer killed; you hear of a battle in Somalia but you cannot get factual details and reports of –(Member timed out_)

2.14
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to greatly thank the committee for the report, and to also go further and say that given my background, it is only fair on this occasion of contributing to this debate to put on record my sincere thanks to the UPDF, the Police Force and ASTU, who have really done a commendable job to ensure that we have relative peace and security in the Teso region as a whole. I also want to thank the leadership of these agencies which have kept very closely with the local leaders on the ground. A clear indication of this is recently when hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima was in Katakwi officiating on the occasion when the youth were celebrating their national day. We really thank them and we do appreciate your efforts. 

Until recently, the southern parts of Teso had also become areas of thuggery. I refer to areas of Bukedea, Kachumbala and some parts of Kumi and Ngora. But all this is now history. Again we want to commend the security agencies for the swift action. Now people are feeling that the army and the olice are really in control of the security situation there.

I would now like to draw your attention to page 14 of the report under Karamoja disarmament. The committee recommends that regional disarmament exercises be carried out. At this point in time, I expected an update from the ministry. I am aware that not even a year ago there was a very high level conference that was held here in Kampala under the auspices of the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region. Part of the objective of that conference was to launch the disarmament committees. Now, when the committee recommends a fresh start, I get worried. I should by now be getting an update. I am aware that this conference was organised by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here, but all the relevant stakeholders were here in attendance. Government of Southern Sudan was represented; I think Ethiopia was in attendance; Kenya; Rwanda and Uganda and if I recall well, Burundi, was also in attendance. So, we expected at this point that the country, or particularly this House, would have been updated on the progress that is being made.

I will move on to the next point on the payment of the auxiliary forces. The committee talks about some concerns on some of the payments that have not been fulfilled to date. I want to remind the House that about a year ago - especially after the strict adherence of this matter by this House - the Minister of Defence was availed funds to pay some of the arrears. This was supposed to be in phases. The first phase was to pay for the arrears to those who had been demobilised and were allowed to go home, but they had a claim on the service that they had rendered to this nation. It was understood that after the initial payment, we would then move to pay those who are integrated into either ASFU or UPDF. But they also had a claim on arrears -(Member timed out_)

2.24
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say that from the time I have been here for the last 23 years, there has never been a better time to discuss the Defence budget than now. I have not heard before, in this Parliament, both sides of Parliament thanking the armed forces for the work as I have heard this morning. (Applause) I am very pleased to say that the committee has done a wonderful job; it has pointed out the positives and the negatives and has come up with a clear statement of the outputs for the last financial year and even the planned outputs of this financial year. If you look at the committee report, they are very clear on where we are going.

I would like to thank the Opposition. You know for us UPDF we are there for all of you. (Laughter) While we have two hands and this one, we know that it feeds the same mouth. The report ended with, “Let the motto be ‘security: freedom for all.’” I was hearing that and I said, “Well that is what UPDF has been here for all the time, since we started.” It has been for providing security, peace and freedom for all. 

When I heard some people from Lango, Teso, Karamoja and elsewhere thanking UPDF, I thought, “We better pass the budget and go.” (Laughter) Because when it comes to fighting, we talk of what we call the end state, that is, what comes out of all this effort. It does not mean that during the war there are no struggles, problems, difficulties or mistakes. They are there. But what is the end state? That is why I want us all to move together. 

Now, in this case, I have heard a lot of concerns about simple things like balancing. I am aware of the Constitution -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I have here with me the Constitution. Article 210 provides: “Recruitment, appointment, promotion, discipline and removal of members of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and ensuring that members of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces are recruited from every district of Uganda.” 

So this provision is about recruitment, appointment, promotion and discipline. It should be done fairly and equitably from all the districts of Uganda. Is the honourable member, a General, in order to stand before us in this august House and say that this matter is very simple? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, honourable members, my difficulty is that he had just started and I do not know what he was going to say.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wonderful ruling. That is exactly what I was going to say. I was going to say that balancing is a simple issue because it is provided for in the Constitution -(Laughter)- and I was going to say that the UPDF is on record for defending the Constitution. So, how is it simple? The whole thing is a process and figures of that process are available; just to answer that specific question. But before I come to that - and we can put documents on the Table as background; I am an artist and a teacher. In art, we start with an empty canvas and you keep on adding colour until you get a painting with a message. You do not start with a finished object. 

As a teacher, I know that the biggest room in the world is room for improvement and that is why I was enjoying this debate the whole of this morning. When somebody like hon. Ekanya brings hearsay SMS messages about some soldiers who have not been paid, that is good. That is room for improvement. If they are there, let them be paid. But the most important thing as a teacher is that when you are giving marks, and here I am talking as a professional in art, teaching and soldiering, you do not give marks to a student who has been throwing stones at other people while they were studying or a student who has been playing all the time. And you put in your report, is Kony a General? And you want to compare him with Gen. Aronda who has chased Kony hundreds of miles away from Uganda; who has pacified the North and Karamoja or you want to compare him with Gen. Tumwine who commanded and successfully captured power and retained it? (Laughter and Applause) 

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I stood here and I was going to give substantial evidence, which I have here of all those who went to the bush and for 23 years they have not been promoted. Is it procedurally right for him to continue debating on that matter when you earlier ruled that I should not continue on that line because it is subjudice? I have all the names of many historicals who went to the bush, have the qualifications; some with Masters’ degrees and PhDs but because they are not from that region, they have not been promoted. So, is it procedurally right for him to continue with the debate while I was stopped from giving my evidence?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what evidence you had but about the imbalance and the rest, you leave that out. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, I will leave that out but I thought that I was responding to what was raised in the report. However, on the issue of balancing, I said that you should give marks to the one who performs. 

Somebody referred to the professionalism of the UPDF. He was asking, “When shall we have the policy reviewed …” I have been in this Parliament and I remember hon. Nankabirwa explaining elaborately the policy of professionalisation of the UPDF and it was supported. We are following that. 

I would like to explain –(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my honourable colleague. The information I want to give you is that when we transferred one Army Commander to head the Police, up to now, the Police has not been doing very well in terms of payment of police officers. I have an example of a police post where out of the total number of employees there, seven officers have not been paid their salaries ranging from the period of two to 15 months. And I want to lay this on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gutomoi, I instructed the Minister of Public Service to give us an update on the payment of salaries for the civil service, the Police and the Army this afternoon. So, this is not his duty. I want the Minister of Public Service to give us that information. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, this is the problem of unprofessional people handling professional matters and they want to give judgement on the Police, on the Army, and on everything and yet they are not qualified to do so. The Constitution clearly states that professional people should be used in professional areas. But when you allow every Tom, Dick and Harry to be an expert on issues they are not professionals in, you get all these sorts of things and you cannot run a country like that. 

2.36
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much. Most of the points that I prepared have been tackled but for emphasis I will start with the rent arrears for Mengo. As you are aware, the Kabaka rejected the Shs 5 million monthly payments from the central government simply because he has enough resources to take care of his institution. The problem is that even those properties which are rented by government are not paid for. You have the example of Kigo, where Shs 8.4 billion is due. You also have Uganda Supreme Court rented by government and its rent is not being paid to this institution. As Members of Parliament from the Buganda region, we are appealing to government to honour its obligation and pay the Mengo government so that they also run their affairs.

The other issue I want to discuss is about constructing a home for the Directorate of Immigration. It is true that this place is in a very bad state. All the buildings there are very old; there are incomplete structures in that place and this is a place foreigners come to get work permits from. So, it would be good to expedite the construction of the home of this Directorate. But the Ministry of Internal Affairs is also in a bad state. I appeal to government to think of constructing a decent building for the ministry.

They talked of work permits; hon. Obua captured the problem that we have very clearly. He pointed out Nakumatt. I happen to be a producer and supplier of one of the commodities to Nakumatt but because I do not have capacity to employ someone to operate at the stall where I put my product, my product is not selling and yet products from Kenya have Kenyan workers to market them. So, we are losing out in terms of employment and market for our goods. I think we should try to control this problem so that we avoid an influx of foreigners doing work which should be done by Ugandans.

Lastly, on the issue of national identity cards; I have said this several times on the Floor of this House, there is a section of our society in Uganda which is suffering because of lack of national identity cards. This is a group of people who are called Banyarwanda. As we talk now, it is almost clear that whoever states in his application that he is a Munyarwanda does not get a passport. I have raised this matter several times in the House. I appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Immigration to make sure that they do not harass our people.

2.41
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for their report. The committee raised several pertinent issues but I would like to confine myself to three of them. 

The first one is on recruitment. When you look at Article 210 of the Constitution, it clearly states that recruitment in all the forces must be done in all districts of Uganda. 

I wish to assure the Minister of Defence that this Article is being abused because on several occasions, when these people go to West Nile region for recruitment, they remain in Arua and instead write a letter to Yumbe and other districts telling people in these districts to come and join the recruitment exercise in Arua. It is very expensive for the common man to come to Arua. As a result, my people are deprived of the opportunity to join the forces and it is a serious concern to the people of Aringa. They think that they are being deliberately left out of the forces. I would like to request the people concerned with this exercise to make sure that this exercise reaches Yumbe as well.  

GEN. ARONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and colleague for giving way. I have a pattern of recruitment into the UPDF and it is by a quota system. We have been using this method since 1986 and every district is entitled to a quota. 

In the recent recruitment in Adjumani, of a population of 272, according to the national average with a percentage of 0.01, we recruited three cadets and 29 recruits to come to Arua. In Arua, with a population of 471,400 by national population with a percentage of 0.2, we recruited four cadet officers and 50 recruits. There was a recruitment centre in Arua. 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, you have already ruled on issues concerning promotion, recruitment and you restrained all of us from making submissions along those lines because the matter is subjudice. Is it in order for the General to read the list here, which seems to even be an annexure to his defence in a matter that is in court? (Laughter) Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not seen the court papers and I do not know what evidence is being presented. I thought that the case is about what already happened. He is talking about what they have been doing recently. Is that also part of the case?

MR OLEGA: Madam Speaker, if I can continue, I would like to inform Gen. Aronda that his position is such that he stays away from this exercise, but what I am telling you is the truth. There is a letter that I will bring to you saying that people from Aringa should come to Arua and this has happened several times. This is a serious matter and you should investigate this issue because we cannot afford to be left out of the armed forces. This is our work and we need it. 

My second point is on payment of gratuity to soldiers who are retired and those who are fallen. There is still a problem as far as those groups are concerned. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Epetait, for raising that issue. 

As I speak, you find people from Yumbe and Arua coming to my home just because they went to Bombo trying to follow their payments. This is a serious matter, which must be handled otherwise we are in trouble because we cannot afford to handle all these people who are coming to our homes because they are not paid. Let the people concerned streamline the process of payments so that those who need to be paid are handled.

Lastly, I want to comment on the UPDF operations in Somalia. I would like to commend the UPDF for doing a good job. When I was in the USA they were actually commended as Ugandans who were providing peace in that area. My advice is: let the UPDF confine themselves to peace keeping exercises and not fighting. This is because fighting will create enmity to Ugandans. Fight only when attacked and act only in defence. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.47
MR GERALD MENHYA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the wonderful report. I have two points to make. One is that I thank the Uganda Prisons Service for the wonderful job done in regard to helping prisoners undertake academic programmes right from primary to secondary school and I hear some of them are joining universities. This is very interesting to note and I commend them for being creative and innovative but also helping these prisoners acquire skills during their rehabilitation. 

However, on a sad note and still about Uganda Prisons Service, according to the report they are looking after 32,000 prisoners in 222 prisons spread all over the country. Yesterday, we heard the feelings of hon. Okello-Okello in regard to having juveniles being imprisoned alongside hard-core criminals in Uganda’s prisons. To us this is something that is unbecoming and I wish to find out from the Minister of Internal Affairs how many of the 32,000 prisoners in Uganda are minors and what steps are being taken to help these minors by separating and taking them to their own prisons? Of the Shs 3.04 billion, which has been budgeted for development, I would have loved to see some of this money going to develop prisons where these juveniles can be imprisoned. I wish to know how this is going to be handled.

The other issue is on page 24 of the report. I note with concern, like somebody has said, that some of these prisoners have stayed for too long in prisons, that is, between five to seven years and they have not been tried. This is abuse of human rights. This Parliament has a right to know how many prisoners are in prison serving five to seven years without being tried. 

Lastly, I wish to re-echo what some people have said on page 14. I know it is very contentious but the chairperson said and I wish to quote him verbatim, “In addition, there were concerns about the structure and promotions within the Army” and he went ahead to say that for security reasons, a sub-committee has been established to look into this matter. 

I would like to know the terms of reference for this sub-committee and what their time frame is within which this report will be adduced. Which of the two will take precedence - is it the sub-committee’s report or the court case? I thank you so much.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising to inquire whether it is proper for us to continue with the debate when we do not know some Members. There is a Member who I have never seen seated behind hon. Tom Kazibwe. I have tried to ask my neighbours and I need to be helped. Could we know who he is?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you introduce yourself?

BRIG. MAKUMBI: Madam Speaker, I do not blame the honourable member for not knowing who I am. I am Dr James Makumbi, representative of the UPDF in this Parliament and I am also an old Member of this Parliament. I have been here for the last 15 years, even before you came.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope all Members are taking note of the need to be here a bit more frequently.

2.53
GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, that advice is taken absolutely seriously. Like my colleague, Gen. Tumwine did, I salute you for your overwhelming commendation. I thank you very much on behalf of the UPDF. It is because of this support that our country from West to East, North to South is peaceful, stable and developing. I thank you for working together with us.

Having said that; let me comment on what hon. Santos said that our commitment in Somalia is likely to weaken our defenses at home. Not at all! Our country, even with that commitment, is safe. Even though we were all here, still we would not invade Southern Sudan because of a border dispute; we would amicably discuss it with our colleagues. That was his concern but according to the minister, that issue is being handled and we will handle it as we have handled others. So our commitment in Somalia will not weaken us. With your support, we have developed overwhelming capacity to guard our borders and also honour our obligations abroad.

A comment was made that there are untouchables and people above the law. I think the debate in this house is testimony in itself about the maturity of our democracy and therefore there cannot be anyone who is untouchable and above the law. 

That there are some advisors to the President and soldiers who have been encroaching on land here and there - as individuals of the UPDF there is no one who is allowed to take land that he is not entitled to. Hon. Lubyayi, please get in touch with your RDC and the chairperson of your area. This matter has already been resolved, it is on record. Maj. Nuwe is not at all above the law –(Interjections)- hon. Katuntu, I will not give way. Nuwe is being handled and the RDC, the chairperson and the CMI have handled him. But in case he is continuing, hon. Lubyayi, I will give you my telephone number, as we have always worked together and I will handle him straight away. 

On matters of land in the Northern part of the country, in case there is still any detach on individual land, we will discuss that matter. I am only aware of our location where we have the division headquarters. But in case there are still some detaches, then we will look at it. We cannot occupy land illegally without compensating the owners. For the areas that are going to be gazetted, we have a military land board whose mandate is to ensure that we legally occupy our land. 

On NEC, as one member has said, because of poor performance in this area, we can only enforce NEC and the report is very clear on the recommendations - we had moved quite a distance in strengthening NEC to perform to the expectations of Parliament which appropriates resources to it. NEC is going to be doing well in the years ahead. 

On auxiliary forces, we cannot disadvantage any member of the auxiliary forces because we worked with them to bring peace in this country. We paid all those who were entitled to payment. In case any Member of Parliament has any name of an individual or groups, we will have the name and we will investigate. We do not want some political mobilisers of anyone to come and masquerade as auxiliary forces and they get away with it. We have the lists and we will investigate and see about it. 

On the question of welfare, our part as the UPDF, in the areas of construction, we have moved quite a distance. We still have some “Mama ingia pole” these are grass thatched hats. But in the UPDF, up to 2003, our training places were still in “Mama ingia pole”. But now, we have only one grass thatched hut of Ngoma. Otherwise, the entire training establishment has been modernised. All our training places are well built and some of them are being shared with the East African Community members like Kimaka and the Engineering College. So in the area of accommodation, we have done a quite commendation job. And we will continue to do that to ensure that the budget that is passed on to us, priority number three will be welfare to ensure that all our troops are accommodated in well built buildings. 

A good point was raised by hon. Mugyenyi that when our comrades pass away in service abroad, we should receive them better than we are doing; that they deserve a state reception. We will look at that, otherwise we have been handling them –(Interruption)

MR KASOZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Aronda for his contribution and I really respect it. But procedurally, I see that he is answering queries that have been raised by the Members to the minister. Is it procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is his contribution as a Member. 

GEN. ARONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. We are going to consider the recommendation made by hon. Mary Mugyenyi that our comrades who die from abroad should be handled in a more deserving manner. Otherwise, according to the report, all the resources that were passed to us were well utilised and as a result, we have done well in Somalia. 

For Kony, the last remnants are running up and down in the Central African Republic. Most of them have left Congo, Southern Sudan and our borders and we remain on standby to continue providing security to this country with all our efforts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we anticipated to start early but we started at 10.10 a.m. It is now five hours since. Ordinarily, we give two hours per report. I would want to appeal to those who want to contribute to do so in the next committee. I want to invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to respond. 

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to thank the committee, which in my view has come up with a very good report.

I would like to promise this House that my ministry will, as best as it can, take into account these recommendations as we carry out our operations on a day-to-day basis. However, this will be subject to having the funds that are necessary to implement whatever has been recommended.

Two, if in my response I do not give a direct answer to the question against a Member’s name, please forgive me. It will be because I might have answered that question under another question. So, do not feel offended. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, just respond thematically; do not mention names.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Okay, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kyanjo raised a question on why we are taking the identity card project to the Electoral Commission. No, we are not taking the project there. Let me explain how this came about. 

Because of financial constraints – you remember I came here and made it clear that in order for the ministry to carry out this project successfully the way we had planned, we needed US $56 million. When we went to the Ministry of Finance, they told us they did not have the money. This forced us to go to State House given that the project is so vital to the country. State House – you know what State House means –(Laughter)– they guided us as follows – they did not direct: 

We were told that there are other agencies within government that are collecting data. Our plan within the ministry was that this project should be completed before the forthcoming general elections so that a person’s identity card would act as a voters’ card –(Interjections)– yes, in other countries that is working very well. It is being practiced in many parts of the world. I just do not want to mention names.

Later on, it was agreed that anybody that is doing data capture like the Electoral Commission should be utilised. For Electoral Commission, we were supposed to tell them that as they collect data for updating the voters’ register, especially in the city – the Electoral Commission had said they were going to capture data afresh to include fingerprints, bio-data and they would give us that data after. And State House guided us to begin from there. According to State House, we as the Ministry of Internal Affairs would take over that data for this project -(Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_) yes, I can take the information – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please just respond. We have got another report of the Ministry of Works to deal with. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I cannot go against the Speaker’s ruling. So, I think I have done my best in explaining the question on why we want to depend on the data that will be captured by the Electoral Commission.

A number of questions have been raised about NGOs including information that some of them are fleecing Ugandans. I would lie to say that we have a problem that is not restricted only to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We have noticed that some people who had registered as NGOs went away from their objectives and started committing felonies. And excuse me for using that word; I know it may not sound very parliamentary. However, I would like to inform you that we deregistered those - a case in point is an NGOs called COWE, which took us to court after being deregistered. However, after that they went and registered as a company. So, legally they are not a registered NGO although they conduct the business of NGOs. 

Others have managed to acquire registration using the Law of Trustees. But when of course they commit offences, we arrest them. It is when we arrest them that we get to know that they have a wide network. That is why we have a problem in doing a follow up. I think at an appropriate time, I will come here maybe through Cabinet and seek an amendment to the NGO Act to include a clause, which says that if any NGO is found to be carrying out a duty for which it is not registered that will be an offence. This is important because our law as we talk now does not say so. Otherwise, for those whose directors have been apprehended having committed crimes, they are usually subjected to the law.

There was an issue to do with salaries of Police that are unpaid. But you heard of late that we encountered a problem within the payroll for the Police and some people are already in jail as you may have read from the press. And because of that, we are now looking at the payroll afresh. In the process of doing this, unfortunately, some of our Police officers have fallen victims because we have had to suspend salaries for us to be able to verify the information. However, I would like to assure this House and the public together with members of the Police Force that we are doing everything possible to ensure this exercise is completed with everybody paid their salaries.

On the question of housing – really we are talking to people who are completely converted. I wish to thank you, Members, for crying louder than myself on this issue. I am very happy that this House is taking the issue of police accommodation seriously. I would like to assure you that the management of police together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs is doing everything possible – if you look at page 33 of the report you will see something to do with public private partnership projects. And precisely this is what we are saying. We are going into this venture so that we can enter into an arrangement with some good businessmen and women who have money. As part of our shares, we will give in prime land - especially the land in Kibuli and Nsambya - and then they will construct for us Police barracks, especially around and within Kampala. We believe this should soon take off once the agreement has been signed. So far, we have now done the consultancy. They have shown us that this is possible and the next thing will be to look for the business people who can give us the money and we do that job. 

I want to take this opportunity to thank this House once again for having passed the amendment to the Immigration Act, when we introduced dual citizenship –(Interruptions)–I have only talked about Kampala, but we are fully aware of the nature in which our police barracks are in countrywide. I think hon. Kawanga raised this in Masaka, and we are fully aware of the dilapidated houses that our officers are living in. But again, it is a question of money and I think everybody is aware of this. If I could get the money today or tomorrow, I would make the whole place change. 

As I said, I wish to thank this House for having passed the Immigration Act in which we introduced dual citizenship. There was also the provision that we shall retain our non-tax revenue as appropriation aid so that the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control can be able to do one or two things; to improve their own accommodation and other things, so that they can improve their work and even collect more money. 

Prisoners and private work
 
There are two reasons why we do permit this, because the law allows us anyway. One is to earn a little revenue, but secondly, to also give the prisoners a chance to exercise, especially in the rural areas. You have seen that these prisoners are taken out to work in rural areas because there may be farms. So, it is done for exercising and for collecting revenue, small as it may be. 

I agree that the lowest paid officer in the Police Force now earns Shs 200,000 and it is very little compared to the responsibility they have to carry. But again the question is: What do we do? Until and unless we get sufficient money, there is no possibility that we can improve that salary for the time being. 

Kigo Prison - Location of the Prison and our Shs 8 billion 
Let me explain this point thoroughly. This Shs 8 billion was not worked out by us, but it was sent to us by the landlord. That land belongs to the Kabaka and he sent a bill, because we have been occupying the land since 1966. Originally, that was a Buganda prison. So, when kingdoms – (Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the senior minister in order to tell us that he is not certain about this figure? Did he agree on this figure before he presented it to us? I want to find out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you repudiating or do you confirm the figures? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I do not doubt my policy statement. A bill came and there is no way I can dispute that bill. I have only been trying to explain to you how this bill came about. Well, we have been occupying these premises since 1966. If the owner of the land comes and says that you have been occupying my land since 1966 and here is the bill, how then can I say no? If I say no, then the only alternative would be to go to court and contest that bill and I do not think there is really any justification for contesting it in court. 

Relocation

We would like to relocate as quickly as possible so that the money which we are being asked to pay or continue to be asked to pay can go to develop the new site. We would like to go away as quickly as possible -(Interjection)- As soon as the Minister of Finance gives me the money, I will definitely pay. 

Influx of Foreigners –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will not resolve it on the Floor of this House. You will follow the minister and negotiate the rent. Mr Minister, please conclude.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: There are two types of influx of foreigners here, which this House should take note of, and I will show you how we are handling each. There are those who come here to look for jobs; those are very easy to control because normally, those come from very far and we control them through the issuance of work permits. However, there are also people who come into Uganda looking for land. You will excuse me if I use the word “bibanja”. These are the peasantry from our neighbouring countries and their main concern here is to look for a small piece of land or kibanja on which to settle. 

Those who are seeking jobs will normally come through the main entry points into this country either by air, through Kenya or through Katuna, whatever the case may be. Those are very easy to control. The ones who are very difficult to control are those coming through our porous borders. The solution to this problem, therefore, is identity cards. Once we have issued an ID, then it will be very easy for us to control this kind of influx. 

Work Permit Issuance

Colleagues have complained about foreign companies and foreign entrepreneurs or investors who are coming here and they carry luggage of their own workers. The information I want to give is that work permits are issued under set guidelines. The National Citizenship and Immigration Board has formulated very stringent requirements for anybody to get a work permit. However, investors insist on employing, in some key areas, their fellow foreigners in order to protect their investment. This is not dictated by us; it is dictated by the investment code.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I gave you information on two occasions. In Egypt, for every foreigner you must create nine jobs for the Egyptians. In Malaysia, for every foreigner you must create ten jobs for the natives. Those are the conditions and that is what we are asking you to do. (Applause) That is what we expect you to do. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I am not disputing this. I wish my colleague, the Minister of Labour, was here. I think there is need to -(Interruption) 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS)(Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, the information I would Like to give the House in relation to the investors creating jobs for Ugandans is that the Ministry of Labour has already drafted an employment policy which we talked about here yesterday. That policy is going to be launched in Namutumba in October, and as we talk, hon. Madada is in Arusha harmonising that policy with those of the other East African countries. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, is that policy going to say that for every foreigner, create 12 jobs for Ugandans? That is what we want to hear. Is that what it is going to say? That is what we want to hear.

MS ALUPO: Madam Speaker, in that employment policy, conditions are going to be provided for all the investors who have investment in Uganda, in relation to the number of jobs given to the foreigners, and those given to the Ugandans.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I think it is a procedural matter in as far as Parliament handles policy documents that are brought into this House. We need to know what the procedure is because most of these policies are just laid on the Table and we never get to discuss them. We had the Land Use Policy launched outside there and a copy was brought here. It was the same thing with the Defence Policy and those other documents; they were tabled but Members never debated them. I think in our procedure, it is important for us to see how Parliament really inputs into those policy documents.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, that thing you are going to launch in Namutumba, what does it say? We do not know. Nobody knows it here. Honourable minister, please take our concerns into consideration. There are serious concerns of the unemployed in this country. Please.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, we are all concerned -(Interjections)– Yes! We are all concerned on this matter. I have had occasion to meet quite a number of investors and I have told them that the principle when asking them to come here is to get jobs for Ugandans. As I said, my colleague from Ministry of Labour would answer that one better because we, as immigration, cannot go very far unless we are guided by the Ministry of Labour. 

Like the Deputy Speaker is saying, for every foreigner there should be 10 jobs. Now, unless that comes clearly in our labour laws, there is no way Immigration can be able to enforce that. For us, we go by our Immigration Act. If somebody is supposed to be here for a specified period of time and he applies for a work permit that is permitted by the Uganda Investment Authority, there is very little we can do -(Interjections)– No; I do not think I need any more information on this matter. I am telling you how things are.

We can look for improvement. I am not saying that the system is perfect, but we can look for improvement, and my colleague can always join me sometime and we look through the law and see how best to improve it.

Let me give you some other information. Most work permits go for only 36 months or three years after which they are subject to renewal, and we are very strict on this one. We normally say that you should be able to find a Ugandan to replace you. You must convince us beyond any shadow of doubt that within the three years you have not been able to find a Ugandan. I can tell you that many applications have been rejected when they cannot prove satisfactorily why they want their permits to be renewed.

Immigration is constantly apprehending those fellows and taking them to court. At an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, I can come and lay before this House a list of the people whom we have apprehended for staying either in the country illegally or for staying in the country and working in the country when they do not have work permits. Those that we prosecute satisfactorily, we put them on the first flight back to their home countries. 

Somebody has made a statement and I will not take exception on this one. Someone said that there are some prisoners going naked. I want to state categorically to this House that about a month ago, I was in Luzira Upper Prison and I saw those prisoners; first of all those who are there, the 3,000 plus, are beautifully dressed up in their uniforms. We tailor uniforms. The Commissioner-General assured me that every prisoner in any prison in any of our facilities in Uganda is given a pair of uniform. So, I cannot believe this. I would like to know of the case where one time he was in prison and he went naked. I doubt that. -(Interjections)- Yes, they put on a yellow uniform. -(Interjection)- No, that is not the reason they put on a yellow uniform. (Laughter) 


I would like to join hands with my friends and colleagues who have said that things in Karamoja are almost back to normal. I was in Karamoja for four days and I travelled by car without extra security apart from my two bodyguards. I travelled all the way from Namalu to Kaabong through Abim and back to Soroti. So, I would also like to take this opportunity to salute the UPDF for a job wonderfully done. Now it is up to the Police - and we are taking on that responsibility of ensuring that there is law and order prevailing in that part of our beautiful country. 

Transport for prisoners upcountry 

Yes, that is quite true. Even here in Kampala, in some cases prisoners, walk from their facility to court simply because we do not have enough money, but there is hope. Under JLOS, we have been promised this financial year that we shall get facilities that will help us transport our prisoners to court. Of course this does not mean that we shall cover the entire country, but at least there is hope, and we shall keep moving on when money becomes available. 

A question was raised: When are we going to renovate the rest of the prisons? In northern Uganda and a good part of eastern Uganda, most of our prison facilities and police facilities have been renovated because of the good gesture shown by the Netherlands Government. They gave us a shot in the arm through JLOS and through the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme. Many of these facilities have either been renovated or new ones created. How soon shall we be able to renovate the rest? As I said, it depends on the amount of money that I can get. 

Hon. Godi is not here but I wanted to congratulate him –(Interjection)- Yes, he recently got married. However, I also felt very sad and I wanted to convey my sympathy and condolences to him for having lost his wife. But I also congratulate him upon getting another wife.

Community Service 

Honourable colleagues, about two years ago, I circulated to all of you a copy of the benefits of community service, and I made a very passionate appeal for you to help me have this programme understood all over the country. If you would like me to re-circulate this write-up, I am ready to do it. This is a programme which has helped us in several ways to decongest prisons. If somebody has stolen chicken or someone fought with his wife but the wife is not terribly hurt –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for allowing me to seek this clarification. As you talk about decongesting the prisons and using community service for petty offenders, I want you to tell me what you have in mind regarding mothers who are imprisoned with their innocent children. Children are serving sentences with their mothers. Now, as you have this in plan, what do you have in your basket for those mothers to be decongested or an arrangement where their children do not serve sentences with their mothers, including expectant mothers, because this is a human rights violation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That question was asked while you were away. I hope he will answer it. Minister, please try to hurry because we have defence and works to deal with. We have another report to deal with. Please try to conclude. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I am about to finish. There are very many questions that were raised. What mechanism do we have to regulate NGOs? We have the NGO Act.

Somebody made a statement saying that there are people who are beyond the law. I think the Army Commander answered this. Nobody in this country is above the law. 

Another issue that was raised concerned police and prison land, that it should be surveyed and titled. Definitely, and instructions to that effect were issued, but their complaint has always been that they do not have enough money. Cabinet did make a decision that all Government land should be surveyed and titled and we passed on this directive to the respective officers within the two institutions. 

Hon. Mutuluuza talked about something that has been very sensitive - how do we identify an applicant when he comes for a passport, and that the Banyarwanda of Uganda are being inconvenienced. I think that is not true. We have communities that cut across the borders, and we are very careful with those communities that come from those border areas. We are very careful with such communities because we do not want to give our passports to non-Ugandans. Remember that sometime back, some non-Ugandans accessed our passports and they almost got us into some diplomatic fracas. However, as soon as our ID project is in place, this will be history. 

Juveniles and minors in prison
 
I want to state categorically that we do not keep minors and juveniles in our main prisons. These are handled by the remand homes, for example in Kampiringisa. Statistics –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the children they are talking about are those imprisoned with their mothers. Some children are born there while their mothers are still serving their sentences. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, then these are two questions, but the one who made this contribution, and I think that was hon. Menhya, talked about minors being imprisoned. (Interjection) There are two issues now - there is the issue of minors who commit offences; these ones we do not keep in our prisons but in remand homes. 

The other issue is about children born either in prison or the mothers are in prison when they have babies in their hands. Madam Speaker, you ruled and cut me short, but with your permission please allow me answer this. When we are considering community service, especially for women, this is one of the conditions that we look at, but it depends on the nature of the offence. If it is a capital offence, we cannot give community service. If someone has committed murder, definitely there is no choice here. 

We have facilities in our prisons for looking after these children -(Interjection)- What information do you have? You can go to Luzira and you will see for yourself. As I have already told you, I was in Luzira three weeks ago - (Interjection)- Yes, even for lactating mothers, if you commit an offence –(Interjections)- Unless we pass a law and say when lactating mothers commit an offence, they do not go to prison, but that is a different matter which I will welcome if this House decides so. 

Statistics on length of sentences and remand periods
 
I can promise this House that this information is available and that I will produce it at the earliest opportunity, so that you can know who are serving what length of sentence and who have been on remand for what period. Even tomorrow, we can do that because the information is available. The Prisons department has got that information. I can see somebody there shaking his head. That is not a problem; we have that information.

Finally, I would like to really thank you, honourable colleagues, for all the support that you have been giving my ministry. I cherish it. It makes me very comfortable in this responsibility. As I have said, we are open at any moment. Our job is to ensure that there is law and order in this country so that you can practice your freedoms; so that you can enjoy your politics when everybody is happy and free, provided we do it within the law. Thank you very much.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had fewer questions than my colleague, the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, so I will not take as long.

I hope, at the end of my presentation in responding to the questions, to have conveyed two key messages - one, to put in context the expenditure that we incur in the defence sector and two, to indicate to members the state of defence of our country. I will, therefore, follow five themes: Contextualising the expenditure; defence of the country; the welfare of the Army; the productivity of the Army, and the civil-military relations.

On the side of expenditure, we are grateful that year after year, Parliament votes for us funds that we use to sustain the defence of the country. I would like to remind Members that at one time, the expenditure in the Defence sector was number one for many years. I will say that in this current Budget, we are going to appropriate, Defence is number five. At one time, the expenditure of Defence was 2.2 percent of the GDP. The proposed budget allocation for this year is just 1.4 percent of GDP and approximately seven percent of the total Budget.

I think it is very important that we also compare with other people that live with us in the region, and the world, as far as Defence expenditures are concerned, because that gives us orientation of where we should be going. Because of shortage of time, I will just quote six countries. Malaysia’s Defence expenditure is two percent of GDP. Sudan, our neighbour in the north, has its expenditure at three percent of GDP. Botswana’s expenditure is 3.3 percent of GDP. Kenya, our neighbour in the east, is 2.8 percent of GDP. Tanzania is 3.1 percent of GDP. Ours is just 1.4 percent.

That indicates quickly that the Defence sector is under funded. However, because the army is a national Army and an Army born out of revolution, whenever other priorities arise, they are ready to wait at some stage. For example, we all support that Works should be number one followed by Education, the Energy sector and then the Public sector. So, my first point is that we are underfunding the Defence sector.

We had the opportunity to go to the countryside with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Hon. Kyanjo was there together with other colleagues in the House. They saw where improvements have been made and they also saw where we need to do a lot more. If we had sustained the percentage of 2.2 percent of GDP, we should be appropriating Shs 808.7 billion this year. That is my first point in terms of assessing the budget which we are passing for the Army.

In terms of the defence of the country and where we have hot spots, Somalia has been widely discussed and I want to sum up the situation in Somalia. There are now six battalions in Mogadishu; three contributed by Uganda and three contributed by Burundi. What has changed of recent is that the UN, although it has not yet owned the mission in Somalia, has formally decided to support the mission. My honourable chairman did report that the UN in January approved US$ 72 million to support AMISOM in Somalia. The European Union is very supportive too and there are also bilateral donors assisting us.

Part of the problem in Somalia - and I am glad that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has spoken on this - is the issue of mandate. There is the issue of numbers, but there is also the issue of mandate. Even when the Army knows where the insurgents are; even when they know the insurgents are about to reach State House to try and assassinate the President; they cannot answer until the insurgents have shot at the Army. They can only respond in self-defence. This heavily constrains the work of the Army in that operation, and we stand at par with the committee in requesting that the mandate be reviewed appropriately.

I have just come from Libya where we had a summit of the OAU Extraordinary, and the OAU Summit has also concurred that the mandate of AMISOM, as we mobilise more resources, should be reviewed.

I will leave Somalia at that point and go to our neighbour, the Congo. The problem in the Congo still remains the negative forces. When we are talking about Congo, we are not only talking about LRA but about ADF -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The minister has stated that our budget for Ministry of Defence is 1.4 percent. Given that we had Shs 7.5 trillion, if you multiply that by 1.4, you get about Shs 392 billion. Are you in order to tell us that Shs 464 billion is the same as 392 billion? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, he is talking about the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Please continue.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would invite hon. Nandala-Mafabi to have lunch with me then we can go over the mathematics. 

When we were talking about our neighbour, Congo, the broader picture is that of negative forces. The LRA is just one of them, but we have the Interahamwe and we also have the ADF in the case of Uganda. In the case of LRA, as we have said and as the committee has reported, we think that the situation is going very well both militarily and also diplomatically. Yes, the offensive against LRA is a regional offensive. We are working with Southern Sudan, the DRC, and the Central African Republic, where the LRA Force has now moved, escaping from the hot pursuit of the joint offensive by the forces that I have mentioned.

In terms of our defence, we should know that Eastern Congo remains a hotspot with those negative forces. We must, therefore, keep that situation under full view so that when we are called upon, we are able to take the appropriate action in the defence of our country.

Hon. Odit raised a related question - the historical Shs 10 billion that we are supposed to owe the DRC. This matter has been discussed at the highest levels and at a number of summits between President Museveni and President Kabila. It has been passed on to the appropriate sectors of Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Attorney-General to review. I am sure that when they reach a conclusion, we shall be appropriately informed.

This response would be incomplete if we did not say something about the formal and growing co-operation that is going on in defence in the region. At the East African Community level, our armies are working together and they were given a Memorandum of Understanding by the different heads of state. We are looking forward to this Memorandum of Understanding being upgraded to a protocol.

On Saturday, the armies of East Africa - Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya - are going to have a field exercise in Kilimanjaro. They are going to imagine there is war in Kilimanjaro and they are working together in order to deal with that situation. This is a fundamental change in the way that we are going to keep the security of the East African people - to have the armies of five countries working together and thinking together on how they will defend our region.

Our co-operation does not end only with the East African Community. Under the African standby force, we fall under the brigade in Eastern Africa. This brigade consists of 11 countries including: Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, Kenya, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Djibouti, Seychelles, Madagascar and Mauritius. Again, our co-operation here has gone so far that in the course of this financial year, there is going to be a joint field exercise by armies from these 11 countries, and this will take place in Djibouti.

Lastly, coming back to East Africa, there is also going to be a field exercise by the armies of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania in the area of Gulu and Kitgum. Again, this goes to show how far we have come in ensuring that we have a common approach to the defence of our continent.

I will move to the question of welfare of the Army, which has been discussed, but there are points I want to clarify. Normally, when the Minister of Public Service or the Minister of Finance announces a salary hike, the Army is left out. For the first time in many years, I am glad to report that the five percent hike in this year’s budget has reached the Army and so the Army, like other public servants, is going to have this increment.

When it comes to parity, we have worked with the Ministry of Public Service to equate different ranks and different responsibilities within the Army with their counterparts in the traditional civil service. The conclusion is that as far as salary is concerned, parity has been achieved from the private to the lieutenant. However, above lieutenant there are still gaps; the traditional civil servants who are their equivalent still take home a bigger package than their counterparts in the Army. We will continue to work at this so that the people working in the Army are not disadvantaged.

I want to repeat what the Chief of Defence Forces said, that now that the payroll of the Army is computerised, the issue of ghost workers is a thing of the past. I can assure you that it will not recur in the Army.

Accommodation, although improving, is still difficult. Some barracks have been modernised, but in many places the soldiers still live in the “mama ingia pole”. We would like to thank the committee for recommending that the development budget of the Army needs to be hiked.

We have done a needs’ assessment and in order to complete building the barracks to a modest standard, we need over Shs 1 trillion. We do hope that when we make a presentation to Government, a plan will be agreed upon, on how quickly we can get this money so that accommodation can be improved throughout the Army.

There have been complaints that now and again, we come for supplementaries. I want to assure Members that each time we come for a supplementary, it is justified. One of the areas that we normally have pressures from is the issue of feeding the soldiers. The soldiers feed from the same market that you and I feed from, and as you know, seasonally, food prices do go very high. We cannot tell the soldiers to live on half ratios, so in situations like those we have no option but to return to you, the people who approve the funds.

I am glad to hear Members of Parliament saying that arrangements must be put in place so that the soldiers too can participate in Prosperity-for-All. Of course for the soldiers this is not as easy as for those who are outside the Army, because a soldier should expect that anytime we can get trouble and should be on standby. At another time, the soldier will one day go home and he has a family to look after. So, in a limited way, some actions are being taken in the Army. Now that the Army is not as active as before in terms of war, extension officers have been appointed that are going to help individual families and advise them on activities that they can undertake, and advise in order to improve the incomes of their families. 

On the side of the SACCOs, I think the “Wazalendo”, a SACCO of the Army, is one of the leading ones and the Army has welcomed this and literary all the soldiers are saving with this organisation. So, welfare is improving. More is planned to be done with time subject to funds being available. 

Madam Speaker, I will now move to the issue of productivity of the Army. We now have what we call the “engineering brigade”. Before, it has been a battalion. The Commander-in-Chief has strengthened it and put it to the level of a brigade in order to prepare the Army to be more productive, not just in agriculture, but in other works.

Capacity is going to be built in the Army to assist in road construction, railway construction and valley dam construction, in addition to housing and water works. We do believe that the rest of the country will definitely benefit from this move.

My last point goes to civil military relationships. This is something we take very seriously. In fact, we say that the Army is like fish in the water, and in this case, the water is the population. So, we take relationship with the population very seriously. Without good relations with the population, even if we are well equipped, it is very difficult to fight a war and win it. So, I want to underscore what the Chief of Defence Forces said that no one, whether in the Army or in the Police, or in the President’s Office, is above the law. 

But for the Army, it is not just a matter of law. It is an ideology that we must have a good relationship with the population. You find that where the Army may be staying, if the population have no health care facilities, the Army goes out of its way to share the health services with the population. The same applies for water and other such issues.

So, the isolated land incidents we are hearing about, we have encouraged MPs that if in your constituency there is such a matter, you do not have to wait until there is a policy statement. Do communicate to us and the matter will be expeditiously handled. Many colleagues have brought such matters and we have taken the appropriate action.

The matter of auxiliary forces is at heart for the Army because they have been very useful when dealing with the insurgents. But for avoidance of doubt, I want to repeat that to date; we have paid 4,205 auxiliary forces. We have paid them over Shs 17.1 billion although the supplementary which was passed in the House was Shs 16.2 billion. We went out of our way to reallocate within the sector to make sure that they are paid. 

We have presented a very detailed documentation to the committee which at that time was chaired by Hon. Rose Namayanja with names and addresses and signatures of the people who have been paid. Nevertheless, we do not say that it is complete. But I would ask the honourable members not to be general. If you have a specific case, of an Auxiliary Force that has not been paid, present it to us with as much detail as possible, and we shall sort that out.

The matter of former soldiers – soldiers of former armies is also very critical to us. That was raised by hon. Epetait. I will make three points on this. One is that the former armies, apart from those of pre-independence, took Government to court claiming Shs 1 trillion. When they reached the Supreme Court, the court said they had no case, that they should go home.

But taking into consideration the wider view of the country, the government through the President decided that an ex-gratuitous payment be made to the soldiers who are in the former armies, including those who may have served before Independence. 

Unlike in the past, we have not called people to open accounts; we have not called people to come to Bombo; we are sitting down and checking the numbers because we have to exclude those who are already on the payroll for pension, and those who are currently in the UPDF, and those who may have already got ex-gratuitous payments. 

Once we have the figures and Cabinet has gone through them, an announcement will be made and an elaborate system of how they will be paid will be communicated. So, I would like to assure Members that this is a matter under serious consideration and our brothers and sisters out there should be reassured. 

Hon. Member for Central – hon. Lukwago has nagged me that I have to say something about my colleague Hon. Jeje Odongo. I had hoped that – well, what is the procedure. What did we demand as Parliament?  We demanded that the Attorney General should give legal opinion on this matter to H.E. the President. And, I would like to assure the House that the Attorney General has done so. What needs to be decided now is whether Lt. Gen. Odongo can now retire from the Army and, therefore, take his right place as Minister of State, or whether he should remain in the Army and other considerations are taken. 

I want to assure the House that in the very near future, this matter is going to be decided by the President and we shall get to know.

Hon. Kyanjo – on the point of the Islamic courts and Alshabab, I respect the knowledge of my brother hon. Kyanjo; he takes these matters seriously. What we are facing in Mogadishu is a mixture of insurgencies. Alshabab and elements of the Islamic courts, the radical factions. You know our friend Ahweshi who is in ICU – so you cannot say ICU is out. It is true that President Sherif was ICU moderate and he accepted reconciliation - perhaps I should have added that there are also other insurgencies including the Alshabaab.

I thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues for listening to me. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank all of you for your contributions and participation. And as we have agreed, the Committee of Supply will be handled on Wednesday for all the ministries. As for now, I put the question that this House do adopt the Report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will suspend the House for one hour. We will handle the report of the Committee of Physical Infrastructure on our return. Thank you very much.

(The House was suspended at 4.04 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.00 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)


PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

5.00
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have the pleasure to present to you and honourable colleagues, the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Works and Transport, and Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

I will not go through the introduction and methodology. Let me move on to page 2, which talks about the financial budget performance for the financial year 2008/2009 under vote 016 – Ministry of Works and Transport.

Table 1 shows what was budgeted for in the last financial year. It also shows the releases in terms of percentages. And as you can see, the release was only 61.4 percent. That means that the Ministry of Works and Transport received only 61.4 percent.

By the end of June 2009, the Ministry had spent Shs 103.8 billion out of the approved Shs 169.1 billion, which included donor releases, representing a performance of 61.4 percent. 

I think we need to note that it was not possible to issue the overall performance of some vote functions due to lack of donor budget data from the Ministry of Finance. This is a serious matter that also concerns other ministries. I do not understand why Ministry of finance cannot liaise with other ministries to get this data after this money has been spent.
 
Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA)

As you are aware, UNRA is mandated to develop and maintain the –(Interruption)

MR BALIKOWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are considering a very important sector. So, is it procedurally right to continue discussing this report when the minister responsible is not around?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the report of the committee. It is written and has been distributed. The more important part would be that when the Members are speaking to it, the minister must be here to respond. But since his counterpart is here, let us proceed.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was on 2.2 - Uganda National Road Authority, which is mandated to develop and maintain the national road network and well as management of national roads, ferry services and axle load control.

Table 2 shows the approved budget, releases as the percentages for UNRA. The total budget approved for UNRA for financial year 2008/2009 amounted to Shs 948.63 billion, of which Shs 715.91 billion was for development, while Shs 152.7 billion was for the recurrent budget. 

Table 3 shows releases, outturns and the performance percentage for UNRA.

The overall expenditure performance for Vote 113 amounted to Shs 565.34 billion out of the release of Shs 744.08 billion, representing a performance of 76 percent. This performance is attributed to the under performance of Government of Uganda Development Budget, which registered 58.6 percent, and taxes, which performed at Zero percent. 

The committee was concerned with the low absorption capacity of Uganda Government Budget under UNRA. Despite the 100 percent budget outturn for the donor development budget, out of the domestic development budget of Shs 335.23 billion released, only Shs 196.49 billion was actually spent.  

However, the committee was informed that most of the funds were committed to various projects, although not yet spent. A total of Shs 248 billion was committed to the following projects: Matugga–Semuto–Kapeeka; Busega–Mityana; Kampala–Masaka; and Ntungamo–Kabale–Katuna. 

In addition, Shs 99 billion was allocated to projects that had run short of funding and these included: Kawempe–Luwero–Kafu; Jinja–Bugiri; and Dokolo–Lira.

Physical Performance by vote function for financial year 2008/2009. 0.1 shows the vote functions that we have in this ministry. We have been elaborative on each of them. 

Transport Regulation

Under this vote function, the things that were handled are very clear. I think Members will read that. However, the committee observed that the Ministry did not prioritize the issue of road safety when it carried out only four sensitization campaigns in the four regions of the country. 

Road safety should be given more priority by giving it enough funds. The committee was, however, informed that the Ministry of Works and Transport is in the process of establishing a National Road Safety Authority, and urges the ministry to expedite the exercise.

The committee welcomed the idea of having a motor vehicle inspection firm, but recommends that Government should consciously enter into such concessions to avoid the scenario of Rift Valley Railways (RVR) that has left railway transport crumbling. 

The committee welcomed the operationalisation of the sections in the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998. However, their enforcement is still weak, and hence, their impact has not yet been felt.

When you go on to 3.1.3, transport services and infrastructure, Members can see what happened, but let me just mention that the procurement of designs and supervision of consultants for the four border posts was completed and signing of the contract was expected to be by the end of August. These are the border posts of Katuna, Mutukula, Malaba and Busia.

Also, I wish Members to note that the procurement of a consultant for the feasibility study to upgrade Tororo-Pakwach railway line is ongoing, and the contract was expected to be awarded before the end of July 2009.

Allow me to also add here that under the East African Road and Railway Network project, the existing railway lines are going to be rehabilitated and extended. The railway line from Gulu is expected to be extended to Nimule and then Juba; the railway line from Pakwach is expected to be extended to Bunia and Kisangani; the railway line from Bihanga is expected to be extended from Kabale to Kigali; and the railway line from Kasese is also to be extended to Kisangani.

The other significant issue for Members to note is that the government position paper on the National Transport Master Plan and the Master Plan for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area was completed and awaits Cabinet approval. This is a project where the congestion in Kampala and other areas in the metropolitan area will be effectively handled.

The other vote function is the construction standards and quality assurance. It is important to note that they have updated the Building Control Bill. They have also financed the National Construction Industry Policy that is very important in many aspects of reducing the unit costs to the government. 

It is also important to note on page 7 that they have also completed 35 per cent of the works on the redevelopment of the Kyabazinga palace at Igenge.

It is also important for Members to note that the ministry has prepared all systematic preliminary and detailed designs for the construction of the government office block to be erected on Plot 9-11, Sir Apolo Kaggwa Road, just neighbouring the Parliament.

When we go to the district urban and community roads (DUCAR), this is where many Members of Parliament have interest. You can see the number of district roads, which were maintained, re-gravelled, rehabilitated and even some roads in the urban centres like in Kyotera, Kalisizo, Lyantonde and Ibanda, which were tarmarcked.

Works on some bridges like Enyau Ora footbridge; Dopeth, Ngusi, Nchwera, Nsamya-Ntunda and Oguta bridges were completed. Works on Agwa, Alla, Birara, Hamurwa and Nyamabare were commenced; and designs for Kaguta, Semuliki, Kanyamateke, Kyarumba, Kabale, Ora, Nyanga and Bugaji also commenced.

Designs for Kisege, Mirambi, Wassa I and II, Simi-Pondo, Atoot, Okor, Kabundaire and Alla I bridges were completed and 33 kilometres of the Karamoja Roads Development Program were also rehabilitated.

Let me now go to function 1.6 - mechanical engineering services. What is shown there are some of the ferries, which have been handled by the sector. This is one sector where honourable members are always asking many questions concerning the ferries. Allow me to take sometime and talk about the ferries so that my colleagues can go to their constituencies and give a clear picture.

UNRA at the moment is operating and maintaining six ferry crossings at the following places; Laropi ferry, which crosses the Albert Nile between Laropi, Moyo District and Umi in Adjumani District. I am expanding on what is here because I found out that Members will want more information.

Madam Speaker, I was on the mechanical engineering services and there are some ferries they are talking about. After talking to hon. Members, I found that they needed more information and that is why I am expounding. They are in the policy statement, but I am extracting them for clarity.

The second ferry is the Masindi Port ferry, which crosses Victoria Nile between Masindi Port in Masindi District, and Kugu in Apac. The third is Wanseko ferry across L. Albert, between Wanseko in Buliisa District and Panywa in Nebbi District.

There is Nakiwogo ferry across Lake Victoria between Nakiwogo in Entebbe Municipality and Kyanvulu in Wakiso District. Then we have the Bukakata-Luuku ferry across Lake Victoria between Bukakata, Masaka district and Luuku, Kalangala District. We have the Kiyindi ferry across L. Victoria between Kiyindi in Mukono District and Buvuma in Mukono District.

Also, very soon, UNRA is preparing to commission a new ferry across the Victoria Nile to cross between Mbulamuti in Kamuli District and Nabuganyi in Kayunga District. I am also happy to report that the ministry intends to provide waiting sheds, offices, toilets and lighting at the above ferry crossings. Also, in the long-run, UNRA is working at acquiring land at the crossing sites to develop the landing facilities so that the ferries can move smoothly. 

Also, a ferry to cross the Albert Nile between Obongi in Moyo District and Maji in Adjumani district. The procurement started last financial year and we are at the evaluation stage. The ferry is expected by July 2010. 

Also, a ferry across L. Kyoga between Zengebe-Lwampanga Nakasongola District and in Namasale, Amolatar District. Procurement started in June this year and the ferry was expected in August this year. 

Finally, they have also delegated procurement of ferries from the Office of the Prime Minister and this is the L. Bisina ferry. This ferry crosses L. Bisina and will link Kumi to Katakwi District. A supply contract of an amount of Shs 3.724 billion was signed between the government and Messrs of Netherlands that mans shipyards. The letter of credit is expected to be opened as soon as the Office of the Prime Minister remits the balance of Shs 2.724 billion because the Office of the Prime Minister has only passed Shs 1 billion to the Ministry of Works. 

Additionally, the procurement of a consultant to design and carry out construction supervision of the landing sites for the same ferry is also in advanced stages for award. 

MR BUTIME: I am not a very dull student, but I cannot follow how the chairman is proceeding. The document he has given us is completely different from the one he is reading. Can I be assisted so that I follow with him and then discuss the report? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chair, is that a summary or do you have a different document? 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I was doing this for clarity because many Members are interested in queries. And when we write a report, we do not copy everything from the policy statement. But if it is the wish of the Members, I leave it out.

Now, I proceed.

3.2 Performance under Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority

Madam Speaker, I now turn to the physical performance under the UNRA. It should be recalled that out of the total budget appropriated to the Ministry of Works and Transport, 85 per cent was for UNRA. Of this, 84 per cent was spent on road construction and maintenance, while 16 per cent was for recurrent activities. 

Physical performance

3.2.1 is showing the policy planning and support services - what they did. 

I turn to the section where most of the famous Shs 1.1 trillion has been spent on national roads maintenance and construction. 

3.2.2 that is on page 9; national roads maintenance. Key achievements can be seen in the tarmacking, maintenance, upgrading and re-sealing of roads. But I think I need to point out for clarity that the repair works on the Nile Bridge at Jinja and Awoja Bridge on Mbale-Soroti Road are ongoing. 

Then the procurement of a contractor for the construction of the Aswa bridge on the Gulu-Kitgum road also commenced and the feasibility study for the new bridge - Nile Bridge at Jinja, is ongoing. The government has prioritised this project and is doing it with our development partners the Japanese. 

3.2.3 National Roads Construction

Madam Speaker, a total of Shs 775.433 billion was allocated for national road construction and maintenance for the fiscal year 2008/2009. The following projects benefited from this funding.
Major construction works for the following roads were substantially completed: Jinja-Bugiri, which is about 99 per cent complete; Kampala Northern Bypass 95 per cent plus completed; and Kawempe-Luweero-Kafu. These projects are expected to be handed over in September this year. 

Construction and rehabilitation of the following roads continued: Soroti-Dokolo, Dokolo-Lira, Kabale-Kisoro Bunagana-Kyanika, Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe and Masaka-Mbarara.

Procurement of contractors for the following roads is in advanced stages: Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Imaya, the award of the contract is just awaiting the African Development Bank’s “no objection”; Busega-Mityana, the contracts have been signed. Malaba-Busia-Bugiri, the evaluation of bids is ongoing; Mbarara-Kikagati, prequalification of contractors is ongoing; and Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge, prequalification of contractors has been advertised. Kampala-Masaka is also ongoing. 

Design of the following roads was completed: Atiak-Moyo –Afogi; 300kms of district roads; 2,011 kms of district roads in 12 districts in South-western Uganda; Mbarara-Kabale-Katuna; and Nyakahita-Ibanda-Fort Portal.

Designs of the following roads were started: Gulu-Atiak-Nimule; Vura-Arua-Koboko-Oraba; Kapchorwa-Suam; Ntungamo-Mirama Hills; Kagamba-Ishaka; and Hoima-Kaiso-Tonya roads.

In addition, procurement of design consultants for upgrading projects totalling 1,955 kms of roads - some of these are capacity improvement projects that are due in some areas - and design review projects amounting to 467 kms is ongoing.

Members may be interested to know that these designs cost about US$ 1.5 million per 100kms. 

4) Budget outlook for Works and Transport Sector - FY 2009/2010 is Shs 1,042.055 billion (excluding non-resource taxes and road funds). Whereas the Ministry of Works and Transport will take Shs 138.082 billion, which represents 13 percent, UNRA will take a lion’s share of Shs 903.973 billion which represents 87 percent. Out of the total budget for UNRA, 89 percent is meant for road construction, representing Shs 808.949 billion. 

The committee demanded to know why taxes on imports had not been provided for within the budget for UNRA and the Minister assured the committee that this was an omission and would be considered under the corrigenda at the time of appropriation. I am happy to report that this has already been done and the budget has been adjusted accordingly.

It is important to note that this Financial Year 2009/10, the Road Fund has been allocated a vote - Vote 118 with a total budget projection of Shs 116.24 billion for national and district road maintenance. The Committee was informed that the Road Fund will become operational from January 2010. So, this money which has been for Vote 118 is from January up to the end of the year.

This Financial Year 2009/10, Shs 320.26 billion added to the sector in Financial Year 2008/09 has been maintained to enable steady implementation of projects under the Transport Corridor Project.

Adequate funds have been provided in this Financial Year 2009/10 to enable the Ministry and UNRA improve the service level on our roads and other related infrastructure. 

The committee is grateful to Government for the continued prioritisation of the Works and Transport sector. The NRM Government has provided these huge funds without any advice or pressure from any circles. 

It should be remembered that last Financial Year 2008/09, Parliament noted that the enhanced funding and the reforms in the ministry were faced with the following challenges:

    1. Absorption capacity of funds by both the Ministry and UNRA; this was a problem identified in the sector;

    2. The need for training programmes for both Ministry and UNRA staff to match the new roles and challenges;

    3. A need for increased supervision and critical review of design works usually done by consultants to reduce on unnecessary claims and extra works that usually arise; 

    4. Analysing the unit costs to road construction; 

    5. Need to attract more credible construction companies with a view of forcing costs down through increased competition; 

    6. Need to develop local construction companies with limited interference from the Ministry;
 
    7. Need to research into new construction methods and materials; 

    8. Need to work on a strategy to reduce traffic congestion in the city through introduction of a Bus Rapid Transport System, upgrading more roads etc; and 

    9. Lastly, the need to work on road safety jointly with Ministry of Internal Affairs, Health and that of Education and Sports.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am glad to report that both the Ministry and UNRA have made significant improvements on most of those challenges. All they need from us is more ammunition so that they can perform better.

The restructuring of the ministry and the creation of UNRA is now producing dividends. The areas where focus should be put are axle-load control, road safety and the development of local contractors. 

The committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that the above aspects be taken seriously by Government as a means of rationalisation to improve financial prudence.

        4.1 Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport

The proposed budget outlook for FY 2009/10 is on Table 4. We are showing you where there have been increases or decreases in comparison with last financial year.

The total budget for Ministry of Works and Transport is Shs 138.08 billion, including taxes and arrears. The total budget for the Ministry has reduced by Shs 31.03 billion from Shs 169.11 billion in Financial Year 2008/09 to Shs 138.08 billion in Financial Year 2009/10. Whereas other Vote functions in the ministry have had reductions, that of transport regulation and mechanical engineering services have had some modest increments as can be seen in Table 4 above.

Planned activities for financial year 2009/10 by vote function. We will start with policy planning and support services. You can see what falls under those. On vote function - transport regulation, that is also shown. 

The next Vote is transport services and infrastructure. Here, allow me to point out something. Under vote function - transport services and infrastructure, some of the activities will be procurement of a contractor for the rehabilitation of MV Kaawa; conducting a feasibility study for the rehabilitation/upgrading of Tororo–Packwach railway line; establishment of the Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (MATA); and also completing the feasibility study of the Kampala-Kasese railway line.

I now go to the District, Urban and Community Access Roads, also known as DUCAR. Uganda Shs 50.854 billion inclusive of taxes and arrears has been earmarked under the Ministry of Works and Transport budget for this vote function in the Financial Year 2009/10.

In addition, Shs 67.92 billion has been earmarked towards DUCAR under Votes 501 to 850 for the local governments. The activities to benefit from this funding include: the maintenance, re-graveling, rehabilitation and tarmacking of roads - you can see the kilometres to be covered.

We are also going to construct two bridges at Grik and Nyakwae, designing and construction of Saaka, Agwa, Mahoma, Nyamabare, Mpongo, Kanyamateke, Kabaale, Kaguta, Atoot, Alla II, Okor, Semuliki, Karujumba, Nyanga, Buganja, Simu, Pondo, Kabundaire and Kisege bridges.

Under the Islamic Development Bank funding, we shall construct 17 bridges in North Eastern Uganda. They include: Olyanai, Abalang, Alipa, Ajeliek, Ojonai, Opot, Achuna, Komolo, Getom, Aakol, Aigogo, Abalang 3, Agali, Enget, Kochi 2 and Nyawa.

Let me also take this opportunity to report that over 10,000 kilometres of district roads have been upgraded into national roads. For the first time, the ministry of works has sent money for road maintenance directly to the sub-counties, and I am sure the members are aware of this.

The government is working through public-private partnerships to procure road maintenance equipment to be managed at regional level.  

Construction Standards and Quality Assurance 

As Members look at the figures, I would like to draw their attention to the bullet that talks about the National Construction Industry Policy to be publicised. Support will be provided to the construction industry to assist our local constructors, which will eventually help to lower the unit costs of our works.

The principles for the establishment of the Uganda Construction Industry Commission to regulate and coordinate the construction industry will also be drafted.

The next vote function is the mechanical engineering that the members can read.

Vote 113 - Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA)

UNRA has one vote function, the national roads maintenance and construction. 

The Uganda National Roads Authority’s mandate is to develop and maintain national roads, manage axle load control and ferry services. Table 4 shows us the amount that each section is taking and the percentage of that share. 

The total budget is Shs 903.92 billion, of which Shs 95.02 billion is recurrent while Shs 808.5 billion is for development expenditure, representing a reduction of Shs 44.7 billion, down from Shs 948.63 billion approved in the last financial year.

It should be noted that the government has remained committed to its promise of providing substantial funding towards the development budget.

Out of the Shs 808.9 billion earmarked for development, Shs 491.27 billion, representing 59 percent is from the government, compared to Shs 327.63 billion, representing 41 percent from our development partners. We must commend the government for taking on more responsibility.

The breakdown of the recurrent budget of Shs 95.02 billion shows that Shs 11.2 billion is for administration, Shs 81.59 billion is for national roads maintenance, while Shs 2.24 billion is earmarked for national roads construction. The breakdown of the development budget of Shs 808.9 billion is available and is shown in table 5 on page 25. 

Item 38 talks about transport corridor projects, and I advised the members to look at page 109 of the policy statement document given to you.

Vote 113 - UNRA Planned activities for the Financial Year 2009/10.  

Shs 95.02 billion has been earmarked as recurrent budget for UNRA. The key activities are listed on that page

Development projects Planned for Financial Year 2009/2010
Madam Speaker, a total of Shs 808.9 billion has been earmarked for development activities this Financial Year 2009/2010. The break down of this budget per project activity is given under table 5 attached to this report. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg your indulgence to turn to that page and internalise it very well.

Air Transport

Civil Aviation Authority (CAA)

During the Financial Year 2008/2009, CAA earmarked Shs 1.6 billion to undertake the following activities: the activities are listed there and members have already internalised them.

The committee was informed that government agencies owed a lot of money to CAA to a tune of Shs 68 billion. 

The committee was further informed that URA alone had a debt of up to the tune of over Shs 40 billion resulting from unpaid rent and utilities at the airport. These unpaid debts have negatively impacted on the capacity of CAA to develop the airport to the required international standards. 

The committee recommends that instead of government thinking of concessions with non-reputable firms to develop the airport; it should find money to clear the arrears of CAA so that CAA can implement its development plans with out any further delay.

East African Civil Aviation Academy in Soroti 
Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that the total allocation for the Soroti Flying School is Shs 5.705 billion. Out of this, Shs 4.6 billion is meant to carry out the following activities:
    • Rehabilitation and modification of the campus and Staff buildings;
    • Procuring of flight training planes; and
    • To maintain aircraft systems and tools, among others.

However, the committee noted that over time the school has been lacking the required staff to meet its expectations. The committee recommends, therefore, that the ministry should expedite the process of recruiting the required calibre of staff to man the school and leave within the expectations.

Rail Transport

Performance of Rift Valley Railways (RVR) Ltd 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, rail transport remains the cheapest means of transport for bulk cargo. In November 2006, when Uganda Railway Freight Services were concessioned, the role of Uganda Railways Corporation changed.  The only role that remained was to monitor the railway concession and provide technical support to the government on railway matters. 

Last financial year, Parliament had recommended that government should review the concession to ensure that RVR performs to the expectations, but government assured Parliament that the concessionaire was doing well. 

However, the committee was surprised to hear from the minister that Railway concessionaire – Ms Rift Valley Railways (RVR) Ltd - had not performed to expectations. The concessionaire has breached several of the important provisions in the concession agreement, including those relating to payment of concession fees and maintenance of conceded assets, among others. 
The committee was informed that government is now reviewing the concessionaire with RVR to see whether there are possibilities of terminating it. 
The committee was further informed that RVR had been given a notice of violation and that it was due to expire – it must have expired by now. 
However, the committee was surprised, despite the advice of Parliament in last financial year that government should consider terminating the concession to avoid further loss; it has taken government this long to realise the problem.  
The committee was informed that the ministry would require Shs 19 billion to support Uganda Railways Corporation in case we terminate our contract with RVR. 
The committee, Madam Speaker, recommends that government should expeditiously take a final decision on whether to terminate the concession or not, without any further delay, and Shs 19 billion, required to support URC, should be programmed into the budget to avoid last minute panic.
Uganda Railways Corporation

In the Financial Year 2007/2008, Parliament had appreciated government’s renewed interest to revitalise rail transport when Shs 0.05 billion was earmarked for the feasibility study to re-open Kampala-Kasese railway line. 

During the Financial Year 2008/2009, Shs 0.28 billion was earmarked for the maintenance of the closed railway networks. That is Kampala-Kasese, Tororo-Packwach and the Busoga loop. 

By Financial Year 2008/2009, feasibility studies for Tororo-Packwach and Kampala-Kasese railway lines had been funded to the tune of Shs 1.6 billion and Shs0.68 billion, respectively.  

This financial an allocation of Shs 1.9 billion has been earmarked to carry out feasibility study for the opening of Kampala-Kasese and Tororo-Gulu-Packwach railway lines as well as strengthening the URC Secretariat. 

The committee recommends that the minister should provide a progress report regarding these studies.  In addition, the Ministry should provide the total budgetary requirement for this activity.

Now let me turn to water transport –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable chair, maybe you could only read the sub-heading and go to the recommendations. Members can read the other things on their own.

MR BYANDALA: Okay, thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On water transport, the committee strongly reiterates its earlier recommendation that given the importance of water transport, and in view of the development of the Southern route through Mwanza, government should seriously renew its interests in that transport sector. 

The committee further recommends that Uganda’s position in relation to the East African Road and Railway Network Project is reviewed because it does not favour our country. Parliament should have more interest in this project to ensure that Uganda gets its share.

MV Kabalega

As you recall, this ship sank and we have not got a report yet on the findings of why, how and what happened. The committee is still demanding for this and we should also note that the last financial year, we appropriated Shs45 billion for the replacement of this ship but the money was never used and returned to the Treasury.

The committee recommends that government should expedite the exercise of rehabilitating both MV Pamba and MV Kaawa with utmost seriousness to avoid the scenario of MV Kabalega which sank. 

Ferry Services

I have spoken about them very elaborately; I will not do anything again. These are the other observations by the committee.

Road Fund

The committee was informed that this Financial Year 2009/2010, a total of Shs 116.24 billion has been allocated under Vote 118 to cater for the activities of the Road Fund Board and secretariat as well as road maintenance. The committee did not understand how the figure of Shs 116.24 billion was arrived at.

Under the Road Fund Act, they stipulate where these moneys will be coming from but when we met both the Minister of Works and Transport and that of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we could not get clear answers from the Ministry of Finance of how they got those figures.

The committee recommends that the Minister should urgently table before Parliament the allocation formula before these funds under the road fund can be shared among the agencies that use the money. You remember last financial year, Parliament requested the Minister of Works and Transport to bring to Parliament for approval the sharing formula and this is the one am talking about.

Delays in Construction Projects

We are trying to highlight reasons why these projects are delaying. One of them is the compensation to the land owners. There are also changes in design that I talked about earlier and the lack of competent contractors leading to few contractors taking on too much work beyond their capacity.

The committee strongly recommends that the government should increase its vigilance in supervision in order to totally eliminate these hindrances without any further delay.

Bridges and Drainage structures

We are talking about the accumulating number of bridges because of the delayed projects in their construction. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government provides the attendant funding for bridge repairs and construction to enable these works take course without any further delay.

Gender Concerns

Last Financial Year 2008/2009, Parliament had appreciated the steps that had been taken to ensure that gender mainstreaming becomes more of an integral part of the sector other than simply symbolic.

Parliament noted that although guidelines for gender mainstreaming into the sector had been developed and were to be used to translate gender mainstreaming into the Ministry’s business, to-date there is no specific programme to consider gender concerns during this Financial Year 2009/2010.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the ministry develops gender responsive indicators to ensure that issues relating to gender are clearly mainstreamed in the sector this financial year.

In conclusion, I beg to move that this House adopts this report and approve the budget of the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Madam Speaker, allow me now to turn to the second part of this report. This is for Vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Vote 156, Uganda Land Commission.

Table 1 is showing you what was approved last financial year, what was released and the release performance.

Table 2, shows Vote 156 for Uganda Land Commission, what was approved, what was released and the percentage performance.

I will now turn to the fiscal performance by the vote function for the last financial year for the Ministry of Lands. We are showing you the vote functions which are in that ministry and then we start elaborating what those vote functions did; the policy planning and support services. So you can see what they did. Members, I am sure will be able to read and internalise.

Land Management and Administration

Their achievements are well laid down and I am sure Members have read and internalised them.

Physical Planning and Urban Development

What they did can be clearly seen; I do not have to read for the Members.

The Housing Vote function

The objectives of this vote function is clearly stated out; their achievements are tabled and maybe some people may be interested to know that this ministry has trained technical personnel in earthquake disaster management techniques in Bundibugyo and other areas and we are getting ready for any eventuality of an earth quake in Uganda.

In housing, one of the activities they have got to do is the establishment of the revolving fund for the Public Servant’s Housing Loan Scheme. This is a scheme government wants to start. 

The committee recommends that the Public Servants loan scheme should commence without any further delay to help our civil servants who never benefited from the sale of pool houses while in service and for those who have just joined the service.

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission

The Uganda Land Commission has only one vote function: the government land management vote function. We are going into the proposed budget for Lands, Housing and Urban Development Sector. 

Table 3, shows what was provided for in the last financial year; what has been proposed in this budget and it tries to work out whether there is an increase or decrease or no change. There has been an increase in most of these votes. 

The committee was informed that the sector will suffer from a funding gap of Shs 18.53 billion of which Shs 15.5 billion is due to under funding, while Shs 3.03 billion is due to unfunded activities. The critical activities that require immediate funding are:
    i. Sensitisation on the land law after it is passed in Parliament, which may be very soon.
    ii. Operationalisation of the housing department for which Shs 1 billion is needed.
    iii. Land use regulations under the Physical Planning Department for which Shs 0.7 billion is required.
    iv. Need for Shs 0.5 billion for the Department of Urban Development and also, the exercise of sensitising the public on their land rights needs funding. 

The Committee strongly recommends that given the nature of the unfunded activities, Shs 4.2 billion required for immediate implementation of the listed activities be provided within the sectors budget to avoid supplementary requests that usually disrupt the budget.

Planned activities for the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development by vote function

Land Administration and Management

The second vote function is land administration and management. Madam Speaker, I need to point out that this vote function of land administration and management is going to survey administrative boundaries, international borders of Uganda, Kenya and the DRC; and also some internal borders of districts in Uganda.  

Physical Planning and Urban Development

On this vote function, members can easily see what has been done as follows: 

    i. The implementation of the National Land Use Policy is prominent in this vote function; 
    ii. Implementation of the Physical Planning Bill which the committee is handling now and will be presented to the House very soon; 
    iii. The physical Planning for the Northern Region and the Albertine Graben Region; 
    iv. Implementation of the National Urban Policy;
    v. Formulation of the Land Use Plan. These are areas where we are going to work very seriously;
    vi. Development of the Urban Planning and Development Management Framework for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. This is an item which was also handled partly in the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Housing Vote Function

Madam Speaker, the outputs are very clear. Activities to be undertaken using this funding entail:

    i. The Public Servants Housing Loan scheme.

    ii. The National Housing Policy, the Estate Management Policy and we are also going to ensure that the implementation of the Condominium Law is strengthened, and we shall also continue with the sensitisation in earthquake prone areas.

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission 

We have shown you what was given in the last financial year; what we are getting this year and we have given you a picture of where we have gained and lost. As you can see, we have lost in the wages and in the recurrent, but we have had an increase in the funds for domestic development from 0.68 to 3.68. 

Madam Speaker, the proposed budget for the Uganda Land Commission amounts to Shs 4.18 billion. The large part of the additional allocation is meant for the land fund under the Uganda Land Commission.

Overtime, Parliament has been recommending that the statutory budget for the Uganda Land Commission to cater for emoluments of commissioners be provided for as it is the case for all other statutory bodies, but this has not been done to date. 

In the last financial year, Parliament was informed that the Uganda Land Commission was not receiving its statutory budget and this was affecting emoluments for its commissioners. The commission has been using its non-wage budget to finance this expenditure. When there are arbitrary budget cuts, commissioners’ emoluments are not spared and they are left unpaid. 

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Finance failed to establish the law guaranteeing this statutory expenditure. So, we appeal to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and that of Finance to sort out this issue so that the Uganda Land Commission can get a law.  

The committee recommends that a statutory budget to cater for emoluments of commissioners be allowed as is the case for other statutory bodies in this financial year so that this matter is cleared once and for all.

Planned Outputs for Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission
The Planned Outputs for the Uganda Land Commission are spelled out very well as follows:

    i. Development of Government Land Inventory.

    ii. Survey and process Government land titles. This will reduce on people encroaching and grabbing Government land.

    iii. Piloting the Land Loan Scheme.

    iv. Compensate absentee landlords of registered land in Kibaale and elsewhere.

Other Observations

Domestic Arrears

The committee noted that despite the existence of the Commitment Control system, the ministry continues to accumulate arrears. The current level of arrears amounts to Shs 20 billion of which Shs 18billion is outstanding compensation to ranchers. 

The committee recommends that government should adhere to the commitment Control System to system to stop accumulation of arrears, in addition the Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development should prioritise payment of property rates and other utilities to the local authorities to avoid accumulation of arrears beyond manageable levels.

Compensation to Ranchers

Compensation of ranchers has dragged on over time; these ranches were surveyed and valued many years ago. The outstanding arrears to ranchers now amount to Shs 18 billion, but only Shs 2.9 billion has been earmarked with in this financial year. The committee was informed that two of the ranchers have already demanded for revision of evaluation of their land to get new values.

Madam speaker, Parliament has been recommending year in and year out that government finds funds to clear the debt once and for all, but nothing has been done to date.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that government should treat these arrears just like foreign debts and clear the amounts as a matter of agency to avoid possible litigation which may lead to huge repayment costs.
 
Land Fund 

Over time Parliament has been recommending that government should provide for land fund guidelines but nothing has been done to date.

The committee observed that the budget earmarked for land fund is too little to have any meaningful impact on the ground. 

The committee noted that the establishment of the land fund was the only solution to issues of land evictions and conflicts resulting from multiple land rights due to dual ownership of land by both the land lord and the tenants.

The committee recommends that government should take the issue of land compensation as a top priority, and source for funds to gradually phase out the backlog and have the problem solved once and for all. 

Additional space for Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development 

My committee visited the ministry headquarters on Parliament Avenue to have an on spot check on the problem of office space which has been appearing in their policy statement year in year out.

The ministry has problems of congestion, especially the registry area leading to loss of vital documents such as land titles.

Last year Parliament was informed that the ministry had a plan of constructing two additional floors on to the century building to create more office space, a total of Shs 4 billion is required to have this completed.

The committee recommends that funds required for this activity should be sought by government so that construction starts this financial year.

Survey and demarcation of district and international boarders: This has been listed as a critical activity over the past three fiscal years in this sector. Next Financial Year 2009/10, Shs 2 billion has been earmarked in the budget to begin surveying and demarcation of international borders beginning with DRC.

The committee was informed that the responsibility of ensuring that district borders are surveyed and earmarked lies with the respective local governments and the Ministry of Local Government.

The Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development intervenes only to provide the technical capacity to carry out the activities.

The dispute between Uganda and Kenya over the ownership of Migingo Island must be sorted out. The committee was informed that the survey exercise was called off after a disagreement between the survey teams of Uganda and Kenya, by then Uganda had already spent Shs 1 billion.

The committee recommends that government should work out a plan to have all international borders demarcated to avoid further consequences resulting from conflicts that keep cropping up. 

In addition government should ensure that the issue of Migingo is cleared once and for all using the available possible means such as going for arbitration.

The issue of international boarders is growing and this week you heard about Uganda and Southern Sudan, so we need to sort out these international boarders as soon as possible.

Physical Planning and Urban Development Directorate Overtime 

This directorate has suffered from gross under funding. This Financial Year 2009/10, it is lined up to benefit from an increment of Shs 1.6 billion. This increment will benefit only two departments, that one of Urban Development and Land Use and compliance, while that of Physical planning will still suffer from the usual meagre budget of Shs 0.7 billion.

The committee recommends that with effect from the next Financial Year 2010/11, adequate funds should be availed to facilitate Physical planning department to enable it undertake its mandate with no excuses.

Participation and consultation of stakeholders on the National Land Policy appears in our view not to have been adequate. We appeal to the ministry- I do not know whether there is any MP here who has participated, or consulted on the National Land Policy, and we are told it is about to be tabled. From the experience of the amended Land Bill, we may have a problem if there is no extensive consultations and knowledge sharing.

As I conclude I, beg to move that this House adapts this report and approve the budget for the Land Housing and Urban Development sector. Thank you very much.

6.17  
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Shadow Minister Works and Transport): Currently, I also hold the portfolio of Shadow Minister Works and Transport. I will briefly give the opposition view on this sector. The opposition wishes to make a few observations on how we view the Works and Transport sector.

This presentation will consider Vote 016 for the Ministry of Works and Transport and Vote 113 for the Uganda National Roads Authority. 

The ministry’s budget performance over the last three years for recurrent and development budget have almost been constant at 85 percent and 97 percent respectively. 

Last financial year was a unique year when the Ministry of Finance, responding to constant calls from the Opposition for increasing funding to the sector, allocated the highest amount ever to it, surpassing the one trillion shilling mark. Nearly all that money was released and the Opposition thanked the Ministry of Finance for that. 

This means that the Treasury has religiously released close to all the budgeted funds to the ministry for the running of its development activities including roads, works and projects. So, what was left for the ministry, therefore, was to accomplish its mandate of planning, developing and maintaining an efficient and effective transport infrastructure and transport service; managing public buildings, including government buildings, and promoting standards in the construction industry.

Despite all the above commitments from the Ministry of Finance to maintain a constant flow of funds to the Ministry of Works and Transport, the general performance of the ministry has remained wanting both in terms of policy formulation and implementation of projects and programmes. We wish to take note of the following areas where there have been glaring inadequacies: 

Unrealistic and impractical policies

During last financial year, the government re-introduced a policy of road maintenance based on non-contracting of maintenance roads. To this end, it was envisaged that Government would procure and equip all districts with a set of new road maintenance units. The Opposition at the time of the proposal of this policy was rather sceptical and suggested that given the high cost involved and the ever increasing number of districts, the policy was not immediately tenable and it would have been advisable to defer its implementation to a later stage. As expected, not even a single set of road equipment has to date been delivered to any district. The policy has, therefore, miserably fallen through. 

We wish to demand for the status of the implementation of this policy, but at the same time, recommend as follows:

    i) Ministry of Works and Transport should introduce regional pools of equipment, especially heavy equipment, and also immediately expand UNRA’s capacity by establishing new district offices.

Non-performing policies

There are a number of examples involving non-implementation of policies by the ministry. The case of axle load control has for so many years remained unresolved by the ministry. Although there is a law governing axle loads beyond which our roads should not be subjected, there is completely non-enforcement and compliance with this law. 

The Opposition wishes to observe that over 80 percent of the total road network in the country does not have any form of equipment deployed to regulate axle loading. On most roads where there is axle load measuring equipment, they are non-functional. A case in point is the axle load control point on the Masaka-Mbarara Road. This is one of the causes of early road failure.

We wish to ask the Ministry of Works and Transport, as a matter of urgency, to procure working axle load measuring machines for all main roads, and to enforce the penalties on those who break the law.

Costly and non-timely completion of projects

Despite regular outcries from the Opposition and the general public about the high costs of road construction in the country, the ministry has either failed or deliberately refused to invoke practical measures that will bring the cost and time of construction down. There are projects like Jinja-Bugiri, the Northern Kampala Bypass which has embarrassingly taken over two times the initial project contraction period. 

The Minister of Finance revealed to this august House that the Ministry of Works and Transport engages either ill or unqualified contractors.

Corruption was also cited by the Ministry of Finance as another cause of waste. This is shocking and both irresponsible and unacceptable, and we demand an explanation from the ministry why this problem seems perpetual.

Ministry of Finance also continues to be the national procurement officer for some of the roads in the country, for example, Jinja-Bugiri and the Kampala Northern Bypass. This, according to the Opposition, is an anomaly which is responsible for the unnecessary delays in procurement and subsequent late delivery of projects. 

The Opposition wishes to recommend that increased political and technical supervision capacity for the projects needs to be immediately built and that contract procurement be widened to increase competition with the eventual dividend of lowering costs and efficiency. 

We also want to advise that the Ministry of Works, through UNRA, becomes the national procurement officer for all road works, and they be given full responsibility for the procurement of contractors.

Planned and timely compensation of properties falling on the road areas should also be done. 

We also recommend that a special value-for-money audit be instituted to determine money lost through all these bad practices, and those responsible brought to book. 

Poor resource absorption and continued poor road networks

Last financial year, the famous one trillion mark budget provision was hit by the Ministry of Works, the first ministry ever to achieve this. As a result, the ministry, through UNRA, set out rather ambitiously and also in haste to take on the backlog of maintenance and also to contract rehabilitation and upgrading works. 

It is now clear to the Opposition that over 300 billion was unspent; this money having just been committed to ongoing works. This is a classic case of unutilised funds that the ministry sought but did not spend. We believe that this is a symptom of poor planning on the part of the ministry and its agency.

The Opposition wishes to challenge the ministry to explain why funds could be requested for and yet remain unspent at the end of the financial year. UNRA claims that the funds have since been committed to running contracts. The Opposition wishes to demand that the Ministry of Finance gives evidence that these funds are secure and ring-fenced to pay the running contracts and that committed funds will not be drawn from this year’s Budget.

We wish to recommend that funds requested for during any financial year should be spent in that financial year. 

Poor or non-functional railway transport

Last financial year, we observed that the railway transport system was almost non-functional or dead, and it was creating high maintenance costs for the rural network. The Opposition wishes to observe that despite promises to re-open the Tororo-Pakwach and the Kampala-Kasese lines, nothing in that direction has been done, and there is nothing significant that is expected this financial year.

The extension of the railway line to Southern Sudan remains a myth that may never be fulfilled by the NRM Government. Three years ago, a 25-year Uganda-Kenya Railway Concession was signed with Rift Valley Railways. We have previously recommended the termination of the concession agreement because of poor management by RVR and failure by them to fulfil the concession agreement, but the ministry has handled this matter sluggishly, leading to a dormant railway network. 

We wish to reiterate our position on the termination of the concession agreement with RVR, and to recommend that the Ministry of Works hastens the plan to open up the Kasese-Pakwach line, and to negotiate with the Government of Southern Sudan on the expeditious extension of the railway line to Southern Sudan. 

We also recommend that Government revitalises railway passenger transport as a vital service for the rural poor, and also a means to decongest Kampala City. 

Encroachment on road reserves

Road reserves have continued to suffer encroachment, and remain an encumbrance to further expansion of the road network, and provision of essential services. A hotel being developed at Bwebajja along Kampala-Entebbe Road and a fuel depot on the Kampala-Jinja Highway are some examples of encroachment. We recommend that Government demarcates all Government road reserves. 

Construction standards and quality control

Road fillers have continued to be put on our new roads and we know that this amounts to a loss in investment. As construction and maintenance works progress, the Opposition continues to observe defects on roads, even before they are commissioned. Depression and bleeding are commonly occurring, observable defects.

Potholes and poor motor-ability is common on the new Arua-Nebbi, Nebbi-Pakwach, Pakwach-Olwiyo, Olwiyo-Karuma road sections. The ‘black spots’ improvements on the Jinja-Kampala Highway that were recently worked on by a local contractor are a disaster. We recommend both political and technical supervision to be reinforced on all projects, and contractors penalised or completely blacklisted for defective works. 

Implementation of the Road Fund Act

The advent of the fuel levy saw the scrapping of road licence fees. It was then understood and Parliament was informed, that funds secured through levying tax on fuel would be ring-fenced exclusively, to tackle the backlog on maintenance of roads. 

The Opposition is concerned that it has taken very long to constitute all the arms of the Fund and that the money from the fuel levy, since its inception, has been diverted to other use.

The Opposition would like to demand that Government immediately operationalises the Road Fund, and that the Ministry of Finance reveals the total amount of money collected from the fuel levy, and it recommends that this money is immediately transferred to the Road Fund account.

Civil Aviation Authority

Shs 68 billion is owed to CAA by different government ministries and this has been the case for about a decade now. The situation continues to cripple this organisation which is now being viewed as non-performing, and probably the reason for the much hyped giveaway of Entebbe International Airport to a new manager, or selling it to an investor.

The Opposition believes that this is unfair and demands that Government recovers all monies owed to CAA. We also recommend that the management of Entebbe International Airport be left under CAA. 

CHOGM roads

There is still an outstanding debt of Shs 5.0 billion to be paid to contractors who worked on CHOGM roads. The Opposition is extremely surprised that this debt has been outstanding for two years now. We wish to question whether this money is actually owed to contractors, given that these ‘contractors’ are conspicuously silent. We also consider that the interdiction of the Engineer in Chief, Eng. Samson Bagonza, appears to be window dressing; as combat against corruption on the part of the ministry, and this officer had to play the sacrificial lamb. 

We demand that the minister informs this House whom these creditors actually are, and whether interest on delayed payments is being charged. 

Conclusion

The budget performance needs to be matched with actual physical performance. In the policy statement, planned and actual activities need to be given. There is a need to especially address the following areas urgently:

    • Traffic Management Plan for Kampala to reduce traffic jam.

    • More funding for road safety provisions so as to control road accidents.

    • Improved resource management through technical and political supervision in the ministry.

    • Construction of a new bridge at Jinja – Madam Speaker, I was about to say Pakwach for very obvious reasons - to replace the old one that has gone beyond its service life.

    • Provision of a ferry for Bukungu-Kaberamaido-Kasilo/Bugondo, and a third ferry for Kalangala islands. 

    • Access to the mountainous Bundibugyo and Bukwo areas which have extremely poor roads.

    • Opening of an alternative route to the sea to mitigate possible problems with our single access to the sea.

    • Timely maintenance interventions to avoid costly rehabilitation works.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much! (Applause) 

6.34
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to commend the committee for the work done. However, when I look at the list of those who signed, I realise that there is a name of hon. Father Simon Lokodo. I do not know whether the chairperson is aware that Lokodo is not a member of the committee. Why did he appear in the committee?

I wish to commend the Ministry of Works for the work done, especially regarding the money they have sent to the sub-counties. I wish to also commend the Ministry of Lands for surveying Katakwi and Moroto, the border districts that had become a problem, because people were getting killed because of different boundary perceptions.

I want to ask the ministry to inform this House on what happened to the road equipment. Last year, the Minister of Finance said he was launching an assault on roads and he gave the Ministry of Works Shs 1.0 trillion. They say that all the money was released but no single road equipment was bought. What exactly happened? What went wrong and what is going to happen?

Also, I am at pains when I look at the Kampala Northern Bypass. This is 21 kilometres of construction which has been going on for over seven years. I don’t understand whether the ministry is serious or we are serious as a country. 21 kilometres to be repaired for over seven years is pathetic and a shame!

When it comes to rehabilitation, I have not seen anything in Busoga region. The road that brings you here; the Jinja-Kamuli road is not there in the report. The roads from Walugogo, Kiyunga and Namwendwa are missing. These roads are in a very sorry state and I think the minister should come out strongly and tell us on the Floor of Parliament – (Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to give information to my colleague that it is not only Walugogo missing out. Last year, we were promised that the road from Musiita, Nankoma up to Busia will be one of those to be designed. We are also surprised that it is not captured in the report. We are not pleased with the way the report is being presented. I thank you.

MR MULUMBA: Madam Speaker, I also want to talk about the Kyabazinga’s palace. It has become an annual feature in the budget that they are going to complete it. We want to know when they are going to complete the Kyabazinga palace. Last year it was there but nothing was done in the whole financial year.

I want to talk about railway transport and RVR, which were given a concession to manage the railway transport. Instead of managing, they are mismanaging. Actually, it was in better shape but now it is on its death bed. This Parliament had recommended that the concession be terminated, but the ministry said they were doing a good job. Then they turned around and said they were not fulfilling their part of the bargain. I wish the Minister of Works could explain exactly what is taking place regarding the concession of Uganda Railways.

Madam Speaker, I thank you.

6.40
MR FREDERICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I take this opportunity to thank the committee for the report. Secondly, allow me to thank Government for doing all it takes to ensure that road infrastructure in this country is improved. 

I have one or two concerns I want to raise, and the first is the issue, which appears on page 19 of the report of the committee under Uganda Railway Corporation. We have been informed that during the financial year 2008/09, Shs 0.28 billion was earmarked for the maintenance of the closed railway networks and what was mentioned was Kampala-Kasese, Tororo-Pakwach and Busoga line.

Again in the financial year 2009/10, another allocation of Shs 1.9 billion has been earmarked for carrying out the feasibility study for the opening of the Kampala-Kasese, Tororo etc. The concern is, the Busoga line has been mentioned several times and actually it was meant to have benefited from the funds that were earmarked in the last financial year. So, I would like to request the ministry concerned to make clarification. Has any work been done on the rehabilitation of the Busoga line?

The second concern is on page 11 of the report. I would like the minister to clarify on this. I remember last year when a lot of dust was being raised concerning the issue of Jinja-Bugiri road. We were informed that the money that was meant to work on that road was a loan from the European Union. However, in this report, it has clearly been spelt out that the famous Shs 1.1 trillion - as one Member called it - is actually the funding that has been working on this road. This is because last year alone, that road according to this report had Shs 47.18 billion that was earmarked for the Jinja-Bugiri Road, and again this financial year 2009/10, there is another balance of Shs 4.37 billion that has been earmarked. So, basically, we want to know, was the fraud done from the loan from European Union or from the Shs 1.1 trillion?

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the government for coming up to implement the Road Fund Act. A lot of concerns have been raised especially on the issue of equity in the distribution of resources in this county. And I come from the poorest of the poor regions in this country, and one of the biggest problems is in the distribution of resources. 

So, I want to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the Road Fund that seems to be trickling down to the sub-counties. For instance, in this financial year 2009/10 there is a total budget projection of Shs 116.2 billion that is trickling to the sub-counties. 

Recently, we had a communication from the minister that at least most of the sub counties in this country were going to get part of that funding. However, there is a problem that I see on page 11. In the report, the chairman notes - that is in the first paragraph, “The committee was informed that the road fund will become operational from January 2000 -” (Member timed out_)

6.44
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. I wish also to thank the government for providing a new ship for Kalangala, which has been operating for the last three years. 

However, that ship like any other machine is supposed to get routine service and maintenance. Early this month, this ship was taken to Tanzania, Mwanza, to be serviced. But in modern times, I would have expected a technical body like a ministry full of engineers to do things in a modern way. 

They would have inspected the ship, and seen the issues that needed to be worked on, and contacted the contractors who were going to work on it, and know the given period when the ship would be worked on. 

To my surprise, this ship was taken to Mwanza and brought back after one week, the service was incomplete. As I talk now, the ship is grounded indefinitely in Nakiwogo. Isn’t this a disservice to the people of Kalangala? We cannot plan; this is marginalisation! I would not expect this to be done in such an era. How can a technical body do ad hoc things - in a trial and error manner! We are really irritated by this act and I am standing here painfully on behalf of Kalangala. 

Madam Speaker, I want the minister to come up and tell us the circumstances surrounding this matter. Now people have started saying that maybe they are going to sell this ship. This is about the third time I have been mentioning this issue without getting feedback from the minister. He is very aware that this ship is multi-purpose; it is supposed to carry cargo and people. But the loading facility design is not user-friendly at all. There was a mistake in designing this ship. They all know the modern way of doing things. Now the people of Kalangala painfully have to take their merchandise through the long way at Masaka. This has stunted a lot of businesses in Kalangala. Now, before the minister leaves this house, let him give an appropriate answer to the people of Kalangala regarding this matter. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue concern the navigation facility gadgets. For many years, we have been requesting Government to install navigation gadgets on the lake so that navigators can even move at night on the lake. But so far nothing has been done; there are no light houses. 

I remember that last financial year, Shs 1.6 billion was allocated for purchasing and installing navigation gadgets on the route from Bukakata to Nakiwogo. The ministry has failed to give an update to the committee, as you can read on page 20. They say, “The ministry has failed to give an update as to the whereabouts of the Shs 6 billion.” What is happening? This is like making people travel on a road with no road furniture. Why do you expose the people of Kalangala to high risk?

Madam Speaker, the trunk road in Kalangala – the road from Lukku to Mulabana. Three years ago, the minister announced that this road had been taken over by the central government. But this road carries heavy traffic load – (Member timed out_)

6.49
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice in thanking the NRM Government through both ministers, the Minister of Lands and the Minister of Works, for the detailed plan and projection that we have got this financial year. 

Madam Speaker, I am specifically happy to note that under the development budget estimates, the road from Kigumba to Kyejonjo via Masindi, Hoima and Kagadi has been earmarked for design.

On page 22, the committee has noted and observed that at times the changes in the designs lead to increased scope of work and project costs. 

I want to pray and request that the Ministry of Works, when working on these roads, ensures that the design is user-friendly. I know that the road from Kafu to Masindi is complete, but I remember one time I stood here and observed that the construction and designs had not taken into consideration access bridges. That is why I am praying that the designs for these other roads take into consideration the access bridges for the communities that reside near. I would like to report that actually for most of those homes that are along Kafu-Masindi Road, one has to ride a bicycle for like 500 to 1000 metres to get to an access bridge to his home, which makes it very cumbersome for the people.

Madam Speaker, under the development budget estimates, I expected to see a road from Kirasa in Masindi, to Kijunjubwa in Nasakese, on plan, because we had been assured that it had been taken over by the Central Government. But I do not see anything.

The other thing I would like to say is that I have noticed that when these roads are earmarked to be worked on by the Central Government, the district local governments abandon the maintenance, hence making it difficult for the communities there – I want to know from the Minister of Works and Transport what happened to this particular road and the bridge that connects Kijunjubwa to Bulyamusenyi in Nasakese.

I would like to say that I am happy that the committee has also observed that now, for almost two years, the MV Kabalega Ship is on the programme to be replaced. The people of Bunyoro, Madam Speaker, who are your Jajjas, attach great respect to the MV Kabalega. I can add that this year, Kabalega was honoured on Heroes Day.

I pray that the ministry takes it upon itself to purchase this ship and rename it after Kabalega. I am hoping this will help redress some of the problems that are happening in Bunyoro –(Interjections)- I seek to be protected, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are protected.

MS BINTU: On page 32, there is something on regional land offices. I would like to thank the Ministry of Lands for constructing both the regional and district land offices. However, my contention about the designs of these offices is that the local governments are actually given – (Member timed out_)

6.54
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I am going to restrict myself to Ministry of Works issues only.

I notice that throughout that report, there is a big appeal on road safety. I would like to relate this to what I saw happen this morning. While I was coming to work, I met Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Works officials stopping vehicles to check on the drivers’ permits.

On behalf of the people of Masaka, I request the Minister of Works to extend the period for confiscating paper driving permits; there are many requirements that have to be met in order to get a computerised permit. I am saying this because Masaka was not given an office to issue those new driving permits Face Technology does not have an office there like it is in other places such as Mbarara and Mbale. This means that people have to travel to Kampala to process these permits. As a result, many of my people have not managed to do so. That is why I am requesting for the extension of the deadline for maybe two to three months. Masaka has got a big population of drivers who have not been able to acquire these computerised driving permits.

The other issue I would like to comment on is road safety vis-à-vis boda boda riders. Most of the time, these people ride into the opposite directions when the Police are looking for them. I call upon the ministry to stop this.

Madam Speaker, let me say something about vehicle spotlights. I have noticed that at night, some vehicles move with queer coloured spotlights that tend to confuse other drivers. Can the minister tell us which types of lights are supposed to be on cars? We need to be protected.
 
The other issue that is almost making me shed tears relates to stages between Bombo Road and DFCU Bank. Every ti
me I pass there, I see pregnant women trying to jump onto taxis. Why leave people just jump into vehicles like that?

Accordingly, I have found big problems with big trucks that ply the Masaka-Kampala Road. Sometimes you find that these are the big trucks and they release diesel when on the roads, and roads become slippery. How are we going to protect these roads? Could you please make sure that this action is stopped so that the roads are not seriously affected?

Another issue is about overloading of motorcycles. I lose a lot of people due to accidents in Masaka. You find four people seated on a single motorcycle with their luggage ahead of the cyclist; where is the Road Safety Act? So, since the minister and the committee appreciated the problem of road safety and called upon the ministries to work together, I would like to request the Ministry of Works together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to ensure that boda bodas are not allowed to carry more than two passengers. They are always overloaded and because of that, a lot of accidents occur. 

Madam Speaker, I will stop here but the minister should really take into consideration what I have said. As far as I am concerned, they are very important issues especially the issue of safeguarding the interests of my people who have not yet received the computerised driving permits. Thank you. 

7.00 
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for the report that they have presented, and I also take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Works for rehabilitating the UNRA office in Kotido. There is now evidence that the ministry is available and functional in the district. 

But above all, the people of Kotido are very grateful to the ministry for giving them a bridge. For many years, while Parliament appropriated money to Teso region for floods, there was a river called Dopeth that would flood and kill the people of Kotido who were unfortunate not to determine the level of the water. So, the people are grateful that there is a bridge now. However, I would like to make a few comments and observations on the issue of the axle load that has been raised. In Karamoja, our roads are getting destroyed every year, especially in the districts of Nakapiripirit and Moroto, because of the heavy loads that the lorries of Tororo Cement Factory carry, and I wonder what plans the ministry has, given the fact that the Opposition even says that the axle measuring machines are non-functional. How are we going to help the situation in the Karamoja region? Apart from these lorries carrying lime from Moroto to Tororo, we are also using the Obalang-Abim road to Kotido, which is also getting destroyed because that is the new route that the lorries carrying relief food now use. I think it is important that a decision is made in this area. 

Secondly, on page 14 of the report, I want to be helped to understand the issue of district, urban and community access roads. There is a statement on the activities for funding which talks of rehabilitating 139 kilometres under the Karamoja Road Development Programme. I have just heard of that programme, is it possible to give me specifications so that when I go to Kotido I will know how many kilometres of road will be worked on by the ministry, since Kotido is not Karamoja although it is part of Karamoja? I think it is good that this is defined, but at the same time, when you look at the annex table on page 25, there is a statement which indicates that there will be design and upgrade of the Muyembe-Namalu-Moroto road to Kotido of 290 kilometres. Maybe the ministry should help me understand what these two are. What is the 139 kilometres of the Karamoja Road Development Programme and what is the 290 kilometres?

From the annex of the policy statement, you have tried to make a distribution of resources for community access roads in the districts of Karamoja, but apart from Nakapiripirit District, all the others have a flat allocation of Shs 2.0 million. What is the basis for this, and yet we have district planning units that should have been able to provide population statistics for every sub-county in order for you to allocate money like you have done to the rest of Uganda?

I also have a problem with the growing urban centres in Karamoja. In Kotido District, there is a centre called Lokitelaebu that has grown on the Kotido-Abim road and there have been many accidents reported. Many years ago, with insecurity, there wasn’t much traffic in Karamoja, but like you heard this morning, there is a lot of traffic now and vehicles are killing people day and night. I intended to put a hump but I was told that I was not the right person to do it, and I recall that two years ago in Kotido, the town council put up humps in the town and they caused an accident and the town council was sued because people said they were not the right people. Who is going to save the children of this growing centre? Who is responsible for putting humps on these roads so that these children can be saved?

Hon. Minister of Works, at one time you said in Kotido that there were district roads that were going to be taken up into the National Road Network, but I have looked at the report and it does not seem to reflect that. I have not seen the road from Kalongo via Labwordwongo, Loongor to Katheri because I remember –(Member timed out_).

7.06 
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this country, this Parliament and the Ministry of Works should really wake up to the situation if infrastructure, particularly the roads. We from the urban areas, are about to ask Government to leave the loyalties of the taxes collected in the urban areas. 

Page 7 of the report talks about upgrading district roads to central government roads, but apart from Kampala, there is no programme addressed for the urban roads. Honestly, all of us and all of you who pay taxes live in urban areas, but do you enjoy the roads on which you ride? Go to other urban areas; they are well catered for. So, should we also ask for loyalties since most of the taxes collected are from the urban areas? In Mbarara Municipality, they gave us just Shs 825 million in the last financial year, but at the end of the financial year, they only released Shs 230 million. That money can construct less than a quarter a kilometre of a tarmac road. It is very shameful and it is very difficult for us. We do not know –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Kigyagi. The issues that you are talking about were supposed to have been solved by the Road Fund, but this country has been robbed of the Road Fund by the Ministry of Finance. Take that from me. 

MR KIGYAGI: The second issue is about the Nyakishara Aerodrome. Hon. Minister, there is a high voltage power line passing the end of that aerodrome. One of these days when an aircraft loses altitude, we shall get a disaster. I do not know why the Civil Aviation Authority will not relocate this line. To make matters worse, with the construction that has taken place there, the hotels do not have power, and yet high voltage power passes there, and there is even no power at the aerodrome. 

On the issue of physical planning. Since I came to Parliament, every time we allocate money for physical planning, it is always for Kampala. What do you think about all the other urban areas? In this budget, on page 32, that is what was provided for.

Uganda Land Commission

I know that the hon. Minister of Lands has worked hard, but we still have a problem with the Uganda Land Commission. All the land that belongs to Government and the district administration has been lost in the hands of your officers at the Uganda Land Commission. They connive with people to give away Government land. In Mbarara, the district has no land. The land belonging to Kagera Basin has been leased to someone else, and yet there is a building there. I do not understand what this elephant called Uganda Land Commission is doing, because I thought it was the custodian of Government land. 

Lastly, on the issue of road reserves. As a country, we should take a stand on road reserves. You all know about those buildings that were on the road from Jommo Kenyatta Airport to Nairobi; first class buildings that had been constructed on the road reserve. Government woke up one day and put all of them down. Now, they have dual carriage roads. But here, everybody builds on road reserves; a minister builds on a road reserve; a Member of Parliament; a town clerk - So, what is this? And yet we have laws governing construction. I think we should take a stand on this and sweep these buildings out of the road reserves.

On infrastructure, especially roads, this needs to be looked at. If you do not do this, one of these days I will bring a resolution here that we get royalties like Bunyoro is getting for oil, because we have no money for the development of urban infrastructure. I thank you.

7.10
COL TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. On the Kampala-Northern Bypass, now that it is 95 percent complete, can I from today use this road? I want to get this assurance from the minister because I have been using that road stealthily. I just wear a uniform and they allow me to use it. But beginning tomorrow, can I officially use that road now that it is 95 percent complete?

On Kyenjojo-Masindi-Kigumba; last financial year Shs 0.96 billion was spent on the design of that road. In this financial year, no money has been allocated. Can I take it, therefore, that the design is complete? If the design is complete, when does upgrading begin? Can I hear this from our distinguished minister? 

Lastly, on Migingo Island; Shs 1 billion spent; the teams disagree; the Uganda team comes home. Is the minister happy? Is it true that the Kenyan team remained and surveyed while the Ugandan team withdrew? Have you arrested these cowards for having withdrawn? When they go back, at what point will they start? Where the Kenyans will have stopped or where they withdrew? 

Why are there many countries that are interested in Uganda land? In Rukwanzi, it was the DRC that invaded us. In Moyo, it is Southern Sudan. Migingo, it is Kenya. The other time it was Mutukula. Why are our neighbours interested in taking away our land? We are rich. Can we also change tactics? Can we also claim land? (Laughter) The only way to keep peace is to prepare for war, isn’t it? So, let us reciprocate so that other countries stop taking so much interest in our land. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow me to make an alteration to permit our two Muslim colleagues, hon. Kawooya and hon. Fungaroo, to speak first and they go and break their fast. Let us have hon. Kawooya first and then hon. Fungaroo.

7.13
MRS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Madam Speaker, I am fasting and you can tell it from my face. (Laughter) 

I want to thank the committee for the good report and good work. I want to begin with the overall performance and I agree with the rest of the Members who have said that the Ministry of Works and Transport is still wanting. 

The ministry has had a lot of bashing this afternoon, but let me take this opportunity to thank them as well. At least of late, the Ministry of Works and Transport has shown some improvement in as far as Sembabule District is concerned -(Interjections)-  I am saying this because, at least, Sembabule District has had an opportunity that three of the roads that were under the district are now being taken care of by the ministry, and I want to thank them for that.

I want to move to the district urban and community access roads. Once again, I thank Government for introducing the policy of road maintenance based on non-contraction. When you take into consideration the time, the high cost and the contractual services, in a district like Sembabule, maintaining these roads has been costly. I had communicated it to the minister. We are happy about the release again, of approximately Shs 65 million, which Sembabule is going to access in maintaining the roads. But we still feel -(Interjections)- and I have to be sincere that every time the budget is read, you will see me religiously applauding and clapping for the road of Nyendo-Villa Maria-Sembabule and then Tusi-Lumegere-Lwemiyiga. And it has remained like that every year. But I continue applauding and clapping. What is happening?

I hope that they will consider it. And the honourable minister knows religiously that good neighbourliness - as our neighbour and my neighbour, they should be considered. Sembabule District has had many elections and one by-election and every time there is a promise or a pledge. There is a very urgent pledge for Matete Town Board roads. The President said that he was going - and the minister was there or somebody from that office – to ensure the tarmacking of Matete Town Board roads which are not more than five to ten kilometres. Hon. Minister, what is happening?

Finally, when you look at page 19, Uganda Railways Corporation is talked about and during the Financial Year 2008/2009, Shs 0.28 billion was earmarked for maintenance of closed railway networks. During Financial Year 2008/09, Shs 2.2 billion was released for feasibility studies and in this financial year, there is Shs 1.9 billion for feasibility studies. Hon. Minister, when will you reassure us? What are these feasibility studies which we see every time? I hope you are not coming again with this thing, “feasibility studies”! When are they going to end so that we see actual physical reopening of the railway? 

What is happening to the railway line that passes -(Interjections)- I am not bashing I am just asking you, hon. Minister: what is happening to the railway line that passes through Lwemiyaga constituency which you are aware of? When is it going to be among these that you are looking at? We want you to give us the assurance because it was a line that was connecting us to Mubende and Kasese. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.19
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members. I have three issues here. One, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude, on my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Obongi, to the Government of the Republic of Uganda and to Madam Speaker for joining the people of Obongi and leading the crusade in calling for the support from the government to address the issue of Obongi-Moyo road. Hon. Ekanya was there. Thank you also. 

I am reporting here that the Obongi-Moyo road is now being worked on. The start so far is better than the previous one. Thanks also go to the Uganda National Roads Authority that seems to have indicated a different way of doing things from the previous one. We people of Obongi would like to say that if you treat us like this -(Interjections)- listen, if you treat us like this, we shall feel that we are part of Uganda. There are three areas which are remaining for you to finish so that we can really believe we are one.

There is a bridge which is not in my constituency but it is important to Obongi. It is called Kia Kia Bridge and it is in hon. Arumadri’s constituency. Time and again the budget comes and it goes and they tell us that the bridge is at the design stage; but until when? This bridge would shorten the distance between Obongi and Kampala by providing a link from Packwach. If you are coming from Packwach, you get to hon. Jachan Omach’s constituency and just within the town, there is a road which connects to Rhino Camp through Madi Okolo, then to Obongi, Moyo and then to Juba. It is even a very easy route for the long distance trade. This bridge is the only gap.

The second issue is about the co-ordination between the Ministry of Works and other bodies that deal with road works. Districts are in a mess. I take mine as an example and I would like to call upon you, my honourable colleagues, to join hands with me to iron out the problems of Moyo District. It is an embarrassment. 

These road works which were given to the Ministry of Agriculture - the Ministry of Agriculture deals with food -(Laughter)- but here it has been given works on roads without proper control and supervision from the Ministry of Works. There are North West Small Holders Agricultural Development projects running in West Nile in the districts of Adjumani, Moyo, Arua and others especially in our area. Doing road works is a mess yet the money was borrowed. The new generation will have to pay for this money. There is no value for money. How do we give road making work to the Ministry of Agriculture when we have hunger problems here? Why don’t they produce food and leave the work of road making to the Ministry of Works supervised by the Uganda National Roads Authority? 

On the selection of the contractors, the most shaming of all is that there is one company selected from the centre here. I do not know how the company won the contract but they never had the capacity and the equipment. They even tried to hire the district equipment of Moyo which was already “sick” to do the work with the contractor. We therefore ask that this corruption is fought. 

Lastly, when promises are made by the government, whether by His Excellency the President or other arms of the government, they need to be fulfilled in time. If you leave the problems of yesterday to find the problems of today and tomorrow, how will you have the capacity to solve all the problems of three generations at the same time? Why don’t you keep promises in time? You can have all the money and all the other resources but once you lose time, you will do nothing. 

The pledges that have been made by His Excellency the President, including the ferry which has appeared again and again here, need to be fulfilled speedily otherwise the plus which you get from a road, when you add it to minus seven, you still get minus six. You will never be appreciated properly because minus added to a small plus is equal to a big minus on your side. I thank you very much.

7.25
MS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I would also like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to ask the minister that he as he talks about district urban and community access roads as well as other roads on the list they have given, we would like to know where they are. 

They also talked about carrying out routine maintenance of 2,200 kilometres of district roads. Which districts and which roads? I would like to know. Also re-gravelling/rehabilitation of 750 kilometres of district roads was mentioned; which are these roads? Why do I want to know? I have a road from Tirinyi to Pallisa, Bukedea, Kumi and another one from Mbale-Pallisa. They have been on your programme and have been earmarked for tarmacking for over ten years now but as we wait, can we have them re-gravelled? I do not recall when they were last re-gravelled. We would also like to pass on smooth murram roads.

Secondly, when they are doing maintenance or re-gravelling, can there be serious supervision from the Ministry of Works? This is because as we speak, when you see the work that is being done, it shows that there is no supervision from the ministry. The contractor works as he wishes and it is shoddy work. At the end of it, the contractor is paid – for what? You have not supervised and maybe you did not even inspect. I think before you pay, you need to inspect the work. You find that community roads, which are being supervised by local governments, are better than the central government roads.

Another issue is that as you think of having the Road Safety Policy, can you also think of speed governors? This is because I am sure that speed governors are the surest way of controlling reckless drivers.

Another point is on the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. You are saying the work of demarcating boundaries of local governments is an issue of Local Government. However, in this report, the ministry noted - as an achievement - having handled land disputes and you list some of the districts where you surveyed and demarcated land. You mentioned Katakwi-Moroto, Tororo-Butaleja, Mbale-Bududa. What about Budaka and Mbale? Budaka and Mbale are a long standing issue since the 1960s when I was still a young girl. (Laughter) 

I was a small girl when the Secretary-General of Bukedi was mysteriously murdered because of land disputes. The tension was between Bugisu and Bukedi. Now Bugisu has four districts and Bukedi has five. When will you help us solve this problem? Please help us because people have died. One person was killed and his head and limbs cut off. That is the situation. They have brought here a petition to the Speaker and we have presented this to the Vice-President as well but nothing is taking place. Why? I leave that to you but we want this problem solved. The people of Budaka would like to rest. We have lost many people because of that border dispute.

You are talking about the industrial park, which is going to displace some people. We do not know where it is going to end. Are you planning to look for where to resettle those people when you begin the industrial park? I thank you.

7.30
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. When the chairman was reading the report and the names of the roads, members were happy but I was not happy because of the quality of work vis-à-vis the cost. It has appeared that in Uganda, the cost of maintaining or constructing one kilometre of road is the highest in Africa and the quality of work is the poorest. I do not know what is happening. If you went to the Sironko-Kapchorwa road, that road was handed over to government in 2003. But go there now and see the potholes. This is just five years ago but it is full of potholes. So as you look for money, let us maintain a few roads and we do quality work other than reading out these roads - first of all you do not do them in time and yet you do the work poorly! Let us be serious and value money.

Since I came to this Parliament in 2006, there were the Muyembe Namalu designs, which were ongoing. Then last financial year, in the design, there was no budget line - now they have brought in one. I wonder when this designing process is ending. They are still designing. So we want to know how long these designs will take.

Recently, government took over some of the district roads and Members were happy - I was also happy. They gave me one road, but now I do not know when these roads are going to be worked on. Districts have been putting some small resources into the roads but now it seems the money for these roads is not in this budget. 

Madam Speaker, why don’t we reallocate the Shs 19 billion from railways to roads? The deal between the Uganda Railways and Rift Valley was defective. Secondly, they are talking about strengthening the secretariat, but the workers were laid off. So why don’t we use the money for the roads? 

There is a bridge I am happy has been mentioned – the Simu–Pondo Bridge - but we last went there with the minister, hon. Byabagambi in 2006. Since 2006 you are just going to work on it in 2009? And we are not sure you are going to work on it even! 

Recently, on the East African Civil Aviation Academy Soroti, we read an article where they said they were stuck with expired fuel. What is the status of this expired aviation fuel which came to Soroti - I do not know from where? 

When it comes to the Road Fund, the Act is here” “Establishment of the Road Fund -(Member timed out_)

7.36
MR TOM KAZIBWE (NRM, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also commend the good work done by the committee. However, I have a few recommendations I would want to make. On page 5 we read, “The committee welcomed the idea of having a motor vehicle inspection fund”. This is a very good idea but I hope it will not be a money-making fund with no value addition. We used to have the inspection firm of the police, IOV, and I hope this will not be a duplication in which motorists will be looted under the guise of motor inspection.

On page 9, the key achievements include maintenance of 2,750 kilometres of tarmac roads. I know this includes Kampala–Jinja Road in dealing with black spots. But the roads have been made more dangerous than before. This is because Multiplex, which repaired the road, was qualified in collecting parking fees in Kampala but not in road construction. How can such an important road be given to somebody who is learning to construct roads?

Parliament should not look at appropriating funds without looking at value for money. The Ministry of Works is good at convincing us to give them money but the end result is nothing. And we shall be doing that year in, year out; that is very shameful.

Page 11 talks of absorption capacity – that whereas the ministry comes here yearning for money, it cannot absorb it and we end up paying penalties for the money. There are other demanding needs in the country, why do you ask for what you cannot swallow? Let other ministries in dire need take the money.

On page 13, there is a CHOGM debt totalling to Shs 5 billion and domestic arrears of Shs 10 billion. We saw what was done in CHOGM. Whereas the Auditor-General is still auditing CHOGM activities, this money should be related to that report to see what the Auditor-General has to say before such a big debt of Shs 5 billion is paid. 

On page 19, “The committee was informed that government was now reviewing the concession with RVR to see whether there are possibilities of terminating ….” Now they are looking for possibilities. You made an agreement without an escape route and now you are turning from the agreement looking for possibilities of escaping from a bad deal? A whole government with an Attorney-General should have exit routes, but now government is looking for possibilities of going out. So to me, this was deliberate sale of the country. 

On page 20, we read that during that financial year, the ministry intended to put navigation aids along the Lutoboka–Nakiwogo route on Lake Victoria with Shs 1.63 billion, but there is no report regarding the activity, yet that money is nowhere and they are here demanding for more money. Where did the Shs 1.63 billion go? Who took it? What did it do?

On the same page, the committee is concerned about the delay in procuring a ship to replace the MV Kabalega. Whereas my colleague is happy about the name Kabalega –(Member timed out_)


7.41
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the ministry responsible for roads. Actually when you go around and see the amount of construction on the roads, you get an impression that the minister may deliver on his promise and that he may be on top of the potholes within two years.

Having said that, I want to raise one very important matter in this report in relation to the road from Mirama Hills to Ishaka via Ntungamo and Kagamba. As far as we know, this road was to run from Ishaka to Mirama Hills via Ntungamo and was supposed to be one road. On page 10 of the report, they say, “The design of the following roads commenced ….” You will realise that now there is the Ntungamo-Mirama Hills road with 37 kilometres and the Kagamba-Ishaka road with 37 kilometres. This means the road has been divided into two portions. However, the minister is aware and we have been talking to him that this is one road – I and my chairman have met the minister several times. The President of this country has also pronounced himself on this road a number of times - in the State of the Nation Address, this road was also mentioned. One point that I would like to ask the minister to clarify on is whether he knows that this is one road. 

In that respect, I would request that we correct item 32 on page 25 to read as follows: “… to upgrade Ishaka-Kagamba-Ntungamo-Mirama Hills road”, and it should be 72 kilometres because the other section of Kagamba-Ishaka is 35 kilometres.

I am raising this matter because as the minister is aware, this is a very important road, which was designed for very small traffic at the time but because of the increased business with DRC, Burundi and Rwanda, the road is now used by very heavy trailers and buses. So many accidents have been recorded on it. We want an assurance from the minister that this is one road. 

In same vein, we also would like to know the commencement for the construction of this road because it was mentioned as having been constructed and completed in 1992. Even when we talk about it, people in the villages at times do not take us very seriously. That is why we want an assurance from the minister in this regard. Otherwise, if this matter is not clarified and these records go out, the political future of some of us including that of Prof. Kamuntu and Prof. Kabwegyere will be at stake. For today, I only wanted to contribute on that. I thank you.

7.45
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for producing this report. I also would like to thank the Ministry of Works because the people of Kanungu are happy with some of the support they have received particularly in respect to bridges. We now have one that connects Kinkizi and Rukungiri and the other that connects Kanungu to Kabale, which are still under construction. And although the contractors are a bit slow, work is going on. We appreciate that.

Two, I have stood here several times since I came to Parliament to talk about the tarmacking of Rukungiri-Kanungu road. Maybe this should be my last time to talk about it because it appears raising it here does not help. Otherwise, when the President visited us last year, this matter was raised to him. And before he left, the President pledged publicly that the tarmacking of that road was going to start soon. 

I know that the part from Rukungiri to Ishasha is already designed, but he did pledge that it would be extended to Kanungu Town and Nyakishenyi in Rubabo constituency. I also recall that the hon. Minister Nasasira also came with a big team and we agreed on certain issues. 

However, when you look at both the policy statement and the committee report, this road is mentioned nowhere. Probably, I will advise the people of Kanungu to communicate to the ministry differently –(Laughter)– on this road because the Hansard is full of my speeches relating to it. And most of you who have visited Kanungu know the nature of the road that I am talking about. That is why I want a clarification on when the construction of this road will start if at all it is still on the programme.

Three, on page 11 of the report, the committee says that a budgetary provision of Shs 116.24 billion for the national and district road maintenance has been provided under the National Road Fund, but that it will become operational in January 2010. I am wondering how this will happen because we have been told that El Nino rains are going to be with us around that time. I have a fear that they will wash away most of our roads. So, what are you intending to do since we are already in September? What will happen between now and then, given that you have taken on about 10,000 kilometres from the local governments? Won’t these roads really get destroyed and won’t you get problems maintaining these roads by the time you come down to our districts? 

On page 22, the committee makes a very good recommendation which I want to associate with, that the minister should urgently take to Parliament the allocation formula used to give out these funds and I want to speak on behalf of Kigezi. Those of you who have come to Kigezi can tell that we are gifted by nature with mountains but sometimes when it comes to allocation of resources for maintenance of roads, we are disposed of by the ministry. We would like to know whether you factor in the geographical terrain of Kigezi when computing the money you send to districts because for a district like Kanungu, the little funds which we receive are extremely inadequate to maintain the roads and the roads are in a poor state most of the time. So, we would like you to factor in the issue of the geographical terrain in addition to other variables which you consider when allocating funds. 

Finally, on the issue of land, all of us appreciate that there is a problem with land and we need comprehensive land reforms in this country. We know of the debate of the indigenous “Bafuruki” and all this stems from the land issues. The chairperson of the committee rightly said that we should be involved and consulted in the formulation of the land policy and we would like to stress this. Ugandans must participate in the drafting and formulation of the land policy which is going to guide us and help all of us in this country. We still have land tenure systems, some of which are primitive - like the Mailo land, the customary land and especially the communal land tenure system. I think the ministry should take a quick step to comprehensively reform the land tenure system in Uganda so that all of us are happy. I thank you very much. 

7.50 
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report and especially for bringing out the issue on surveying and demarcating the Katakwi-Moroto border. Well, what I can clearly state here is that the work is not yet complete. There is more to be done because we shared some strong recommendations with the team that came over and one very determinant recommendation was the use of an aerial view to support or to determine the original coordinates. But that was ignored and the Moroto team became so demoralised. 

Therefore, I wish to state that if there is any survey report or demarcation report which has come out minus that very good determinant of the aerial view, then that report will be questioned because when you look at the map of 1958, the two physical features which help to trace the Katakwi-Moroto border are very clear and this border was demarcated by the colonialists. So, the aerial support would really trace those coordinates and would help the team but since it was ignored, the team should revisit that –(Member timed out_) 

7.53 
MRS JUSTINE KASULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. It is a good report because it has been able to bring out the weaknesses of all the departments in these ministries. 

I want to thank the ministry for the share given to the Jinja-Bugiri road which they have worked on for close to six years now, but they are about to finally arrive. 

There is a problem on the issue of cost and quality of the work done by the Ministry of Works. The cost is high and the standard is low. Let me give an example of the Bugiri-Malaba-Busia road which was worked on between 2002 and 2004 and they must have used something like molasses to put together the stones because when it shines, it melts. Actually, moving on that road is like moving on porridge -(Laughter)- I am saying this because the ministry takes time to pay a lot of money to consultants and a lot of time is taken in studies but they come out with shoddy work. 

I am so disheartened that in the policy statement and in the report, the ministry is planning to give out a tender for the same road, which road was never handed over to the ministry by the contractor –(Interjections)- I come from the area and I have been keenly following the developments and the road was never commissioned. Now the ministry has gone ahead to allocate more money so that they do more work before the other contractor has even handed over the work. Is that what Ugandans deserve, hon. Minister, yet people are dying in hospitals, there is no medicine, people are dying of hunger without any food? We are drinking water from wells with dogs. Is this what you are giving to Ugandans? It is so bad –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you hon. Lumumba, for giving way. I patiently listen and take notes but it reaches a point where you think maybe a contribution might mislead us all. I have over the years mentioned that this Malaba-Bugiri-Busia road was never finished. We only had a saving of US $20 million from KFW when the road was in shambles and the Germans who were giving us that grant wanted to take it back because we did not have money on our budget and we opted to use that to improve the road. The road needed two more layers of 400 millimetres which at that time would cost US $9 million. 

There are records in the Ministry of Finance to show that we wrote that we needed this money to complete the road but what we achieved kept us going for the time being. I think it is unfair to stand here and say that we have wasted the money and that people are dying in hospitals to raise sentiments when what we did was in the best interest of the country. I am on record in the Hansard year after year on that point and that is why we are now re-advertising it so as to complete it.

MRS KASULE: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way to this information. Hon. Members, I want you to know that the road I am taking about is the main entry to this country. The road I am talking about is the one that brings in the highest revenue to this country. So, if it is not a priority for government to allocate it money and you just have to go and seek for some little money from some donors, some Germans somewhere, are we setting our priorities right?

People keep talking of ferries. The Ministry of Works should know that we have people on Lake Victoria beyond Kalangala. We have Sigulu islands - and some of these problems of Migingo arise because of transport problems. The leaders of Bugiri District cannot easily access this area. Can you also think of a ferry for Sigulu and Buvuma islands and the islands in Mayuge District because these are also Ugandans who live on the islands?

There is also the issue of land. I want to give advice to the minister. When I was being trained as a teacher, I was told that when you get to a school and there are very many problems, do not struggle to work on all the problems. Work on one problem at a time and accomplish it. The moment you have accomplished it, you will always be identified as the person who fixed that problem. 

What is killing Ugandans in that ministry is the issue of land titles. I would advise the minister to identify himself with the problem of land titles within that ministry and solve it so that when you leave that ministry, we who are supposed to stay longer in this country -(Laughter)- all factors remaining constant, will always single you out and praise you for saving Ugandans from this mess.

I also want the minister to bring amendments to the Act that established the Land Commission so as to make the commissioners full time because this will be pegged on their emoluments and facilitation. But if you have not changed the law, then it will not solve the issue of emoluments. This is what other ministries did. I remember that the Education Service Commission and that of Health did this. If you take that direction, then you will succeed on the issue of emoluments but if it is part time, then you will not do much.

Last year, one of our Members of Parliament was held captive by his own voters and he was almost lynched just because of a problem with a bridge. We read about this in the papers and just laughed about it. I do not know whether the ministry, out of courtesy, wrote to the Member and apologised because they were holding him responsible for what was not his duty. This is team spirit; did the ministry do that? Hon. Mugambe suffered because of the poor performance of a ministry and yet he is not the minister responsible. Thank you very much.

8.01
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you for this opportunity. In the first place, I want us Members of Parliament to take our job seriously and realise that roads are a public good. Do not take the President captive. Do not just look at him and expect him, when he comes to your constituency, to pledge a road. Know that it is your right and therefore do not hold the old man captive. (Laughter)

Secondly, I was very disappointed that the honourable minister, Uncle John, is saying that he received some resources that were inadequate and therefore they did some work that required some extra 400 millimetres or centimetres. Hon. John Arumadri, there is need to say no to these donors when you are not going do good work. Learn to keep your coat on yourself and say no. When a woman says, “Please not now”, you say, “Yes” (Laughter) Now back to business.

The Northern Bypass - I am one of those culprits who have been using this road illegally and every time I try to pass there I am stopped. They assume that this must be some young girl who will be paying something. I have been paying Shs 1,000 for lifting those sticks that have nails on them. One day, I got annoyed and put one in my car. I was nearly lynching him and I told him, “I am a Member of Parliament, this road is overdue and if I want, I will take you to the Minister so that you two give me an explanation.” 

Sincerely, this is a pathetic road. Look at the design; it does not have ring roads around it. When you are on the bridge and you want to access the lower road, you cannot access it at all. I am wondering what kind of engineers were here in this country to design this road. How do you have bridges and no ring roads and you expect us to enjoy this facility? It is such an absurd situation, Mr Minister.

Road maintenance - this is one of the countries in the Great Lakes region with roads that have many colours. You drive from here to that door you find a patch which is almost grey and another one tending to black; and another one deleting itself into brown. What is happening? You are patching roads in a very unstylish way. The roads are just too dirty to enjoy. In fact, I was imagining that they could be used as tourist attractions so that people come to Uganda to see how roads are patched. One side is raised this way; it is blue, another grey and another brown. Honestly, can you have some sense of fashion with your roads and please maintain them in a better way?

The Gayaza-Kalerwe road has been maintained every six months. We are always throwing money into road maintenance. If it cannot work, can you please trash off all tarmack and put a new one? Who will blame you for that? We have given you a trillion shillings and more.

Mr Minister, that brings me to the issue of absorption capacity of your ministry. You are haunting us with Shs 300 billion unutilised and you have not maintained the roads that you took from our districts and yet we had made promises to our people. I went for a fundraising function in one of the areas in my constituency and they were just hammering me. I had assured them that hon. John Nasasira had taken up this road but you have not used Shs 300 billion! Honestly, can we therefore imagine that you are still functionally active in that ministry? (Laughter)

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I was following the debate of the honourable member as she was talking about the functionality of roads but I did not know that this functionality was going to extend to my personality. (Laughter) Is it in order for hon. Christine Bako to challenge my functionality when I am a very happily married man? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unless hon. Bako can substantiate, she should withdraw that statement. (Laughter) 

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, honestly, the quality of the deliverables from his ministry alone would make us wonder whether he himself, as the political overseer of this ministry, is functionally responsible, irresponsible, active, or inactive. So, it is up to him, in my opinion, to decide whether at this moment he is functionally right. (Laughter)

That said, we are talking about the Kia Kia Bridge. I was in Arua in 2007 and I met a group of people who called themselves consultants trying to look at the issue of extending the railway from Packwach to Juba. They were in these very good cars and they were enjoying our good facilities in hotels in Arua. Until now, there has been almost nothing done about the agreement that is supposed to be signed between the Government of Uganda and the Government of Southern Sudan for that extension.

Mr Minister, you know that our road from Karuma to Arua is now tilted. The last time I remember vividly I told you that the heavy load from Kampala to Juba has tilted this road in this way. In fact, you and I need to drive on that road so that we actually find out whether -(Member timed out_)

8.08
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the Minister of Works and Transport for resealing Kawempe-Luweero-Kafu Road. (Applause) This work has reduced the time of travel to Gulu from Kampala from between six and seven hours a few years ago to between three and a half and four hours now. We appreciate. 

However, Kawempe-Gulu Road was constructed by the Uganda People’s Congress Government -(Interjections)- in the 60s through the bush. It took about three years to complete that road from Kawempe up to Gulu. Now resealing just half of that road has taken this government more than three years -(Interjections)- just resealing! I do not know whether the contractor was given a period within which to finish the work.

Two, this route is one route from Kawempe up to Gulu; it does not stop at Kafu. It should be maintained as one road. The other section from Kafu to Gulu is also falling apart, particularly between Kona, Arua to Kamdini. It is terrible! So, the other section should be worked on immediately so that we retain this road as one road as it was made at the beginning.

Three, the open drainages alongside the roads are good but they are very dangerous; they are very wide and deep. On Sunday when I was coming back, I found one small car at Kigumba, with the engine deep inside the drainage by the roadside. In future, government may be sued. Those open drainages should be covered to protect the road users. They are dangerous.

My other point is about the completion of the design of the roads and the bridges that the chairperson of the committee talked about on so many pages. As a lay man, I am not interested in knowing the design of roads and bridges. I want to see the road being worked on and the bridges being built. Do not tell us about the design. That is nothing to us. 

First of all, what is the incubation period between the completion of the design and the actual construction? You did not tell us and you are now considering completing the design as an achievement. That is not an achievement; you are just starting. There is no achievement there. You have not started.

For three years in a row, Aswa Bridge has been the subject of discussion each budget time - three years in a row - and last year we were told that tender documents were about to be ready. Now this year we are being told about preparations to procure a contractor. What is happening? Can the minister tell us exactly when the works on Aswa Bridge will start rather than make this thing your national anthem to come and sing here year in, year out? (Laughter) It does not help us.

When the Kawempe-Kafu Road was being resealed, we were using it as it was being worked on and it is at 90 percent completion now. The Northern Bypass is also at 90 percent completion but I am not allowed to use the Northern Bypass that is at 95 percent like the other one. What is the policy of the ministry about the use of roads when they are being constructed? What is so sacred about this Northern Bypass? (Laughter) What is it?

Madam Speaker, the Land Fund; the idea of –(Member timed out_)

8.14
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this report. I will proceed to thank the minister for the Soroti-Dokolo-Lira road. We in Soroti are happy; we are not complaining like the honourable member from Luuka in Busoga. We are not complaining. I heard the honourable member name a number of roads that are not being worked on in Busoga. At least for us in Soroti, we are happy about the Soroti-Dokolo-Lira road and the reason is very clear - we voted wisely. Now Busoga must take the cue -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from hon. Ekemu because he is continuously talking about Busoga –(Interruption)

MR EKEMU: I have been given three minutes so do not waste my time, honourable member.

MR KUBEKETERYA: This is something serious that is insulting. Can he be clear?

MR EKEMU: In the chairperson’s presentation - I am actually seeking clarification - you mentioned Soroti Flying School, which was actually declared a centre of excellence at one time. To my knowledge, the procurement process was completed some time in March this year; how come you are talking about this same activity this financial year? Money was passed - Shs 10 billion - last financial year for that same school and that is why I got concerned. Also, Shs 5 billion was released for the same activities that you have listed this same financial year and you are asking for more this year. I will need that clarification.

Again, related to Soroti Flying School, recently the President invited the Teso Parliamentary Group and we met him. Out of all our requests we simply forwarded one request, that we wanted Soroti Flying School to become a UN base for the UN Darfur mission. The justification was that it would help decongest Entebbe International Airport and also, State House is so close to Entebbe Airport. We were also aware that this would have given opportunity for the people where I come from to have some infrastructure. 

In any case, Government did not have a big stake in having the UN Darfur mission; the UN was going to invest in infrastructure and it was going to take care of most of the bills and actually take it from the hands of government. The President gave us an assurance, which was as good as a directive, that Soroti Flying School was going to become the host of the UN mission to Darfur. However, only a week ago I learnt, and I am happy that the honourable minister is here, that that has been defied. 

I would like to seek clarification on this because we now hear that CAA has leased out land for that purpose. That was a very recent development and a disappointment to the people who should have benefited from that infrastructure in Soroti. Again –(Member timed out_)

8.19
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the Minister of Lands to clarify to us what happened to the loan we passed for rehabilitation, computerisation and cleaning of the land titles and the land registry. It is now almost five years since.

We also need to change our system of debate here because some people think that Parliament is a talking shop - we shall come here, lament, go home, elections come, new MPs come and they will be told, “Government is going to do a, b, c, d.” The Ministry of Works and Transport, for example, has had one minister for over 20 years. I want to thank the minister for coming with his technical people - the gallery and lobby are full. However, I want to tell you that some of these people have been there and MPs have been here lamenting and elections come, they lose and they go. 

It is time that we change our system. Rule 193 is very clear. The chairperson should have brought here the report with the minutes so that we look at what they discussed in the committee and what the minister promised in the last three years. 

Also, since we are changing our national development plans to five years, it is good to bring a report with matrices, for example saying that, “In 2001, hon. Nasasira said the railway will be done and he got this money, in 2002 he got Shs 2 billion, 2003 he got Shs 4 billion for design studies or feasibility studies”. That will help us take action. Otherwise, if we do not change, we will have a report like this and then come here and lament. 

Our system of budgeting has also changed to output budgeting. A minister should be assessed on output. For us in FDC, we are going to analyse the Ministry of Works and Transport and circulate this document to the entire country so that the citizens of this country can pick copies of lamentations that take place in this Parliament and be able to vote for a good government.

Madam Speaker, you have lamented for so many years for a ferry between Kamuli and Soroti. You are a full Speaker but what has happened? This level of lamentation should change. I want to ask my colleagues from Western Uganda - when the government was working on the Jinja-Bugiri road, we complained and the minister had to change the contract to “maintain and build”. I was invited by one of my colleagues last week to go to Bushenyi and I could not go because it takes ten hours to drive to Bushenyi. Why can’t you MPs from Bushenyi ask that the contract be changed to “maintain and build” so that some of us can come and bring you good messages? 

It takes almost ten hours to reach Bushenyi; this is a serious matter. I love this country. The Jinja-Bugiri contract was changed to “maintain and build” and we need the same. You can bring the necessary knowledge. 

I want to ask the minister: why are you going to turn the Jinja–Malaba Road into a dual carriageway? In Kenya, there is an axle system and in Uganda we have trailers that are violating this route. I have talked to the Inspector-General of Police and nobody seems to bother. 

The road between Jinja to Bugiri, which has just been completed and the road furniture been placed and marked, is already bleeding. If you ply on that road after it has rained, you will find water running in the middle of the road. Have you run short of money to do a good one like the one you did on Bugiri–Malaba? I had a discussion with the minister here and he said that corrective action will be taken. Some of these engineers have masters and doctorates and they have been in the sector for long; why should it be Ekanya to come here and raise the matter for you before you can take action? You have consultants and supervising engineers –(Member timed out_)

8.24
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, I am the Leader of the Opposition and I am going to talk as the Leader of the Opposition. 

I must first welcome the hon. John Nasasira, whom I last saw during the swearing in ceremony. I had taken some time without seeing him. 

Let me start with UNRA. They said that they were given money and they never performed. When you read the Act which established the Uganda Road Fund, it clearly states that UNRA will be an agency of the Uganda Road Fund. An agency’s job is to develop, rehabilitate and maintain public roads and so on. That means that after UNRA has designed, it should go to the Uganda Road Fund to pick the money. Now what has happened? This should have been done long ago. Hon. John Nasasira, I respect you but why haven’t you done it?

The money should have been in Uganda Road Fund account. This issue of non-performance would not arise because the money would be held there and you would only pick it when it is necessary. 

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Nandala. On the issue of the Road Fund, you cannot believe it but hon. Nasasira has nothing to do with it. It is the Ministry of Finance that has owned everything. They are not supposed to apportion money to the Road Fund. The Road Fund is supposed to generate its own money.

I would want hon. Kamuntu to take the example of Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia and most of the countries in Africa. They realised that the governments cannot have money for road maintenance and so they said, “Let us give the chance to the road users to help us”, which they are doing. However, these people are stuck with this; they are still holding the money to themselves. As soon as they release the Road Fund to be self-sustaining, we will get somewhere. Tanzania, for example, has too much money for road maintenance but they just do not have the contractors. I would request the Minister of Finance to take a trip with hon. Nasasira and some members and go to Kenya and offload this problem.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Member, you have made it clear and I am ready to take a trip with you. So, that is why the committee on page 21 would not understand the Shs 116 billion to the Road Fund. You cannot blame the committee, but I wish they had read the law. On the money they are supposed to get, there is fuel levy, axle load fines, et cetera. This is the money we appropriate here, among others. So hon. Nasasira, if you do not act we are in a problem.

Madam Speaker, these arrears are the ones killing the economy. A person works and you do not pay them, and these government contracts have penalty clauses with interest. Many contractors do not demand because the interest you pay is higher than the bank would pay them. So they sit back or even go to a bank and ask for money against their contract. The interest you pay to the bank is less than the interest we pay to those contractors. That is why we are having a lot of expenditure as far as arrears are concerned. So, to avoid penalties, if you are signing a contract the first call on our budget should be these contracts with contractual obligations and penalties. 

I have seen roads listed here but I have not seen the road from Nabumali to Rwakaka listed. Where is that road? I have not seen the road from Nabumali to Rwakaka or the Namagumba–Budadiri–Sironko Road. What has happened to these roads? Anyway, the more we press, the more the President will come and the more we will get. So I would advise all of you who are lamenting, join this side and the roads will come. 

On Kinyara, what is the Minister of Lands doing about the land belonging to the prisons? I am told that you want to allocate the prison land to an investor so that the investor can grow sugarcane there. There is land which belongs to prisons in Bunyoro –(Interjections)– yes, thank you very much; Nsima land is very fertile and you are giving it to an investor for nothing.  

If we want to develop prisons, the prisons should develop the sugarcane to supply to Kinyara Sugar Works as out growers. If not, let the people in Bunyoro grow cane and supply, but do not bring somebody from outside to come and make money using our own public assets –(Interjections)– I am a Ugandan. That is why I am talking.

In the report you have talked about importing equipment for inspecting cars, but what happened to IOV land. We were told that land in Naguru had been allocated to an investor. So, where are you going to put the equipment that you are planning to import? We are worried that you might lose it due of lack of land onto which to place it. I think you better think about it.

Madam Speaker, we are happy that the Ministry of Works has drawn up plans for roads to be done. However, we want to plead with the Minister – let me say plead because he has been in that ministry for so long and maybe he is now complacent – that please, when you bring such a plan here, make sure you work on it. We do not want to see plans here for the same roads every year. Bring us plans for new roads and make sure you complete the old plans as we move on. Failure to do that, you will be called “Mr song of roads”. Even when we give all the money -(Member timed out_)

8.33 
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. First of all, let me thank the chairperson for presenting a good report. I also thank the minister for being present here today.

In regard to the report, substantially it is good but analytically, this report is missing a lot of information. Why do I say this? On page 9, the report talks of maintaining 2758kms of tarmac roads without mentioning where these tarmac roads are and how much it will cost to maintain them. This information has appeared on several pages in connection to national, district and community access roads. I think Members of Parliament would like to know what roads are going to be maintained and how much that will cost.

Secondly, I would like to thank the minister for identifying roads to be taken over by the central government. However, I would like to inform him that these roads are actually going to the dogs. I will give an example. There is a road that connects Lake Kwania to the main road from Lira to Kamdini via Nambyeso and Aduku. The district handed over this road to the central government, but the maintenance has not been followed. The road has now become a path and yet it is a very important road because it can connect Amolatar and Apac districts if there were to be a ferry over Lake Kwania.

Thirdly, let me talk about the delays in the completion of construction projects, which is a very big weakness. It does not only cost more but it also frustrates those who would like to use the roads. I think it would be better for the ministry to give a timeframe to the contractors. Why do we overlook punishing these contractors when they overshoot their time?

I am a little bit distressed to hear from the Opposition response that the government owes Shs 68 billion to CAA. I am sure this money is being diverted to some place because all these departments are given money for some purpose. So, I would like to urge the ministry to oversee the payments in respect of this bill. 

Lastly, I would like to inform the honourable minister that accountability is very important. Once this august House gives you some money – last year we gave you over one trillion - I think accountability on the use of that money is essential to this House and to the people of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.38
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the Shadow Minister for Works for their reports. This report is one of the very good ones that have come up. I think they did a good job, the way the Committee of Agriculture did, in the sense that a lot of issues have come out. This is evidenced by the fact that both sides of the House are unanimously agreeing on the issues and the concerns regarding this sector, the amount sunk into it and the value for money from the works that are undertaken.

A few days back, much as we worry about the money that is sunk into this sector, somebody said this sector has one of the longest serving senior ministers and this puts everything into perspective. If you look at the APRM Report, which deals with the allocation of public funds to sectors, after considering very many factors I think rather than just lamenting, as Parliament we must play our role to help the Minster of Works by providing effective oversight. This must start from here and not after the money has been allocated. It must start at this stage of appropriating money. 

When you send a child to school and he or she asks you for money and you give that child money without questioning, when that child engages in inappropriate behaviour using that money, who is to blame? It will be the parent to blame. I think the best way to provide oversight is to check the minister at this stage, to help him make us understand what he is going to take the money for. I think we have not done that as much as we should. 

If you look at page 21 of the report for example, under the Road Fund on paragraph 8.1 it says: “The committee was informed that in this financial year, a total of Shs 116.24 billion has been allocated under Vote 118 to cater for activities of the Road Fund board and secretariat as well as road maintenance. The committee did not understand how the figure of how Shs 116.24 billion was arrived at.” 

The minister had all the time to explain to the committee but did not succeed in making the committee understand. For somebody who has not been to that committee, who am I to understand more than the committee? Who are we now to give this money to the Ministry of Works to spend and yet we have not understood what that money is going to do? That is where oversight starts from. 

On that basis, I would like to say that we should put the minister on notice at the stage of appropriation that we cannot appropriate money for purposes that we do not understand. Let him therefore go away with the knowledge that when we go to the Committee of Supply, we shall be seeking to remove that money from Vote 118 and transfer it to agriculture, which is more deserving. 

Secondly, last weekend I was in my village and I passed by a certain road which had recently been taken over by the central government from the local government. I thought that people were celebrating because the road was being worked on. Instead, they surrounded me to complain about the behaviour of the contractors. These contractors go and excavate people’s land to get murram for purposes of working on the road and they are very arrogant –(Member timed out_)

8.34
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Works and Transport and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development respectively for this report. 

I will begin with the issue of land management and administration in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. My problem is that I do not know whether the minister has taken note that public land that has schools, hospitals and sub-counties which have been in existence for over 50 years or more is being claimed by some grandchildren of those people who were within the vicinity, as if a law has not been provided for. I do not know what action or measures are being put in place throughout the country to address this. 

I also wanted to find out whether the ministry is aware of the several complaints about land disputes which are transferred from LC I courts to land board courts to district courts and higher levels of courts. In Lira, there are over 200 of them. Some of them have been referred to Gulu but because of the level of poverty, these people are unable to go and attend court cases and sometimes the cases are ruled against them. Down there, our local communities are saying that if you are poor, then do not attempt to go to court because all poor people have already been judged failures and therefore you cannot win any case. 

Secondly, do we still compensate people on public land, for example when the community has claimed some part of land such as land for schools and sub-counties? These cases are also many and attention should be given to this compensation issue. 

On the issue of construction standards and quality control as far as our road systems are concerned, I would like to thank the Minister of Works and Transport for paying attention this time to constructing Aggwar and Kaguta bridges. So far, we have only one Kaguta in this country. If it is the one, then thank you very much for the gesture. I have been complaining for the last five years about these bridges. When completed, these bridges will now need roads since they are just across big rivers without proper roads anyway. 

What is the cause of the low quality and standards of our roads? I met one contractor at one time and he told me that he was faced with about ten people to give kickbacks to. At the end of the day, these contractors find themselves with no profit at all after doing the road construction. I asked him, “Can you tell me who those people are who demand kickbacks from you?” He said that the line is long and it involves almost all those who matter in road construction. (Laughter) So you can see the challenge of the poor quality of roads. 

Hon. Ministers, I was disappointed last week when I left about one hour earlier to go to Lira and my colleague who left an hour after me caught up with me on the road before I could reach Lira. You cannot even drive at more than 30 kilometres per hour on the road from Karuma to Kamdini. You either go at 15 kilometres per hour or less because of the numerous potholes, and they are big potholes! I think you better –(Interruption) 

THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Hon. Angiro has raised a very serious point. According to him, the roads are of poor quality because of a series of about ten people to be given kickbacks. When he tried to find out who these ten people who took kickbacks are, he was told that the line is long and it involves almost all those that matter. Now, that is a serious statement. 

On a project of any road - let us take a road where money is borrowed - you negotiate a loan, and I think those matter. You take the loan request to Parliament for approval and I think that matters. You tender and it is evaluated, I think that matters too. You award and supervise, and I think all those people also matter. Is he trying to say that the kickbacks are in the whole process from acquiring this money to supervising it? 

MR ANGIRO: I am glad that you know those people who matter because from the process of writing and getting the contract and starting work, those are the people who matter. (Laughter) 

Hon. Minister, we are your subordinates. One thing that you need to accept is that whenever you have an agreement, like for the Kampala to Gulu or Kafu road, can you at least trust us with the agreement? At one time I stopped and measured the width of the road at several points and I found that they were varying. That is one of the concerns I got from this contractor because he has to minimise costs since nobody takes serious notice of the width of the road. They can even narrow the road at certain points and they get a lot of profits doing this. I think you should trust us and give us agreements so that we can check some specifications on these roads and we find a way of dealing with some of these contractors.

I used to receive copies of letters from the contractor, especially on our Lira to Kitgum road, but when you look at what is happening now, I think the work is fair compared to what it used to be because we challenged the contractor. At one moment I wanted to reach hon. Atubo’s home, from Lira to Ngetta, it is only 8kms but that is the worst road in Lira and yet we intend to make Lira a modern city. So, please -(Member timed out_)

8.52
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you. All the previous speakers have been pointing out inadequacies and problems in the sector but I want to draw the attention of my honourable colleagues to page 11. The committee did a very good job and they pointed out the challenges the ministry has. When you read through all these challenges, you come to one conclusion - no wonder we have these problems! 

They said there is an absorption capacity problem, lack of skills in the ministry, lack of supervision, lack of competence, lack of credible contractors and so on. All those are problems that have been identified by the chairman of the committee in this sector. The committee chairman then went on to praise government for prioritising the works and transport sector. 

I want to challenge the minister to please prioritise what he can reasonably achieve. It does not help to make pronouncements such as “Please only MPs” and I have realised this. Since 2006 when I came to this Parliament, the ministry has a habit of singling out roads that they think will excite MPs and these roads are read out. Whenever they are read, MPs will clap their hands in excitement but at the end of the day nothing is done. 

If you look at pages 7, 8, 9, 14 and 15, if these challenges that have been pointed out are true, then there is no way that the ministry will achieve these litany of aspirations. It is only a matter of warming us up while in the House so that we pass the budget and then it is business as usual. So, I would want to challenge the minister to concentrate on achievable goals and we work with those. There is no point in exciting the public on things that you will never do.

Secondly, I have realised that on the achievements, there are things that are being repeated. If you open page 13, point 4.1.2.3, and you compare that with what is on page 14, you find that there are things that are achieved on that Vote and also on the other Vote. They are talking of re-graveling, aerodromes in Tororo, Jinja and Arua. When you go to the Vote on airports, it is the same achievement and yet money is being allocated to these two different activities. 

Madam Speaker, I want to draw our attention to the contractors. We are informed by the report that the problem with the ministry is that there are no competent contractors in this country and they say that this is a challenge they have. We know that there are currently two first grade contractors in Uganda - Spencon and RCC - but there is information that this is by design. Most of the money that we use for roads comes from abroad as donor money and there are people in offices outside Uganda who specify that the contractor should be RCC or Spencon. So, they have forced most of the potential contractors out of the country.

When I was growing up, I used to see Mowlem and Stirling. These contractors were deliberately denied business. They closed shop and now we are stuck with only two contractors, Spencon and RCC. I do not know whether they are the only ones who speak the layer language. 

I also want to talk about the pertinent issue of planning, which falls under the docket of Prof. Kamuntu, the Minister of State for Finance. We have here a number of roads that have been earmarked for design and construction but last week we were here on this Floor of Parliament debating the ICT committee’s report and one of the issues was the national fibre optic backbone, which is being redone now because it was done in a very bad way originally. It was put in a road reserve, it was not deep enough and it was excavated. We think that this is the time for hon. Prof. Kamuntu, under his docket, to help us plan so that all these roads carry conduits; so that, when you are going to lay pipes for water, communication or for any other purpose, they should all be in one conduit which can be hired out; other than spending - now the Ministry of ICT is going to spend almost US$ 23 million relaying fibre from Kampala to Jinja. A contract that was supposed to be finalised in one year is now going to take more than four years before we can benefit from that loan from China. So, I think let us try to pull these services together so that whatever road is being done accommodates more than one service. I thank you.

8.59
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for their report. In their methodology, the committee consulted the different ministers, and on page 21, they say that they consulted the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about issues of the Road Fund, and this minister refused to reveal the level of taxation for the Road Fund. The chairman read this report and it is in the Hansard that the minister was asked to give information and he refused. 

Madam Speaker, the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure are very clear on this. Committees have powers of the High Court. They have powers to summon anyone to appear before them. They have powers to require any document to be presented before them; and if the matter is so sensitive, they can require this information in camera. 

I want to seek further information from the chairperson of the committee. Bearing in mind that the Minister of Finance is also a Member of Parliament and, therefore, is subject to the Rules of Parliament, when this minister refused to reveal this information that the committee needed, did they forward this case to the Rules and Discipline Committee? What action did they take?

Still on the same page, the committee makes a recommendation that we should not appropriate this Shs 116.24 billion for the Road Fund until the minister comes up with an allocation formula. On page 24, the same committee goes on to say, and I will read verbatim, “I beg to move that this House adopt this report and approve the budget for the works and transport sector.” And among the votes they want us to approve is Vote 118, recurrent budget of Shs 116.24 billion. This is the money they are saying that we should not appropriate before the minister comes up with an allocation formula. I am wondering, and the committee chair can verify, what do they really want us to do, because these are two contradictory recommendations on the same vote? Do we go hon. Oduman’s way of refusing to appropriate this money and probably supply or take it to another ministry? I request for clarification.

On page 11 of the report, bullet 6, the committee notes that in order to overcome challenges, there is need to attract more credible construction companies with a view of forcing costs down through increased competition. The cost per unit of construction of roads in Uganda is among the highest in the region. The cost of tarmacking a kilometre of a road is among one of the highest in the region. And the ministry in its wisdom thinks that in order to do away with this problem they must invite as many bidders as possible. This is a ministry that is fully equipped with consultants, technocrats and all the senior officials.

There is what is called a reserve price that is made by technocrats. Mr Minister, don’t you have a reserve price so that you depend on quotations made by these two contractors that you have in the ministry? Why don’t you have a reserve price? You do not need to base yourselves on the number of bidders. You must have your own calculated reserve price that is in line with the aspirations of the country. I thank you.

9.04
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I bring greetings from Kooki. (Laughter)

I thank the committee for having written the report and I thank the minister for having considered Nyanga Bridge in Kooki County; opening up of the road connection between Rakai and Isingiro districts; and giving hope to the people of Kakyera sub-county and Kyalulangira sub-county, which are marginalised sub-counties. This will enhance cultural, social and economic development in the area. I am really very grateful for that consideration.

However, I am very worried about the life cycle of these projects. If you go to page 14, there is that whole list of activities, design and construction - as compact as that. If it were that easy to construct roads and bridges, I think we would be in heaven. But it is not and it is so simplified. Design and construction within this financial year! 

I would like to take an opportunity to ask the minister, should I go back to the people of Kooki, Kakyera, Kyabulangira and Isingiro and celebrate that we are going to have this bridge constructed in our area? Can I get that reassurance from you?

I do not want to repeat the words said by hon. Baliddawa, but we are being treated to a fiasco, because I have been led to understand that tarmacking one kilometre is US$ 1 million. How much money do we have if you add Shs 50 billion plus Shs 67 billion? If you have 125 kilometres to tarmack, do we have money for any other work? Are we going to tell lies to our people? Isn’t this a political liability? It is only one year to elections. What shall we tell the people? 

I remember during the State of the Nation Address by the President he told us to report abnormalities. I am not going to come here and lament. I am reporting now that there were no risk mitigation measures taken. 

You are thinking of telling the district to take over this bridge in Rakai District. The amount of money you send to the district for bridge construction is too little compared to what is going to be spent on the construction of Nyanga Bridge, which will consume over Shs 1 billion. Let us be realistic. If we are going to tell lies, let us tell the nation that we are going to tell lies; otherwise let us get down on the ground and say, “this is not going to be possible.”

I have got one other observation to make. Nyanga Bridge is a big structural work that cannot be managed by the funds going to the district. Secondly, we do not have a competent team at the district to manage this piece of work. I have seen the district doing shoddy work on a very simple job; Katunga road from Kibaale to Kiziba. The work was badly done and it is going to be re-done. This was because we did not mitigate the risks of having shoddy work done at district level. Now here we are, telling the district –(Member timed out_)

9.10
MR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the good report, which I see is almost as good as the one on Agriculture, which we passed last evening. Thank you very much.

I would like to restrict myself mainly to Ministry of Works and Transport. The first area of concern regards the Road Fund. I am very happy to note from the report that this Road Fund will be operationalised come January 2010. I note that the plan for disbursement at sub county level was already out at an average of almost Shs 10 million per sub-county in the financial year.

I would like to say that these funds will be okay in those districts which have road equipment like excavators, graders and loaders; but for districts like Kiboga which lack such equipment and the roads are already in a very sorry state, those monies at sub-county level will be too little compared to the work to be done.

I appeal to both the Ministry of Works and Transport and to the Ministry of Finance, that consideration should be made for provision of such road equipment from the Road Fund to needy districts like Kiboga so that the sub-counties are able to utilise the disbursed funds.

My next concern is in regard to district roads, which were upgraded to national roads as stated in this report. Last financial year, in the case of Kiboga, some of these roads were advertised, but nothing was done. I am talking of cases like the Kituuma Singo Training School up to Nakaseke Road; the Bukomero Dwaniro, Kaira to Kyamukweya up to Kyankwanzi Road, and then Kiboga administration through Kirangira to Zanyiro, up to Bukuya Road. That road passes in front of my house and you know what that means to me as we approach 2011. (Laughter) The other road taken is the one from Masodde to Ntwetwe up to Nkooko in Kibaale District.

I appeal that these roads be worked upon so that this can be a good supplement to the good work done under the KAIIP project on roads in Kiboga District. If we can get these roads taken over by the national roads program, that will be a good combination.

We thank the ministry for the Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima Road, which was completed, but our problem is compensation to the land owners. UNRA started to compensate but stopped midway. They need to be supported. 

Secondly, for those who have been paid, we require that their land titles, which were taken to Mityana Land Office, be worked upon by Ministry of Lands and returned to the owners. Also, the damages to the buildings when they were making the Busunju-Hoima road have never been evaluated. We are requesting the responsible minister to enable UNRA make the arrangements of compensating the land owners and those with damages to their buildings.

Lastly, I would like to address myself to retrogressive acts which have occurred on the Busunju-Hoima Road, and that is the stealing of the road safety signs. These signs, which were erected on metallic poles, have been systematically stolen and taken. I can assure you that these are not the people in Mityana or Kiboga districts through which the road traverses, because we do not have metal sawing machines; it is people from somewhere else who have taken this hardware for their own purposes. I am requesting that the ministry in conjunction with the local government works out – (Member timed out_)

9.15
MR GORDON SEMATIKO (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Firstly, I would like to thank the Ministry of Works and Government because at last contractors are on Mityana–Busega Road, and work has started. We are grateful for that.

But in the programme of upgrading some district roads to national roads, we were instructed to identify the roads which would qualify. Unfortunately, among the roads which were left out is the road from Mutetema-Matte–Kankinga; that road joins Mityana, Kiboga and Luwero districts and the road is used by Singo Military Training School. They really need to do a good job on it; during the rainy season especially, it becomes impassable. I do not know why the ministry neglected it yet the district cannot afford to maintain it. 

On page 17, I want to talk about the domestic arrears, especially to Civil Aviation Authority. Among the reasons the ministry is giving, is lack of local firms to manage the funds; but if you are depriving the local institutions of their funds, how do you expect them to do a good job? In one of the paragraphs, the ministry is stated to have proposed to give away the airport management to another investor because the ministry has deprived the Civil Aviation Authority of the capacity to run the airport efficiently. 

This also touches on the construction aspect. If you are talking of a very high price for construction of Ugandan roads and we have very many domestic arrears, the contractors will in future continue to put very high rates because they know, after all, they will take very long to get paid. So, I am sure early payment is one way of reducing the cost of road construction in Uganda. One of the contractors quoted today here – Zzimwe, was captured in the newspapers as almost being auctioned because of non-payment from Government. 

On the issue of Busungu – Kiboga Road, which passes through my constituency, we are grateful that the road was done. But we also have a complaint on the compensation to the people whose land was affected, and those whose buildings were affected during the construction. 

The people from UNRA who were working on the compensation were demanding some money from the people, up to a tune of almost 51 percent of individual claims; that unless one parted with it, they could not get their money. I have several complaints, and I have written to the Road Authority, and even complained to the IGG, but no action has been taken, and the people are suffering. 

The evaluation was done more than nine years ago and inflation has eaten into the value of the property, and there is, therefore, almost no value for their property which is lost. Article 26 of the Constitution states that there should be protection from deprivation of property and prompt payment must be made before Government takes over one’s property. 

On the issue of Migingo, my word is that our negotiators were just an example that people who go to negotiate on behalf of the government should be more serious. So, Uganda is going to lose because our team left the frontline. Some action should be taken and this Parliament should be briefed on what happened and what actions the ministry is taking.

On the Land Fund, we have a big problem of people being chased from their land –(Member timed out_)

9.20
MR SILVER BAHANE (NRM, BUFUMBIRA County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and I want to thank the committee for this wonderful report. I also thank the minister and congratulate him upon having come with this statutory instrument, eventually operationalising sections 107 to 110 which had stayed in abeyance for a long time. When we come here and deliberate, and eventually enact these laws, I think it is because there is mischief. I do not know why it takes a whole decade for some sections of the law to be operationalised. But we are grateful it has eventually been operationalised.

I want to comment on the state of the roads taken over by the Central Government. Some of these roads were taken over because they lead to important institutions or some important installations, and some areas like in Kisoro, these roads lead to tourism destinations. But I want to report to the minister that some of these roads, especially Kisoro–Rubukuri–Nteko which leads to Bwindi, and then Kisoro–Ntebeko–Mgahinga, are in a very sorry state. They need immediate remedial work. I wish they could start with them as soon as we pass this budget. 

Three, I have made noise on the floor of this House about the road link between Nteko and Nyabushenya in Kisoro, and Nkyeshero in Kayonza, Kanungu District. That road is very important. Kisoro District has only one inlet and one outlet. 

Sometime back, we had a problem when some thugs attacked the town; we were only rescued by forces from a neighbouring country. We would want that road to be worked on as a security road. It is my humble prayer that the Ministry of Works takes over this road; it is a distance of about ten kilometres. 

And when you talk of tourism conurbation, I think it would be easier for our tourists to move from Kisoro; Kigezi is endowed; we would have our people move easily from Kisoro, after viewing the mountain gorillas, to maybe Rwenzori and Murchison Falls. So, I want the ministry to take over this matter and they should do it immediately. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

9.24
MR SIMON MENHYA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two points which I want to raise. One is to thank the chairperson and the committee for the well crafted report. On page 22, I read with concern that there are delays in the construction of projects and many Members have alluded to this point. But I wish to re-echo it by just reading it slowly: “The committee was concerned about the “consistent delays” mark that, and “shoddy work,” also mark that. But the most important of all reads: “…this was by many of the contractors despite the huge expenditures by Government to finance these works.”

Madam Speaker, this is a very tactical statement, as far as I am concerned. It shows that a lot of money is being sunk, with the contractors letting us down. May I know from the Minister, who these contractors are? How many are they? Can we blacklist them? Are they still available? Were they terminated? Can they refund our money, anyway? Can they be imprisoned? 

All these questions are very important, and as Members of Parliament, we need answers to them. I am glad the committee has already identified that this is both a challenge and a problem. From that point, I think the Minister needs to tell this Parliament who these contractors are.

Also, hon. Minister, is it possible to let us know what immediate, short and long-term strategic interventions you have, to ensure this kind of scenario of shoddy work and delayed contractors does not occur again.

Secondly, the Ministry of Local Government together with that of Urban Development came up with a list of 76 town councils and two urban centres at the level of municipal councils that need to be expanded. And last year, people came to my sub- county, Kamuli Town Council with a plan of gazzeting or expanding the geographical area of the council to the neighbouring town councils. They are already grumbling and thinking that Government’s intention to expand urban centres is to grab their land. I think we need an assurance from the Ministry of Lands on whether people’s land will not be grabbed.

On a positive note, I would like to thank RCC contractors for the wonderful job being done. I do not know how this kind of scenario arises – construction of some roads is delayed and/or done in a shoddy way, yet other contractors liker RCC are doing a good job like what they have done on Jinja-Bugiri Road. What is happening? How come one contractor does a good job, while the others are not? To me this is one of the many questions that I will request the hon. Minister to respond to.

Lastly, last year, we were told that Kamuli-Bukungu Road would be tarmacked. However, I do not see it in the work plans and the budget, yet we had already assured our people that this road would be tarmacked; now we are in trouble. (Laughter)

The people of Kamuli District have a right to know whether Kamuli-Bukungu Road is also going to get a new surface. I thank you very much.

9.50 p.m
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the committee. I have perused through the report as presented by the chairperson, together with the policy statement, and noticed that roads under design do not include the Musita-Majanji-Busia Road. This is something that is not going to do me good. I may be among the people to protest the passing of this budget because in the Budget Speech and all the other correspondences – and this is a road that covers about four districts. Hon. Minister and chairperson of the committee, where is Musita-Majanji-Busia Road?

On page 15, there is a provision that some other markets be built after the road has been made. Somewhere, the report talks of constructing Kalerwe Market. But, hon. Minster, along Jinja-Bugiri Road up to maybe Busia, we have not had this done for our people. Places like Musita, Namayemba and Idudi need well-constructed markets. Why don’t we have markets in these places? What is wrong with this part of the country? I would like to appeal to the Minister to take that into consideration.

On the Road Fund Act as has been mentioned, hon. Minister, when this Act was brought here, we all got excited and supported you vehemently. Why hasn’t it been operationalised for this long? I have noticed that the districts are just taking it upon themselves. We need something to coordinate this. I am saying this because that Act gives Members of Parliament automatic membership in their district committees. Years are running out; we need to operationalise that law.

The other issue regards road equipment units. In the report, it was mentioned that the 85 districts are going to benefit from new road equipment units, but the whole House has kept quiet. I do not know whether it is only I who has not seen these. Hon. Minister and hon. Byandala, where are the 85 road equipment units in this report?

Hon. Minister, there are some cities where motorists have been denied access to major areas or roads. When are we cleaning the city of boda bodas? This is important because over 80 percent of the people knocked and admitted to Mulago Hospital  are as a result of Boda Boda accidents. This is because those fellows are not skilled riders.

I was in Abuja sometime, but while there, I was told that their Minister of Works and Housing bites. I was told that, for example, he wakes up one day and arrests all boda bodas when they are found riding in the city. And as of now, you can drive over 60 miles out of Abuja without seeing any boda bodas. 

Now that the ones here are causing a lot of havoc, why don’t we –(Ms Kabakumba Masiko rose_)– Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Information and National Guidance to interrupt and suffocate me while I am supposed to be in a free world? [HON. MEMBERS: “She is giving you guidance.”] No, she is wrongly guiding me. (Laughter)

Lastly, I would like to express my displeasure with the report of the Opposition because it has not mentioned anything about housing and urban development when they all use these roads and sleep in houses; that report is wanting. I would like to express my displeasure to the hon. Member from Madi-Okolo for failing to mention anything to do with housing. So, at an appropriate time, I am going to move a motion of displeasure towards the report of the Leader of the Opposition for failing to mention something about housing and urban devilment. Thank you.

9.33
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for bringing out very pertinent issues including the rarely talked about water transport, air transport, land, the much needed roads and railways. Can I also inform the Minister of Transport that the steel rolling companies are looting the railway infrastructure in the name of scrap? Can we investigate and find out how much we still have of the old railway lines because very many areas have actually been looted? I do not know whether it is under RVR or something else. 

If we are to move from the PEAP to NDP, I think we should fast track planning through the NDP, because on the question of land, and with the current status quo as per the 1995 Constitution and the 1998 Land Act, we cannot develop this country. I want to call for radical land reforms. The minister should tell us what it will take this country to comprehensively plan landuse for utilities, for roads, and for railways; because, even if you gave hon. Nasasira trillions, he would not have access. The roads and road reserves have been built in because a land policy is lacking. I have been complaining and I was a whistle blower; I told you that there were cattle which were prospecting for oil. Three years since, I have not seen a single response -(Interjections)- cattle prospecting for oil and I want to put it on record. [HON. MEMBERS: “How?”] To date, we have allowed speculators to continue to own oil wells and we are quiet and tomorrow, it will become a problem to this country. Can I call for an immediate response?

Having heard the findings of this report; the challenges of unit costs, the procurement plan and the lack of absorption capacity; hon. Minister in charge of the sector, do you think this country should continue with the current arrangement of expecting a lot from companies which you have told us have failed to deliver? Isn’t it time possibly for us to think that the national army should put up some road construction network such that your engineers are also helped to form national road companies? It should not just be the Mukalazi’s and the Zzimwe’s who are part of the corruption. As we move for the National Development Plan; as we put it in place; and as we have discovered oil, why don’t we consider national companies –(Mr Baliddawa rose_)- my time is limited and I have been waiting to talk. 

MR BALIDDAWA: Please take the clarification. It is friendly fire. Madam Speaker, I want the hon. Member to clarify. He said that cattle have been prospecting for oil. Unless I have forgotten my English, but cattle is “Ente”. How can cattle prospect for oil? 

MR MUKITALE: Three years ago, most of you did not know we had oil, but those of us who knew that the animals were not looking for pastures have since proved right. They were looking for oil. But also in literature, you can decide to put it that way. So, I do not know whether you are looking for the hidden meaning or not, but the point I was developing is that I do not see any hope. 

The Mukalazi’s and the Zzimwe’s were assisted, but they have not come up. Since we now have oil, and we expect this country to have some finances, we should reconsider the policy of national road construction companies, which can actually make us roads so that we can even get a comparison of a unit cost, because right now, the million dollar thing that you are talking of is coming from Spencon and others. What does the Ministry of Works know about the unit cost of a road? They do not know because they do not have their own unit. [HON. MEMBERS: “They know.”] I am saying they do not and if I had time, I would clarify. 

I also want to say that we really need to increase the road network by helping neighbours of protected areas like NFA and UWA. A lot of money is being sunk in surveying boundaries all the time. Why don’t we open boundary roads for UWA and NFA and the Ministry of Works can initially take them on so that we reduce the remoteness and peripheries of those of us who host a lot of forests and national parks?

Hon. Minister of Transport, I have been talking about lakeside roads. The Albert Nile Region is the richest area with flora and fauna, and it has potential for tourism, and oil has been discovered along that very stretch. All the oil wells have been discovered along the same axis in that area – north, up to the Murchison Falls. This road will be multipurpose for fisheries, for a tourism circuit, and for oil, and it will reduce costs. Even the Kaiso-Tonya Road being made is not cost effective if you looked at what we are going into in terms of the discoveries currently now in Buliisa. 

I lost my bout of excitement from the Budget Speech and the State of the Nation Address when the financing of Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba Road was lost in this report. It is not provided for, and on page 25, there is no money allocated for this financial year. I have even seen in the papers that the Butyaba-Wanseko Road that has been talked– (Member timed out_)

9.40
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank all Members for their contributions. Mine is on a lighter note because, much as people have complained that there are no roads in their areas, we are basking in road constructions in the area. But we have problems with good roads. My people, especially from Bwaise to Bombo, are these days dying faster because of the good roads. People are over speeding. Hon. Okello-Okello said that the distance has been shortened because of the goodness of the roads, and that they use three to four hours, but if somebody is heading to Gulu and has to pass through Bwaise at that speed, we need to put humps on those roads to control speed.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I was just emphasising the good service the road is giving. Is the hon. Member in order to imply that we are killing their people because the road is good? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member is actually complementing what you said because he said that the road is very good; you move very fast but his people die.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that ruling. We are not blaming you, but we want the Ministry to put a caution, in the form of humps, on these good roads. Because when you hurry, you will kill us. We are asking for this before the contractor leaves the road. 

We are also praying that you look at the junction at Bwaise. If I am supposed to be in Gulu in four hours, the jam in Bwaise will consume one hour. We need that road to be planned as a dual carriage, just like the Kalerwe-Gayaza Road is being planned. A dual carriage and traffic lights are needed there. We beg that the Ministry plans for this junction. 

Lastly, we are facing a problem of rampant theft of materials of the contractors on both the Matuga-Kapeka and Gayaza-Zirobwe roads. We do not know whom to contact because Police will not act. In fact, I contacted Police and they said they do not have facilitation. So, we need an organised system so that these thefts are stopped. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. If hon. Sebunya is saying the Police are inefficient, then he should contact the thieves. (Laughter) 

MR SEBUNYA: No, the Member of the Opposition is misadvising. We are waiting for an organised group to form at least a task force, because when I spoke with the minister, he said that there is an organised group that is stealing materials from these contractors. We need this problem solved urgently because the Chinese on Kapeka road might use it as a scapegoat for poor performance. We are begging the Ministry to address this.  

Lastly, we are requesting that before the contractors leave, they mark the road reserve either by planting trees - I saw this done in Kasese - or give us the task and we shall do the tree planting ourselves. We can get some political capital out of this.

9.45
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I always get very happy when I see hon. Nasasira because he is my friend, and whenever I meet hon. Nasasira, I tell him that he is a very lucky man because from the time he was appointed Minister of Works, he has never been reshuffled. He is, therefore, the life Minister for Works in the Government of Uganda. 

This is a document that contains -(Eng. Nasasira rose on clarification_) - on what? On the manifesto or on your being life minister for Works?

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much my friend, hon. Mabikke for giving way. He is saying that I am lucky because since I was appointed Minister of Works, I have never been reshuffled. Of course, I have been reshuffled many times and even dropped. I want to inform this House, and I have witnesses in the Committee of Infrastructure, that hon. Mabikke in his contribution in the committee offered to appoint me Minister of Works - which I declined - should he take over Government tomorrow. (Laughter)

MR MABIKKE: You are only interested in eating into my time; but that is a private discussion we shall hold outside the House. 

This document contains all the pledges that the NRM has made to the people of Uganda and this must be the Bible of all of you Members of the frontbench; you must have this, including hon. Omara Atubo who is very new there. (Laughter) This must be your Bible. In fact, if I became President and I found my minister without my manifesto, that one would be in serious trouble. 

Three quarters of what the NRM promised in regard to the Ministry of Housing, Lands and Urban Development, and in regard to the Ministry of Works, are now air and it is just a year to the next elections. (Interjections) Hon. Kigyagi, this Parliament is not a place for hecklers. Hecklers go to Namboole. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to start with page 39 of the NRM Manifesto in which the NRM promised to prioritise housing development and home ownership for every Ugandan. They were saying that they would make it possible for many working Ugandans to own their homes. How far have you attained this, given the fact that the price of cement and building materials is exorbitant? The Minister has taken no steps at all to ensure that taxes on cement and iron bars are reduced. 

In this very manifesto, the President promised to capitalise Housing Finance Company with Shs 60 billion. (Interjections) Page 40; I do not have to educate you on your manifesto. This is what you wrote. You promised to capitalise Housing Finance Company with Shs 60 billion so that Ugandans can get cheap mortgages. How far have you gone with this? What have you done about this? And when I come to my constituency - in fact, I am a very lucky man because I have got campaign tools for me here on page 41.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Is hon. Mabikke in order to begin discussing our manifesto when we are discussing the report of the Committee on Works and Physical Infrastructure? Is he really in order to continue referring to our manifesto, which he does not own, Madam Speaker?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our manifesto is a public document so it is okay if he uses it. 

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, in functioning democracies a government manifesto is a working document for all government programmes. I do not know where some of these friends of mine really come from. 

For my own constituency, government promised to do the following, on page 41, for Namuwongo projects: rehabilitate Namuwongo road, Bukasa road, Kisugu road, School road, Main Access road and St Barnabas road. What they have done is that they have patched up St Barnabas road and Namuwongo road. For Bukasa road, that was shoddy work which in fact I will come to. So, Bukasa road, Kisugu road, School road, and Main Access lower roads have all not been done. These are manifesto pledges that you made.

Finally, because you seem to be stealing my time -(Laughter)- we have had a controversy on the airport -(Member timed out­_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 36 Members have contributed to this report. I think we have done very well. Let me invite the ministers to respond briefly. 

9.52
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many leaders do we have? No.

MR OMARA ATUBO: The Opposition are going to be there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have invited the Minister of Lands - 

MR OMARA ATUBO: Hon. Ekanya, can you respect the Speaker and wait please? Hon. Ekanya, we have to set standards for this House. Please, can you sit down? Because next time you are on this side you must have some standards. Otherwise, it will -

Let me start by thanking, first of all the committee for their report and also for their support -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have declined from both sides. Proceed.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you. Let me start by, first of all thanking the Committee on Infrastructure for their support to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and for the guidance they have given us. 

I also want to thank my friends in the Opposition for the very constructive advice and the guidance they have given to our ministry, although they have not written formally like they have done for other sectors. They have written the Opposition response. I hope it is not a sign of total satisfaction of our performance. But even if it were, we would have been very happy for them to put it in writing because it is through that kind of criticism and writing that we shall be able to perform better. 

So, I still hope it is not too late and that the minister who handles the sector on Lands, Housing and Urban Development will find time to do something about it.

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in a way is new. The department of lands is as old as this country, but the two sectors of housing and urban development were brought from other ministries. So, we have been trying to turn this ministry into a functioning sector and, therefore, we have had some constraints mainly in terms of funding and manpower.

I also want to say that, as the committee knows, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is one of the least funded ministries in this country, yet the issues that we handle, namely, lands, housing and urban development are of key productive sectors. It is the basis for this country’s development. Therefore, I do hope that we shall be able to build support as time goes on for more of our activities to go on.

Let me turn to the issues that have been raised. Hon. Jalia Bintu talked of the regional land offices. Yes, we have these regional land offices in a number of regions in the country and Hoima is one of them. If you have not yet got the plan - the plan is a public document - we are ready to give it you.

Hon. Kigyagi complained about the Uganda Land Commission giving out government land. The point is that Uganda Land Commission is there to protect and hold government land, but our biggest problem in this country has been that the district land boards have been issuing some of these titles of government land and therefore there has been this haggle between the Uganda Land Commission and district land boards. It is true government land is being stolen left and right but this is partly because of our history.   

This is because all government lands are practically not titled. You see, if you want to protect your land, like you want to protect your marriage, you have it registered. Even if something else happens at least you can say, “This is somebody interfering with our privacy.” 

Before the 1995 Constitution, land belonged to the State. It is only the 1995 Constitution which says, “Land belongs to the people.” The state took it for granted that land was theirs and therefore they never bothered to have titles; after all every square inch of Uganda belonged to the state and therefore they were leasing it out. Whatever they did not lease out was theirs and therefore why bother to lease school land, army barracks, hospitals and ranches, provided the boundaries are known that it is your property? 

But now the policy is changing and it is becoming extremely expensive for us. Surveying has also been privatised and it is extremely expensive for government to hire surveyors to go and survey their own land. But we are moving to that and we are aware of the problem of government lands being given out illegally.

However, when that is drawn to the attention of government in time, like some of them have been made in forest reserves - people have had titles on forest reserves in refugee camps and so forth. If it is brought to the notice of the government, the Commissioner for Land Registration cancels those titles; she has the powers to do that.

There is the issue that my good friend Tom Butime raised concerning Migingo. Yes, Migingo is being governed by a communiqué; call it an agreement, signed formally between the ministers of Foreign Affairs of Uganda and Kenya. This communiqué is the basic document on which the problem of Migingo is being solved. 

In that communiqué it is very clearly stated that a survey will be done jointly by the surveyors of Uganda with Kenya starting from Sio and going up to where the controversy is. When that survey took place, there were non controversial points in that border. Unfortunately, our friends from the Kenyan side did not fully cooperate and when our surveyors realised this, they came back for consultation but they are about to go back. So the issue of Migingo is still going to be settled peacefully.

On the question of why our borders are being interfered with, this is historical. All these international borders were colonially determined and they were put on the maps but they were never translated on the ground. You know it is one thing to have your deed plan, some of you who have properties and you have your deed plan in your certificate of title but once in a while, you have got to call your surveyor to go and open the boundaries; sometimes it is even resisted. 

So one of the problems we are facing is that we have, in our constitutions in Africa, clearly defined boundaries with where they start but they have never been translated on the ground. It is the same with the Sudan border; the same with Congo and Kenya. But I am happy to report to this House that aggressive and firm steps are being taken by all the governments to ensure that these boundaries are marked. Two have been successfully done, that is the one with Tanzania has been completed very successfully and the one of Rwanda has also been successfully completed.

However, on the issue of whether we should use other tactics as according to my brother Tom Butime, I think Uganda believes in brotherly and sisterly relations with its neighbours. As such, we shall continue to use these relations. We have no interest in extending our borders beyond what we are constitutionally entitled to, and I don’t think that hon. Butime is ready, at his age, to lead us into the new tactics. I don’t know whether he is still in shape to assist us in using other tactics when he is in a position of command.

Hon. Kiryapawo, I share your disappointment. The border between Budaka and Mbale should be completed but we have been interfered with and the interference has come in two ways. One is the diversion of the surveyors from the Budaka-Mbale border to other more demanding places like these international borders, including Migingo. 

But the other point is that sometimes we politicians politicise the issue of internal district borders for our own political interest and I think we should restrain from this. If we want to build Uganda and integrate and unite our people, the issue of borders should be de-emphasised. It is good for administration but to say that, “This is the Lango border and therefore this brother of ours from Teso should not cross”, I think would not be the right thing. The more we do that, the more we fall into the trap of disuniting this country.

The primary responsibility, on the issue of borders, lies with local governments. We are a technical ministry. When there is a problem of district borders, it is first reported to the Ministry of Local Government. When the ministry cannot resolve it through meetings of district leaders, then they come to us and say, “Go and open the boundaries or interpret what is written somewhere and tell us where the boundary is”. 

That leads me to my friend, hon. Terence Achia of Karamoja. The survey of the Katakwi-Moroto border is completed and we have forwarded it to the President. I didn’t come with the paper but we did forward it to the President by April this year.

The border dispute between Katakwi and Moroto is older than hon. Mabikke or hon. Ekanya. In other words, it was there soon after independence so we have inherited it. For the first time, we carried out the boundary survey successfully. The report, which was the directive of the President, has been submitted to him. It is up to the President now to see how to disclose it to the people of Katakwi/Teso and the people of Moroto/Karamoja. 

It is no longer my responsibility and I do hope that he is making proper arrangements because it is a sensitive issue. It is in a place called Iriri, if you have moved from Soroti through Katakwi to Moroto. It is that very fertile and mountainous area called Iriri and that has been the cause of fighting between the people of Katakwi and Moroto.

Hon. Baryomunsi and another member raised the issue of the National Land Policy. Let me assure this House that the National Land Policy is such an important policy that I don’t think even the NRM Government is prepared to have it imposed on the people of Uganda as a policy. 

I found this policy in the ministry and it has passed through four or five ministers. When I went to the ministry, I found the third draft, which was for public consumption. We were supposed to carry out a number of consultations starting with what we call regional consultations. We have completed regional consultations with the interest groups and we are producing the fourth draft based on that. We are going to distribute that to Members of Parliament and to members of Cabinet. 

From the fourth draft we are moving on to the fifth draft and possibly even the sixth. So we are moving cautiously on the issue of the National Land Policy because it is a very sensitive issue, and we must bring everybody on board so that it is not seen as a policy, which is imposed by a particular party or government. We want this policy to outlive us and be a document which every Uganda can say, “I have had my input; we have agreed on this and this is how we should manage it”. A land policy as important as a constitution of a country; therefore, the way we manage it will determine its ownership and acceptability.

The other two Members of Parliament, hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Sematiko raised the issue of the Land Fund. The Land Fund is governed by section 41 of the Land Act. I cannot read it because of time, but the whole purpose of the Land Fund was to have this fund to purchase land – to give people loans and assist the people of Kibaale, and the Kibanja owners to solve these conflicting interests and so forth. 

The biggest problem of the Land Fund has been the funds; the money has hardly been there. We are trying to see how much we can raise. As soon as we get more productive people raising money into the Uganda Revenue Authority and into the national purse, we must be able to expand so that we solve this contradictory relationship especially in areas where we have more than one interest; the Mailo owners conflicting with the Kibanja owners. To develop land you need one interest. 

Finally, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Simba Prison is very safe; I do not think anybody is going to give it to any investor. 

Hon. Mabikke’s issue about the housing finance, we have capitalised housing finance. It has not yet reached Shs 60 billion –(Interjections)– I will tell you. 

On the issue of affordable houses, yes, we need to have affordable houses. We have now moved from the private sector; the high class areas of Kampala, Entebbe, Jinja and so forth. We are now trying to get an investor who can develop a housing scheme for Kigumba and regular low income earners like teachers who can afford Shs 50,000 per month, business people and civil servants can have a two or three bed-roomed house and they can pay back. We passed the Mortgage Bill here; it is awaiting the President’s assent. That is one big step forward and then we need financing. So all this is mainly for the private sector to play a role. 

We have capitalised housing finance with Shs 31 billion and we are still – the Movement Government is not leaving power today –(Interjections)- at least we have one and half years to the next elections. By that time the Shs 60 billon you are talking of, we will have surpassed it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

10.12
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to also thank the chairperson and the committee for their report and the issues they raised. I have also noted the response from the Opposition prepared by the Shadow Minister of Works and Transport, and I want to thank members for their contributions. But it would be amiss for me, Madam Speaker, not to recognise your stamina for staying here the whole day. 

I realised that many Members of Parliament have raised issues in the committee report and there were issues raised in the Opposition response. So we have prepared responses for the committee report and for the Opposition report, which we will polish up and add some of the concerns raised and then we will circulate them to all Members of Parliament. Otherwise, by the time I respond to the 36 Members of Parliament who raised issues - in fact some of them are not here, they have left. 

However, I want to comment on a few issues that are general and then you will get an updated response for both the reports and the issues you raised. Most of the details are in the policy statement. 

Let me comment on the Kalangala ship because I know it is their livelihood. Ships are insured. That is why we are having problems with MV Kabalega; and before they are insured, there is due diligence done on them. So they have to do a proper inspection and that is why the ship was taken to Mwanza. 

There were two major things to sort out: one was what they call the Embarkation Ramp Seal, which must be replaced to ensure that there is water tide integrity. The other one was the fireman’s outfit which is used to detect sources of fire aboard the ship and that must be installed with a breathing apparatus; now, these have to be ordered. 

The reason we took it to Mwanza was to look for a dry dock because our dock here is undergoing rehabilitation. It was assessed and some of those key parts were noted for replacement; it was brought back and packed and those parts are being ordered. When they are installed, then it will begin to sail again. 

It does not mean that our engineers do not know what to do. It is like taking a car to be assessed and then you have to wait until the spares are bought. We are trying to do it as expeditiously as possible because we know how important that ship is to the people of Kalangala. 

The other issue is the roads taken over from the districts. First, I want honourable members to realise that these roads were taken over from the districts with effect from 1st July this year, two months ago. But honourable members are talking as if we have had them for long. So those which are impassable now, it means that they were not passable in the first place when we took them over and that is why there was demand that the central government should take the roads over from the districts. 

Increasing our network from about 11,000 to 22,000 kilometres is part of our reforms in the sector. It also included establishing the Uganda National Road Authority and operationalising the Road Fund Act. Therefore, I would like you to realise that you cannot take over 10,000 kilometres and bring them to a national status standard in one financial year or in two months. It is on this basis that I appeal to you to be patient with us. 

The purpose and strategy is correct, because if you read the National Uganda Roads Authority Act, you will realise that in future if the ministry is to direct that another road be taken over by the roads authority, there will be need to show cause and justify finances before signing the statutory instrument. That process will be long. We wanted to do the reforms at a go and ensure they are completed. So, I expect these roads to be brought up to national standard in three to four years. 

However, let me inform you that we shall look at the most critical roads as part of our road maintenance scheme to ensure they are improved as we move along. It is something that we need to understand – doubling the network from 11,000 to 22,000 kilometres is a major change in that classification and it will take time. 

I do not want us to be blamed for the bad conditions of the roads yet they were like that even before we took over. Like I have said, the purpose is good. We only need to join together, work out a programme, which you will see because according to the new National Road Authority Act and the Road Fund Act, we are supposed to be presenting to you maintenance development plans for clearance. Subsequently, we are supposed come, at end of every year, to account for the money.

The next one was about district equipment. I know in their response the Opposition said this project has failed. I would like to inform you that it has not failed. If you read our statement for the last financial year you would have noticed that we were saying that government was going to buy district equipment; that was the principle. But if you checked the budget, you would have also realised that no money had been provided for it. It was just going to start. I think there was only about Shs 2 million, which we have already used to buy some equipment, but as you know what equipment can be bought with such money?

As I talk now the a paper is before Cabinet; we have studied it with all the district officials including CAOs, district engineers and the chairpersons and agreed on how to work it out. We even toured other countries to see the way they handle this. My colleague, for example, visited two countries, Kenya and Zambia.  

I can report that we have studied the whole process, structure and format. These districts are many and so there is no need to equip every district with all the equipment. What we have agreed upon is that each district will get the basic equipment like a grader, two tipper Lorries and a hand roller. However, we are going to have zonal equipment, which will be handled under the public/private partnerships. A district can come and hire – meanwhile the role of the district will be to maintain the roads. 

I can add that we are working it out, taking our economy into account; it is not just throwing equipment around. May I also add that over the years as we were analysing this, we got into a lot of debates with our development partners? When my colleague, the Shadow Minister for Works said they are proposing zonal allocation of equipment, I got surprised because this is what I discussed with him. He appreciated but now he wants to claim it.

Let me talk about absorption capacity versus budget. I think there is a misunderstanding here. First, we had backlog of roads that needed reconstruction and maintenance, but we had no money. And you know that our laws do not allow any accounting officer to get into a tender unless money is passed in the budget. I think that is very clear – I can see my friend, hon. Nandala-Mafabi nodding his head; he knows this.

We listed what was required for our backlog, but realised that to clear it, government was supposed to inject US $600 million for three years, which would be over and above our normal budget in the MTEF. So, when I hear people talk about the trillion shillings - this is actually the total of more than Shs 700 billion that we have always received from MTEF and an extra Shs 320 million, which was given to us to cater for the backlog. That is what brought it to one trillion. Also note that this money was a combination of both the Government of Uganda budget money and money from the development partners.

When you look at our policy statement, you will realise that Shs 800 billion went to UNRA. We awarded the contracts for those roads that were ready for work. An example is the contract for the reconstruction of the Kampala-Masaka Road. Those that were not ready, we got into tenders and those that had not been prepared, we got into design.

However, in order to sign all these contracts you must prove that you have the money in the budget. So when you hear of the Shs 300 billion having not been absorbed – the contracts were signed last financial year and we committed all the money that had been given to us in the budget.  As far as we are concerned, the money that was given to us was committed. So the issue of absorption capacity should not be seen from that regard because you cannot sign a contract unless you have the money. Yes, it is a vicious circle. And after signing the contract, you cannot complete that road in one year. 

The principle is that the money that was committed should be wired to the Central Bank to let the project start. In any case, you know very well that even the money we borrow from the World Bank or ADB – you cannot go there to borrow every financial year for a project of say US $50 or US $100 million. You will, therefore borrow for example US $50 million; Parliament will approve it before you sign a contract, but that project will take three years.

What we should be blamed for in regard to lack of absorption is a situation where, if you check later and find that having signed the contract we signed three years ago, we have failed to absorb that money; that is when we should be challenged for lack of absorption.

Madam Speaker, let me talk about design and upgrade. I am sorry for those who were concerned about some roads that were not listed. But if you look at the report of the committee – what I can say is that all the roads that were mentioned, whether it is a road to Busia or Rwakaka, all roads have been tendered out and in fact all contracts have been awarded to start the design, but they could not be listed here because some roads had not yet got a code. If you do not have a code in this new presentation of vote functions, you cannot list it. But all the roads that were announced in the State of the Nation Address have been tendered out for design and you will get all the details. 

Axle load; I heard somebody comment that Kenya is controlling its axle loads and that Uganda is not. But before these trailers reach Uganda, they pass through Kenya. In fact, if everything were okay, we would not have any need for weighbridges here. These are sealed from the ports. The point is that much as you think that we are not controlling the axle loads, we have got the axle load stations and hundreds of trailers have been impounded, taken to court and charged, and others have been offloaded and we shall give you the details. 

In fact our main concern is corruption on the weighbridges and you could help us if you get the people who try to get bribes from these Lorries. But they are checked and we are going to give you details on each weighbridge - how many lorries were impounded and how many people were taken to court in the last financial year alone. We shall give you the details –(Interruptions) 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is that the vehicles which are violating the axle road are known. I have the numbers. 

MR NASASIRA: I welcome hon. Ekanya to help me and get me that information rather than just putting it here. You would have helped me if you provided this information so that we involve the Police and the CID and arrest these people. I will be most grateful and I will wait for this information. 

On the issue of the boda bodas, let me repeat that the mandate of the ministry is to create policies and bring them here so that they can be passed into law. Enforcement is a different matter. I have got no power to arrest any boda bodas. The policy on boda bodas is very clear. They are licensed both as boda bodas and as cyclists and there is a clear statutory instrument signed by the Minister of Transport on how boda boda riders should behave. 

The enforcement part is what we should push ourselves over. For example, Kampala City Council can decide on how many of these boda bodas they want in an area, just like they licensed the taxis. Somebody challenged me to bite them but I cannot bite boda bodas -(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, thank you for noting that point because I actually raised it and it was from the order of the presentation of this report on page 11 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS MUGERWA: I am just giving him the background.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. Just raise the point of order. 

MS MUGERWA: I wonder whether the minister is in order to say that his ministry is not responsible for road safety since this was the theme of the report and this report called upon all ministries involved to work together, and I appeal – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know what you are appealing for if you are raising a point of order. Please, proceed. 

MR NASASIRA: Maybe the point I can raise for hon. Sauda Mugerwa is the issue you raised about having no station for driving licences; I will take that because I asked for more extensions and that is what I can take to find out more if Masaka has none. 

But let me just read you the laws signed: Speed limit regulations, drunk-driving regulations, use of mobile phones while driving, safety belt regulations, rules of the road regulations, motorcycle regulations, speed governors regulations, driving permit regulations, weighbridge regulations, express permit schemes; all these are signed into law. What we want now is to enforce them. 

But I can also add that over and above this Road Safety Action Plan that we undertook between 2004 and 2008, there are many other things that we did like setting a curriculum for driving schools. We are now moving on together with the World Bank to establish a Road Safety Authority. 

When are we opening the Kampala-Northern Bypass? And why is Bwaise to Kafu road - I want to inform my friend hon. Okello-Okello that Bwaise to Kafu and all the way to Gulu was not actually done by UPC. Kampala to Bombo was done in 1957, Bombo to Wobulenzi was done in 1959 to 1960; the UPC Government constructed the road from Wobulenzi to Gulu and I agree and I want to congratulate the UPC Government for doing that but the other one was done before independence -(Mr Okello-Okello rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, we really need to end. Hon. Minister, please conclude. I do not think that who did the road is a very serious matter. 

MR NASASIRA: Finally, as I promise all the answers, I want to appeal to honourable members to realise that when you hear that a country is called least developed, it means a lot. It means that it is least developed in knowledgeable people, least developed in competent contractors, least developed in engineers, least developed in many things and even least developed in Members of Parliament and ministers. 

So, we are a least developed country struggling to improve our capacity but definitely even with a new increment in the budget, I think honourable members who travel within this country have realised that there is positive change. There is work going on in every corridor. Some roads have been finished and for others, construction has started, and even potholes have reduced and they will soon be finished. I thank you, hon. Members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Minister, produce 350 copies of those replies for all the members - no, you will answer all the Finance issues separately and not today. 

Hon. Members, our practice has been that we do not deal with budgetary issues now but we shall deal with them in the Committee of Supply. So, I put the question that this House do adopt this report. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is adjourned until 11 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 10.34 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 4 September 2009 at 11.00 a.m.) 

