Wednesday, 6 September 2006

(Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to the first meeting of this week – (Interjection)- yes, Leader of the Opposition. 

PROF. LATIGO: Is hon. Ssebunya in order to cross - you will have to notify us formally - (Laughter)

MR OMARA ATUBO: The honourable minister is actually not crossing; he is just being enticed –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I would like to begin by altering the Order Paper to permit the laying of a paper by the Prime Minister.

Secondly, I would like to congratulate all the chairpersons who were elected in the recently concluded elections for the new districts as well as the Members of Parliament who have not yet sworn in. I would like to reassure them that as soon as the returns from the Electoral Commission are brought to this House, they will be contacted for swearing through their whips. The Office of the Clerk will handle those who have no whips. So, this is really for the other people who are about to come, but they should just wait for their whips or the Office of the Clerk to contact them. Thank you.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you for allowing me to say something small without an earlier notice. 

On Monday, I travelled to Pader District to bury a friend who at one time was our colleague and Secretary-General in FDC. He crossed to the NRM and stood in Aruu County which election was won by my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto. This is the late Jeron Okello Lobo. We thank the Minister for Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi for representing Government at the funeral service in Luzira. 

Now, when we were there –(Interruption)

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, did the honourable Leader of the Opposition imply that this was a small matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, he was just beginning to explain the matter. So, let us listen and hear how big or small it is. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know the honourable minister for sometime has not been in Parliament. So he is really anxious to contribute –(Laughter)- but I was just opening my statement. 

While we were there, after the funeral, I travelled from Pajule to Gulu. But at the funeral we met various leaders of the districts in Acholi. The most significant thing was that on that same day, one of the LRA commanders, of course also one of the five that our law excludes from the Amnesty, Brig. Koyelo came out with his group at Atanga Lacakucoti. Army leaders, including the Acting Fourth Division Commander, met them. And the atmosphere was really good. He was told about the role that he must play in answering to some of the queries with ICC. He said that, “We came out because we really want this war to end and if because of this I will face ICC, then I would rather face ICC but we want this war to end.”

At the same time, I met people who came from my constituency in Agago and two days earlier, a group of LRA who had mobilised to travel to the Sudan to the reporting point, came to Kalongo. And they actually went up to the barracks; they were received by the UPDF, the shared water and food and after that they were facilitated to continue on their journey.

Yesterday, when I was leaving Gulu, one of the presenters on Omega Radio had gone to meet two senior commanders of the LRA who have been camping in Zoka Forest for sometime. This is Brig. Koyelo and one of his colleagues. And again the message that he came back with is that these people are organising to travel to the Sudan to report as required of the cessation of hostility agreement.

Now, the reason why I requested that I say something is, when I came to Kampala this morning, I looked at what was in the newspapers. The Daily Monitor says, “Talks in trouble as LRA makes U-turn.” You know, for some of us, ending of this conflict and restoring peace in our land is so crucial that when we say we are going to forgive, it is because it is just we do not have a choice except at least in our time as leaders to see our people go back in peace. And so when newspapers publish, it is incumbent upon us to caution them. 

I write articles in Daily Monitor newspaper, but that does not mean that they do not make mistakes. The position that Otti presented on KFM is not even a u-turn. All he is saying in their own language, which I understand very well, is that they are scared of ICC and that something should be done about it. But that is how they speak.

I also saw in the papers again one of the authors writing about “Mato put” and trivialising it and saying, “No, ‘mato put’ is for small matters, not for big things.” That is again a misrepresentation of things that creates worry because they think that that is the mindset of Government. 

I want to inform Parliament and the whole country that we had difficulties during Idi Amin’s time. The killings that went on during Amin’s time and then after UNLF time, when many of our local defence forces went to West Nile, was something which was very atrocious. But at some stage the two communities agreed that this must be put behind and mato put took place between the people of Acholi and those of West Nile. What happened during Amin’s time or during UNLF is now not even a matter of discussion between West Nile and us, it is closed. The essence of mato put is that you deal with fundamental matters that cannot be resolved even by simple restitution. It has to be forgiven and closed.  

Mato put is an element that Kony and Otti talked to us about when we went to Garamba to meet them. They believe that it is the basis on which they can escape the International Criminal Court (ICC) indictment and be reconciled with our people.  

Therefore, I thought, Madam Speaker that I should take this opportunity to inform members that the situation on the ground is that the LRA is fully responding to the cessation of hostilities agreement and that the UPDF are making all facilitation possible for these people together with our locals- (Applause)- We should encourage this and where we think we have doubts, let us hold it and provide encouragement so that this conflict comes to an end. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

3.04
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution is very brief.  I fully associate myself with what the hon. Leader of the Opposition has just stated. However, I wanted to know something from the Leader of Government Business. My perception of cessation of hostilities suggests that anything that would impact negatively towards the present status quo should be put on halt. I am asking the Leader of Government Business, there are statements that come in the press, which if not handled properly could impact negatively towards the present status quo. 

Is it possible for Government and the Minister of Information to persuade the editors of these papers that the time we are living in is very critical and delicate and that it is in the interest of every Ugandan that these peace talks succeed? It is not a matter of selling newspapers; to some of us it is a matter of life and death.  Is it possible for the Leader of Government Business and Government to take it upon themselves to persuade these editors in some manner that things that impact negatively towards the peace talks should stop. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for that consoling message. It was quite upsetting to hear about it in the morning and I am glad that you have reassured us. We would like to thank the government, all those who have been involved here and in the Sudan and especially the civil society for following up this matter.

3.06
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, that is a very good proposal by my brother-in-law, hon. Ben Wacha –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: I really did not mention it as a family matter but since you have –(Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I wish to recommend to the Minister of Information that he meets the mass media and makes this point. For those who are here I hope you have grasped this.  This is extremely important because it is a very serious matter. If you distort what is going on, you may in fact injure what is happening. The Third Deputy Premier will handle this matter. I thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2006

3.08
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2006” be read a first time. I also beg to lay on table in accordance with Section 10 of the Budget Act the financial implications thereto.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has satisfied section 10 of the Budget Act. The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2006 is hereby committed to the Committee on Budget for earliest perusal and return to this House.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I wish to lay on Table a document entitled, “Nation Peace Recovery and Development Plan for Northern Uganda, 2006-2009.” I have given the Clerk to Parliament 370 copies for all Members of Parliament and they are requested to read this document, internalise it and send comments to hon. Wakikona, the Minister of State for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation, within two weeks from today. We shall incorporate your views in a paper, which will go to cabinet for consideration. 

In the past there has been criticism that sometimes we make proposals without interfacing with you. I wish to take this opportunity to point out that we have interfaced with NGOs, Members of Parliament and civil organisations. I call upon you to internalise the document and send us comments within two weeks because time is of essence. I thank you, Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for presenting a very important document. However is this the way to deal with such an important national plan? You have tabled the paper yet I should imagine that there is a more organised way of getting feedback and handling it. I thought there must be a better way because – please, demand two week’s opinion if you do not get anything, what does that matter?

In my view now we have a National Planning Authority and I think in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the Committee on Economy or Finance should look at this report, study it and make a report to Parliament so that it can be adopted by Parliament. Unless the Rt hon. Prime Minister is saying it will come back to Parliament for discussion after the Cabinet, I do not know which is the best procedure to really handle this document. But I must thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister. As a member of the Northern region I have been consulted, we have been involved in the formulation of this document but I want us, I want Parliament to own it. I want it be a national consensus on the development of the North. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, this document has been laid on the Table for the attention of the entire House. We have a Committee on Presidential Affairs who should scrutinize it on our behalf, but I think the Prime Minister wanted to have bigger input from the honourable members of the House. So, much as our committee will handle it and report back here, it is not a bar to individuals also making their proposals or even attending the Presidential Affairs Committee meetings so that they can also improve it. Certainly, it has to come back to the House for debate.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
I)	THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005/2006
II)	THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2006/2007

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 001 – Office of the President

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honorable members, Vote 001, Office of the President, I propose the question that the total sum of 25,480,999,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just want to be guided: before we reach this stage do we not need the Appropriations Bill because actually we do not have the figures?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you passed them when you were doing the policy statements, this is where they came from. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Chairperson, during the report there were some figures, which needed to be harmonised so now if we just go ahead, unless we have a copy we actually cannot follow.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you have them in mind those you wanted to harmonise, do you not have them? But hon. Nsubuga William, you are the chairman of that committee.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Chairperson, I just wanted guidance: is it the procedure, do you always have the Appropriations Bill before we go to the Committee of Supply or it can come thereafter? I just wanted guidance from the Chair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nsubuga William, the Appropriations Bill is coming. It will come with these same figures for final handling by the Parliament, but we also need to do this first.  

MRS KASULE: More guidance, Madam Chairperson. When we handle this and we pass them and when it comes to the Appropriations Bill, can we stay certain Votes until the Executive has fulfilled some of its promises, which are outstanding?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honorable members, before the Appropriations Bill is finally printed during the course of this process you can raise the objections you want and they will be handled before we conclude that Bill.  

MR OKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I am of the opinion that we should receive here the Appropriations Bill –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Okecho, the Speaker has not seen that Bill.

MR OKECHO: Now what shall we approve, Madam Chairperson?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What do you want to do?

MR OKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I am proposing that we get presented here the Appropriations Bill before we commit ourselves to the Committee Stage now and we should be given the opportunity as the Budget Committee to look through that Bill so that we can come back with our report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Okecho, when the Appropriations Bill comes and it is read here for the first time it will come to your committee. I have just given you the supplementary one.  

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the problem that we are facing now is that while we vote on these figures, we do not know the purpose for which we are voting because procedurally do we appropriate through the Bill or when we are voting now we are appropriating? If we can, let us clarify the matter so that the people know what is happening clearly and maybe you may have to appreciate the fact that very many Members are actually new in the House and it is important for them to participate. I am saying it in good faith. They need – ours will be a reminder but for them it will be bringing them on board. If you may, please bring them on board and you remind the old ones, then we will all be together.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Chairperson, it is very surprising to see that the Minister of State for Finance took the trouble to get the Appropriations Bill for himself, the chairman of the Budget, and printed three or four copies. I do not know the rationale behind it because we made a number of comments during the debate, passing a number of votes and said - actually the Speaker was reminding chairpersons to mention the figures that would come at another stage. Hence, this is the stage whereby all of us should look at figure by figure, so that at the end of the day we are not taken for a ride. 

Madam Chairperson, you have been with us and you have been our supporter. The Minister of Finance is very – I can not discuss it, I cannot talk about it – so slippery that they will say this today and tomorrow they say something else. I also want to remind you that while you were in the Chair you said that this gentleman is going to bring a figure for the Chamber of this Parliament, it is not anywhere but we want to pass this figure. Kindly save us the embarrassment. Let us go back and have the Bill, we go figure by figure and we approve; we have no objection.

HON. MEMBERS: Seconded.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, last week you concluded on the policy statements and there are figures, which you passed. All we are doing is to confirm from you people; what is it that you agreed on recurrent? What did we agree on development? Later we shall have the Appropriations Bill; this is not the appropriation.

MR BYANYIMA: What we want is a summary of those figures we approved such that at the end of the day – remember we cannot access the Appropriations Bill after we have approved this! We want to go step by step because that is what we have been doing and I am sure the Minister of Finance knows it. That is why you do not see Dr Suruma here; he is just under cover! Let him be here and we tell him what we want, Madam Chairperson.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Chair and the Members of Parliament. The Ministry of Finance did submit to Parliament corrigenda, and this corrigenda was passed to the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and to all the chairpersons of various sessional committees for them to include on what they presented here, and it was debated and approved by this House. This is what is now being read by you, Madam, for the House to appropriate.  

The Ministry of Finance would in no way like to do anything, which is contrary to the status of this House and to the status of the Ministry of Finance. What we have given here was given to Parliament, the chairpersons of the various committees and thereafter, the Appropriations Bill, which is being printed and should be coming out by around 5.00 O’clock today, will be appropriated. It will be laid on the Table here and will be committed to the Committee of Budget. I thank you, Madam Chair.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the problem at hand is historical because at the time I used to sit in that corner with my other colleagues, we raised the same problem. Take an example of the Finance Bill; that should come first. Because we are talking about the Appropriations Bill, you are forgetting that even the Finance Bill is not yet passed, and by the way the Finance Bill is the basis of our Budget. 

In other words, the issue we raised, which is historical, is that we may have to review our budgetary, legislative process, but to do it spontaneously or to do it in an ad hoc way, beginning with the Appropriations Bill, it will not make sense. The best would be to go with the method we have been following, it is like during the debate and you would see that leaders of the Opposition in their respective capacities would come here also with their statements and the Speaker said, “Okay, we are learning”. 

In future we may have to subject these reports first to go to the appropriate committees and then they come back here maybe with one position in one way or the other. So I urge Members to carry on with the method we have been using and then we go back and review our budgetary, legislative process.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Well, the Attorney-General has come up with a view that we should continue making mistakes we have been making. I am so surprised to begin with, that we have the supplementary Appropriations Bill, when we do not have the real (initial) Appropriations Bill.  

Number two; if the Attorney-General also comes and says, “Why should we not start with the Finance Bill?” there is always a question, when they bring supplementaries here, do they also bring a supplementary Finance Bill? If that is not being done, I would plead with you that what you are talking about now to be passed is just a blanket passing. We need to look at exactly what we are passing, the exact figures through appropriation. Well, we could have done those things under the Movement System, but now we are in multi-party. We must know what we are telling our people what we are dealing with. 

So I plead with you that for now we wait for the Appropriations Bill, and we look at the figures the corrigenda, which the Minister is talking about. I have never seen a copy, maybe he gave it to my Chairman of the Finance Committee, but I never saw it and we have never discussed it at the committee so this makes everything haphazard. Madam, I plead.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am of the view that some Members have some objections to certain parts of these Votes. I propose that we go through all the votes, where you have objections you raise them and we would fight until we get the Appropriations Bill, but we deal with the others.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. It is now very clear that the figures we adopted when we debated the reports were different from what actually the ministry intended us to adopt, because there was a copy of corrigenda, which was open-handedly given to the chairpersons without going through the right procedure of it coming to the House first, and it was never discussed and included by those respective committees.  

Now, as for these figures that we were going to express ourselves on, are they part of the figures in the corrigenda? Are they part of the report? If not, Madam Chairperson, would it not be prudent for purposes of harmony for the House to resume and we do reconsider this thing properly in the Business Committee on how best we can proceed so that we can agree as a House without any undue embarrassment to one another. I am just seeking clarification if that would be a better way to proceed.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You want us to adjourn so that the Business Committee can be convened?  

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, if I understood him, he was saying that it looks as if the Minister of Finance handled the corrigenda in a manner, which leaves a lot of us with lack of knowledge. 

My understanding of how to handle these papers is that, the papers are laid on Table and they are for every Member of Parliament, not only for chairpersons because he made a commitment last week that he was going to bring to Parliament this corrigenda. As far as I am concerned, I have not seen any.  Hon. Dombo is suggesting that the House resumes, we discuss this matter generally and then we decide on the way forward, because the way we are proceeding now, seems that we are going round and round in a circle.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you tell me how you handled the corrigenda?

MR FRED OMACH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is the practice of this Parliament that when we agree on a position - for instance, we agreed that we would provide Shs 5.0 billion towards the expansion of this Chambers. This comes to the Clerk of Parliament, saying that in this corrigendum we are moving Shs 5.0 billion from one Vote to another, and that becomes a corrigenda. 

You cannot print the Appropriations Bill before the corrigenda have been brought into Parliament and that is why we delayed to have the Appropriations Bill printed. It has nothing to do with hiding of any figures or what have you. 

So, this was submitted to the Clerk to Parliament and given copies to all the chairpersons of parliamentary sessional committees and the Committee on the Budget did come down to include this at the various Votes as was given here and approved by Members of Parliament. So, this has been the practice and this is what we have done.

Unfortunately, the government printers broke down this morning and they were just repaired. So, we expect these Bills to be ready at about 5 O’clock today and will be given to all Members just like we have given the copies of the Supplementary Appropriations Bill, which did not have any pressure from us to wait. That is why it was printed a little earlier than the Appropriations Bill. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable minister, are you saying that the Budget Committee has had the opportunity to look at the corrigenda?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

MR OKECHO: Madam Chairperson, I received a copy of the corrigenda, sometime ago. We were all waiting to look at this corrigendum together with the Appropriations Bill to see whether there are any revelations we have to make, together with the reports of the various sessional committees in the meeting of the Budget Committee, which include all the chairpersons of the sessional committees.  

We thought that when the Appropriations Bill is presented, it would be committed to our committee and then we would use this documents to examine the Bill together with all the reports of the sessional committee chairpersons and then we would come out with a report as I had said earlier. That is what we are waiting for.  

It is unfortunate that the Bill has not been printed and it looks like we are skipping the point. I would suggest that we suspend this whole operation now and wait for the Bill to be presented. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Budget Committee Chairperson is proposing that everything be halted until the Appropriations Bill comes. But the Committee of Supply is different from the Appropriations Bill; all these stages are part of the process. So, I do not know how we can jump the Committee of Supply and proceed straight to the Appropriations Bill.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Committee of Supply is going to do appropriation but what are you going to appropriate? You must appropriate using the Appropriations Bill, so that you can compare figures.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that will be the final part, but we have to handle these figures first before we go to the final Bill. That Bill is the last Act in the budget process.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, are you saying that what we are going to do is far different from the Appropriations Bill?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is a process with it.

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Chairperson, the Chair may be right in insisting to go through this procedure like this. But it is clear to all of us that there is a small problem and that because there is a small problem, sometimes the best way to clear the problem is to let the process that is asked take root. 

All I know is that, we have given government the Vote-On-Account; all I know is that, we have completed the debate as required; and all I know is that, when the committee that deals with the Appropriations Bill receives the Bill, they will scrutinize and act on it expeditiously. 

Therefore, my personal belief, and I think it is the belief of most Members, is that there is nothing extraordinarily urgent that will not allow for suspension of this. The minister has already said that the Appropriations Bill will be available at 5 O’clock. The committee will sit tomorrow, we asked them to sit on Friday, and we can even ask them to sit on Saturday. Next week we can sit and deal with this matter rather than continuing in a manner that seems to create misunderstanding.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to that. I have said that this has been the practice, and I have said it is not intentional that we have not brought the Appropriations Bill. It is under print and it will be ready soon and tomorrow it will be tabled and the Committee responsible for Budget will look at it and compare. So, I have no problem whatsoever if it is the wish of the House that this be extended to tomorrow. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I would like to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the motion that I rose on the Floor of this House on the 15 of June 2006 on the budget for the financial year 2006/07, and has deferred it accordingly. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been assured that tomorrow we shall have power; today we are using the generator. So, I adjourn this House to 10 O’clock in the morning. I hope you will have your Bills for first reading so that we can proceed with the Private Members’ Business. House is adjourned to 10 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 3.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 September 2006 at 10.00 a.m.)

