Thursday, 8 September 2011

Parliament met at 3.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are welcome to today’s sitting, hon. Members. Some announcements before we start: in the public gallery today we have pupils and teachers of St Catherine Day and Boarding School, represented by hon. Frederick Ruhindi, Member of Parliament, Nakawa Division. They have come to observe the proceedings. (Applause)

This afternoon, we also have, in the public gallery, pupils and teachers of Ndegeya Core Primary Teachers’ College, represented by hon. Namayanja Florence, Member of Parliament for Bukoto East. They have also come to observe the proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Members, there will be a joint workshop for Members of Parliament of Uganda and the House of Commons of the United Kingdom on the topic, “Meeting the Challenge: Balancing the Roles of an MP.” This will be next week on 13th and 14th September 2011 at the Imperial Royale Hotel in Kampala. The workshop will be presided over by the Speaker of Parliament. You are all invited to attend. Please, make sure you are there to learn some more ways of dealing with business of Parliament. 

I also take this opportunity to welcome back the Budget Committee. We are all expectant of what we are going to hear from the Budget Committee. Is the chairman here? He is finalising. Okay. For now that is all from the communication from the Chair. Thank you very much. 

3.43
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I stand to raise an issue of importance to this nation. As I speak now, members of the United Nations are preparing delegations to go and attend the 66th UN General Assembly in New York. These delegations are usually led by presidents and ministers of foreign affairs and other dignitaries, including perhaps, Members of Parliament. 

Early this week, you read in the papers that some countries were proposing a visa ban on some of our people in this country. So, I stand to find out from Government if they can make a statement on that because delegations to the UN are led by the President, the foreign ministers among others, actually, the foreign minister sits next to the President. So are these Wikileaks – Wikileaks are (leaked) diplomatic messages that ambassadors and particular officers in missions send back to their countries. But this communication can be intercepted. And we read in the papers that some of this communication to their capitals was intercepted. Therefore, we were privy to that information about those particular persons these countries want to impose visa ban on. We want to hear from the Government side because as I speak now, delegations are in process. I don’t know whether in previous Parliaments, Members of Parliament were included on these delegations. I stand to be informed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you said you were rising on a matter of urgent public importance? I suppose you had sufficient information for the House about the importance of this matter; would you require information to be supplied to you before you conclude? Raise the matter substantially and close and then we open the debate.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I oblige. I am raising these issues because we want to know from Government whether it is true that there have been some people in Government who have been listed as people whose visas are going to be banned. 

3.46
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Wamanga for raising such an important issue. Indeed I also read about it and I have also been seeing some sporadic responses by those mentioned. As a matter of fact, whereas hon. Wamanga is talking of the Foreign Affairs Minister, for this time I may not dwell on that but I know for sure that even other top leaders – it is unfortunate that the Leader of Government Business has just left the House but amongst those, he too was mentioned among those targeted for a travel ban. This puts Government and the country at crossroads. If our top diplomats are being considered to be denied entry visas, are their portfolios still tenable. Can we say they are going by themselves? National interests take precedence over individual interests.

Now that they are being adversely mentioned and indeed being targeted, are we going to bury our heads in the sand? To date there hasn’t been any rebuttal, at least to put the country at ease. It may not be for your personal satisfaction but a country like Uganda of 33 million people needs to know what the status and fate of our leadership is. In the event that they are made untenable to their portfolio, can they make a public statement or by way of service to the country, step aside and then we know what is happening? 

Mr Speaker, now that this opportunity has arisen, can we substantively be informed about the fate and the status –(Interruption)

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I wonder whether it is procedurally right for this honourable House to debate matters that appear in papers, rumours and speculative information.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member who raised the matter said at this moment they are constituting delegations to go to the UN and that is a matter of fact. And he said there are issues that we need to get clarification on. That is what he raised. (Applause) If it is a matter that is going to affect the image of the country then we need clarification from the Front Bench and we move forward.

3.50
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to say that we in the Government have not got formal information about this subject. If our colleagues who are raising it have that information, let them put it on the table then we will work on it, otherwise we shall not work on rumours.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have documents to lay on the Table for this purpose? 

3.51
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I will beg for your indulgence. This is a serious Parliament performing in a serious state, during a civilised era. We have had rumours in the Ministry of Defence upon which this House has been forced to act and appropriate a budget on them. The matter that was raised by hon. Wamanga is not a rumour and any serious Government would pay serious attention. I sympathise with the Prime Minister -

MR TODWONG: Mr Speaker, whereas we come to this House to give it due diligence and whereas we thank the Opposition for raising their concerns, is it in order for the Members of the Opposition to keep insisting on a matter which the Leader of Government Business in this House has ably stated that Government has not got a communication? Is it in order for the Members of the Opposition to keep insisting on a matter where Government has responded and upon which you have already made your wise ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have guided that the matters raised by the hon. Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs are important. I have also guided that the supplementary matters raised by hon. Ssekikubo contributed to the significance of this matter. I, therefore, asked the Leader of Government Business in the House to make a response. He stated that these matters are not yet before Government and they cannot make a comment. If there is information that is available and it can lead them to act then it should be laid on the Table. 

I have said that while we wait for the substantial information about this matter to come to House, we can move on with business and deal with other matters. We are not going to go on with this matter anymore.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I am very surprised because this is an issue of national importance. It has got nothing to do with the Opposition or Government. This is Uganda and when issues come up we should look at Uganda first not the Opposition or Government side. I raised it in good faith because Government is putting up a delegation to go to New York. If some countries are thinking of issuing a visa ban to some people, we should discuss this issue openly. I am even surprised that the other side do not even read newspapers. It is in the news, internet and everywhere. I went ahead to tell this House that ambassadors and officers in missions send reports to their capitals.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, on what point did you rise again?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the newspaper that had that article. Everything is here from Wikileaks and the Daily Monitor. The Daily Monitor of Wednesday, 7th September 2011 mentions those names. 

GEN. MOSES ALI: I do not think we are going to run Government through Wikileaks. The honourable shadow minister has been an ambassador until recently when he retired. We communicate through ambassadors, Government to Government, not through Wikileaks. I was asking the former ambassador to prove here on the Floor -

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, if my memory serves me correctly, when hon. Wamai stood up, he specifically spoke from an informed point of view that around this time people all over the world are preparing themselves for representation at the UN. He specifically stated that it is a concern of the nation that when something like this happens, the country must be prepared to be fully represented. On the basis of that he raised some fears that are being expressed in newspapers and other media. He specifically stated that, wouldn’t it be right for the nation to be informed whether Government is preparing for representation at the UN? Therefore, is it in order for the Leader of Government Business to suggest that what has been said is a mere rumour?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs said that the matter is urgent because right now countries are constituting delegations. The second thing is that issues have been raised about some of the people who should be in that delegation. He is, therefore, worried - and this country should be worried about who will be in that delegation. 

I gave the opportunity to the Leader of Government Business and he said they have no formal information to that effect – or a communication directed to them that, “We have issues with so and so from your Government.” What the honourable member is referring to is a newspaper article and the Prime Minister is saying that they cannot run Government like that. That was the debate that was going on. I do not see any order violated or any rules violated; the discussions were perfectly in order and at this time, I think I should bring it to a close and we move on to other items. 

4.00
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 41 and with your leave, allow me to make a statement on a matter of national importance. 

Recently, Rwampara was hit by hailstorms and hailstones. Hailstones consist of large ice particles that have a layered structure and that are produced by intense thunderstorms that form into a very unstable air mass that is relatively cool, dry and overlying warm and humid air. Mr Speaker, allow me detail you with the situation that is in very many parts of Rwampara. This is exactly what is happening – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is not visible; just make the point. It cannot be seen. (Laughter)

MR MUJUNI: Mr Speaker, with your permission, I will lay it on the Table. The areas of Kamomo, Kitojo, Kibumba in Bugamba and Ndeija, were seriously affected and more than 1,000 families were affected. In Nyakaronko, Kyabwihure, Nyakaguruka, Kakigani, Kitungulu, more than 500 families were affected; in Kyonyo, Bushwere, Rugando, Kigaaga, Ryamiyonga and Rukalabo in Mwizi, more than 1,000 families were affected. In Nyarubungo, Kicwamba - Nyakayozo, more than 3,000 families were affected. These hailstorms have affected crops like cassava, sweet potatoes and bananas. Schools like Kitwe and Nyakabale in Rugando, Kanyanga in Mwizi, Rutooma and Kibayo in Nyakayozo were affected. Bridges in Kongoro connecting Kiremba-Kitojo were destroyed and Binyuga connecting Bunyuga to Kakongora; the road networks have been destroyed in Kitagata-Kicwamba, Rwakishakizi, Nyabikungu, Nyamukana-Kashuro and Nyamukana-Kibare and this has adversely affected food and nutrition. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I therefore, as follows: 
1.	That the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness quickly moves in to provide relief items to the affected families;
2.	That the ministry of agriculture quickly provides seeds and cassava cuttings for planting, now that it is a planting season; 
3.	That the Ministry of Works and Transport provides emergency culverts especially 1,200 millimetres diameter for washed away bridges; 
4.	That the ministry of education provides emergency funding for schools that were washed away specifically Nyakabale and Kitwe in Ruganda, Kanyaga in Mwinzi and Kibaya and Rutoma in Nyakayojo and provide alternative accommodation and shelter for our pupils especially now that it is the third term, which has turned out to be a sad term for our pupils;
5.	Finally, that the Parliament and the Government of Uganda equip the meteorological department of Uganda through acquisition of radar such that the departments can give early warning to those who may wish to hear. 

We used to hear of these hailstorms in India, China, Germany and France but it is unfortunate that it has now come to Rwampara. I rest my case. 

4.04
MRS EVERLINE TETE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the same issue. In the district that I come from, there is no road and as we talk, the heavy rains have washed away the only road, which was there. All the culverts have been washed away and people cannot move, especially the teachers. The teachers in Bukwo District cannot come to Kapchorwa to collect their little money because we don’t have a bank in Bukwo District. So, the situation is bad. My colleague has just come back from Bukwo but it took him four days to travel from Bukwo to Kampala.

I have a passport which brings me to Kampala and as I speak, my passport is full. So, for how long shall we continue processing passports to go back to our constituencies? The Minister of Works and Transport should help us to ensure we have a road in Bukwo District because they say that the road to Bukwo is economically viable. The problem is pathetic! 

4.06
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for forgiving me an opportunity to make a contribution in regard to the point of national importance regarding disasters. Quite often here, many Members, including myself, have raised an alarm on the problems they have in their constituencies. Disasters start from hurricanes, hailstorms, and the other day we had lightning. Allow me to appreciate the efforts of hon. Musa Ecweru; sometimes you see him moving to some areas. I have seen him go to Bundibugyo and he came to my constituency four years back. But the question I would like to put to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and perhaps the Leader of Government Business is: why can’t we develop a standard response strategy? If there is a hailstorm in Kamwenge, even if I don’t raise it here, what should be the first point of call? Where should the LCs of the affected village report and what should be the expected minimum intervention from Government?

The stores of hon. Musa Ecweru can’t always have posho and beans for immediate relief. You may find that the effects range from famine, destruction of schools, destruction of bridges and they cut across different sectors –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Tumwebaze for giving way. The information I want to provide is that last evening, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness announced that he has got equipment and is going to create alert centres all over the country. Thank you. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you for the information. In conclusion, my appeal and request to Government is that let there be a standard response system, just like in the Ministry of Health. If there is Ebola or a certain epidemic, a surveillance team will be there and they will assess the risk; but you may find that in one sub-county, crops and infrastructure are destroyed and if you are lucky, you may get a few bags of Posho or beans from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, which sometimes is actually also not enough. It always feeds people for one night. There are even no seeds because NAADS has not mainstreamed disasters into the design of their programme. So, my appeal to Government is that let them mainstream disasters into the entire planning and at the same time have a standard response strategy to reach every part of Uganda; whether a Member has raised it on the Floor or not. Thank you. 

4.09
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and Members. Disasters are not new to us but the problem is that much as Members come here and raise matters of national importance related to disasters, the response of Government is always as if this is the first time Government is coming in touch with something called disaster.

Disasters cannot be left to be solely handled by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness in terms of providing food and food relief only. Arms of the state, for example the Army and the Ministry of Works, particularly Uganda National Roads Authority and the Department of Works in every district, should be 101 percent disaster prepared. But I was shocked yesterday - although I did not carry it here, I believe everyone of you read the papers of yesterday and the other day where on the Daily Monitor front page a soldier was being carried -(Laughter)- by somebody in a disaster situation. Instead of the Army assisting people in disaster situations, it is the people who are affected by disaster who are assisting the Army. What are you doing hon. Minister of Defence?

Secondly, the issue of Bukwo is very simple to Uganda. How does a Member of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and particularly of this Parliament need to use a passport to get to his constituency? How? You have to go to another country when you are leaving from here and cross from Uganda to Kenya then from Kenya to Bukwo and then back from Bukwo to Kenya through Kitale and then here. Are you not ashamed of this? We should never allow Uganda to bend that low. We need to construct roads from this Parliament to every constituency so that you leave here with the Speaker or with me or with any colleague to go to your constituency without using a passport. Do you mean to say that you are going to shame the Speaker when he goes from here to visit Bukwo and you want him to use a passport as if he is going to another country when he is visiting his own constituency? Mr Speaker, is that not very shameful? (Laughter)

I beg –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I thank you, hon. Fungaroo. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance: hon. Tete has raised a matter of her constituency several times on this Floor, even before disaster started and I expected the Leader of Government Business to tell us a way forward. Maybe some people do not know but half of the wheat that we consume in this country is grown in her constituency but that wheat is sold to Kenya as raw material, processed in the factories in Kenya and sold to us at 100 percent the cost. So, it is a very serious matter that it is not only about hon. Tete but this country is losing substantial amounts of money.

The Government is also aware that under East African Community - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you rose on a point of guidance – 

MR EKANYA: So, I am seeking your guidance. This matter came before the issue of disaster and I expected Government to tell us that generally they are going to solve this problem. Isn’t it proper that the Leader of Government Business gives us direction on the question of Bukwo? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will come to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Let me first finish - when I come to him he will be closing the debate. Hon. Kikulukunyu. (Hon. Fungaroo rose_) you had not finished? Oh, sorry let him finish.

MR FUNGAROO: I would like to summarise by saying that let us protect the image of Uganda. We should not shame Ugandans by making them travel using passports through other countries when they are going to their constituencies. And the Uganda National Roads Authority and the Department of Works in every district should be disaster prepared. Culverts and other basic equipment of works should be there to rescue people in case disasters of this kind break out. I thank you very much.

4.14
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The entire country is actually cut off. It is not only Bukwo. You go to Kitgum it is the same story; bridges are broken. In Terego County, culverts were washed away! When you put that aside, look at the expectant mothers who need to access medical care; how do they get it? That means many mothers are dying on the way to hospitals that are either washed away or some are even drowning with their babies in these waters. So what does this spell to this Government?

Every year that I have been in this Parliament, when we talk about disaster there is a blind eye from Government. But when elections come there is money for everything purchasable. Now we are asking Government, are you flying the mothers of Bukwo to the health centres to deliver? Are you flying the school children to the various schools? Are you flying the teachers with no pay on those roll calls? What is this country up to? What is Government up to? Because it is one thing for us to stand here but when it is election time the women are at the front line and they put on the yellow T-shirts. It is high time now that the yellow T-shirts are converted into good roads for them to access maternal health. (Applause) It is very unfortunate that we sit here and sooner or later the Prime Minister will come and say, “We as Government are about to do something,” when they are doing absolutely nothing.

So, I would request that we get serious on this matter. A disaster is disaster. It is very unfortunate that in this 21 Century we are talking about non availability of a road. The road to West Nile was done after very serious political pressure because we were told that that road was not economically viable yet we produce the tobacco that fed this country every year with about Shs 40 billion as revenue. So, it is important that we look at humanity first before we even begin appropriating economic viability of investments such as roads. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.17
MR FAISAL KIKULUNYU (NRM, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you Mr Speaker. I am also rising on the issue of disasters. I come from Butambala County in Butambala District. My people were equally hit by hailstones, specifically in the sub-county of Bulo and Ngando. Crops were destroyed, animals were killed and roofs went off houses. As we talk our people have a very serious problem with what to eat. 

Whereas it is good for the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to give our people bags of maize and beans, I would suggest this time round that we come up with an arrangement of giving our people seeds because we should go by the Chinese saying that, “Teach me how to fish but do not give me a fish”. When you say you are giving somebody a bag of maize, what about tomorrow? And the beans! I wrote to the ministry over the same matter that we need some immediate relief but we further request that they should come up with a better programme of providing our people with seeds to prepare for tomorrow’s eventualities. 

I further propose that in the budgetary process at local government levels, the issue of disasters should be one of the issues to be considered. Why should we budget for disaster only at national level? I think even at local government level an item should be there to cater for disasters at those levels. I beg to be informed if it is in any way –(Interjection)- I will take your information. 

MR ACHILE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way. In fact as we talk about this question of disaster, the whole country is in a disaster situation. In Yumbe, it is raining 24 hours. The cassava is rotten, the beans are finished and people are starving. We do not know what to do. This question of disaster preparedness should be taken very seriously. 

MR KIKULUKUNYU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Finally, I want to go by what hon. Tumwebaze said. Our voters in the villages think an MP is the solution to every problem. We need to have points where the local leaders report such matters as they appear. A Member of Parliament is really burdened - it is not a burden as such, but he is overloaded with requests for emergency relief. I rest my case.

4.21
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We formed the Parliamentary Forum on Disaster Preparedness and the main concern was that we should change the way the ministry is being perceived by Government. During a meeting, we urged that it should be a ministry of prevention such that we begin planning properly for these disasters, ahead of time.

The disasters, as you have noted, are going to be much more pronounced in the coming years because we have tampered so much with the environment and cut down trees. If we do not take rapid response by restoring the environment and planting more trees, these disasters will stay. (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that as if that were not enough, under Agenda 21, much as Uganda has already ratified the contents of Resolution No. 40, which obliges every member country of the UN to protect every existing forest cover, the Government of Uganda, under the President of Uganda, is suggesting that Mabira be leased away to Mehta. What a shame!

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, we would like Government to do a thorough feasibility study about the effects of these disasters on the economy because interruptions by these disasters, to the economic activities of our people, are quite real. The moment we do not link the effects of the disasters with the economic activities, we will continue experiencing a decline in our economic growth. Therefore, this matter of disaster preparedness should be at the centre stage of Government planning even as we review the budget. Thank you very much.

4.24
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you note from the submissions, most of the Members are quiet not because these disasters have not affected their communities but because what is being described by the Members of Parliament for Rwampara and Bukwo is actually what is prevailing in most of our communities. I am sure Members know that we get this information through newspapers. Therefore, the Government should stop saying that what we read in the papers are mere rumours because through the media, we are able to get to know what is happening all over the country.

Just the other day, hon. Ecweru assured us that his ministry had put in place disaster management committees in all districts and that the ministry had instructed the district police commanders to report any disasters. True, there has been a bit of destruction in most of our districts. I suppose that at this point, the Government has information from almost all the districts.

May I request that this Parliament asks Government to bring a status report on the kind of destruction that has taken place in the different communities and also tell us what measures it is putting in place to address those challenges? Otherwise, all of us could rise. I stay in Kinkiizi East and all these destructions have occurred in all our communities. I thank you very much.

MRS EGUNYU: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Rule 41(2) reads: “Any statement by a Member shall be prepared on Thursday and may be commented upon by other Members for a limited duration of time, not exceeding 15 minutes and shall be submitted to the Speaker in writing before 11.00 a.m. on the day on which it is to be made”.

Maybe it was submitted as this is Thursday but still, the time we have taken discussing this issue – time is very expensive and we should go to something else.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the rule you are quoting relates to statements of personal explanation. These are not statements of personal explanation. These are matters of urgent public importance and there is a big difference between the two. 

4.27
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): It is true that across the country, we have disasters. I came from my constituency this morning after spending four days on the road that is being talked about. The impact of the absence of this road is not as small as we see it. We are not able to move a distance of 77 kilometres in one day, a distance that would take one hour takes us two or three days and sometimes you never reach Kapchorwa.

To make matters worse, there is a bridge that is on the verge of collapsing and it is the only bridge. Remember the road from Bukwo to Kapchorwa is one way. There is no alternative road and the moment this bridge breaks, we shall not move -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, hon. Sabila, for giving way. In 1981 when I was appointed an officer in charge of Mbale and Kapchorwa districts, at that time it was difficult to move from Kapchorwa to Bukwo via Suam. Many times I used to pass via Malaba through Kenya up to Kitale. The information I am giving you, my brother, is that these are problems, which have been around for the last 30 years and in all this time, there has been a government. There is no time Uganda has had no government. Therefore, the commitment from these successive governments, including the longest, which has been around for the last 25 years, is lacking. 

MR SABILA: Thank you for your contribution. Mr Speaker, when I was in my constituency, my people asked which route I would use to come back to Kampala. They cautioned me against using the one that goes through Kenya because none of them was able to go through Kenya. They told me that whether I would reach Kampala or not, I had to use the Suam-Kampala road; I had to suffer along that road with a patient who was supposed to have come to Mulago a month ago. Due to lack of transport, I had to carry that patient in my car. We both slept in the car and it was not until this morning that I dropped him off at the hospital. 

At Bukwo Hospital, there is no ambulance. The only one there is an old one, which is now grounded. People cannot move and two of them recently died because they could not access the referral hospital in Mbale and neither could they go to Kitale. How are we going to serve these people? We are talking today but in the near future we are likely to have more problems. The civil servants in Bukwo, like my colleague said, get their salary from Kapchorwa, 77 kilometres away. You can imagine travelling for one week to get Shs 200,000; is that cost effective? 

During the food crisis that we had just last month, people were buying a kilogramme of posho at Shs 2,000. Right now, because of the bad road, middlemen are using this opportunity and getting maize from farmers at prices as low as Shs 700 per kilogramme. They then stock it until the road gets better because they have the financial capacity. If you look at that trade, it is impacting negatively on the people. 

I believe this is the time we got a solution to that problem. If it is not given, some of us will either fail to reach the constituency or return to Kampala, meaning that we shall be cut off. I do not know of any other area where people go through another country to reach their homes. I beg to get an answer to that issue. Thank you.

4.32
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have heard a lot of lamentations on the issue of disaster. We have reported the Bukwo road and the roads in Mbale and they have appeared in the budget for five years and suddenly, they are now out. What we are very good at is sending posho and beans and sometimes it even does not come. 

The information I wish to bring to this House is; when we had landslides in Bulambuli, by yesterday, the food that Government sent had not reached the beneficiaries because the road is cut off. If we continue like this, when will it end? My humble appeal goes to my Government; please come to our rescue. Work on these roads that have been identified. There is no way you can access the suffering people if you do not work on these roads. Please, act now! Thank you.

4.34
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been following submissions by colleagues and I am grappling with one issue in my mind. What is the problem? It is poverty, nothing else; the poverty of this country and mismanagement of this country by the present managers, among others. We are talking about an issue of roads. Every financial year we talk about roads. I have sat in this House since 2001 and since then, Members from that sub-region have been raising that problem. What response have we been getting from the managers of this country? “We are going to work on it.” And as sure as day follows night, you will hear the same answer this afternoon. (Laughter)

There is something very unserious going on with this Government. Even as we talk about disaster right now, where are the ministers responsible? [HON. MEMBER: “In the field.”] If one was supposed to be in the field, another would be here, either pleading for resources or explaining to Members of Parliament. And you see, as we are talking about roads being impassable, my colleagues from Ankole are talking about hailstones. For how long are we going to continue like this?

MR TODWONG: Mr Speaker, disaster is not Government-made and neither is it Parliament-made. Disaster is natural and Government is not a switchboard, neither is it an automatic machine. The Government is tailored to work according to the procedures of the national structure that we pass in Parliament and Government is manned by human beings like you and I –(Interruption)

MRS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Member rose on a point of information and the information he is putting across is actually not information. It is misinformation. If it were information, the Member would have looked back and known that Government is always prepared for disasters and that is why we have a Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness. Is it, therefore, in order for the Member to say that Government is not always prepared for disasters when we have a ministry with a budget to fight disasters? Moreover, there is a constitutional provision that provides for the formation of a commission to handle disasters. Is hon. Todwong in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member holding the Floor on a point of information, you have been accordingly informed. (Laughter)

MR TODWONG: Well, I am still on the Floor. (Laughter) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Listening to my colleague, hon. Todwong, I was reminded that before he joined this House, he was a presidential advisor. (Laughter) No wonder; if those are the ideas of presidential advisors -(Laughter)- this country is in trouble! If that is the quality of presidential advisors –(Interruption)

MR TODWONG: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I could have been fortunate enough to stop at that capacity and whereas my people trusted me to come and represent them in this House competently, is it in order for a Member of Parliament who has spent more than a decade in this House to stand on his feet and say that I am a presidential “mis-advisor”, to say the least? That language is totally non-parliamentary. Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, please wind up. 

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much. As I conclude, the point we are making is that our people are facing difficulty and we need to put our heads together as Government to get out of this scenario. The full responsibility rests with Government. It is of no use for us to lament year after year and we do not have any solution. 

In fact, I pity my colleagues who represent those constituencies and maybe that is why there is a high turnover from that region because every other term, they say, “You have not worked on this problem”. The next term you do not work on the problem, they bring another group of MPs. This thing is even affecting the performance of this House. So, we really implore Government –(Interjections)- of course, you may have a problem of quality advisors but when you come to this House, please listen. I thank you.

4.43
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you. Listening to my colleagues in the House, I get the impression that there is a serious problem all over the country and it is with that kind of impression that I would like to move, under rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure, on motions without notice, the following motion:

I beg to move a motion that the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness presents to Parliament, within two weeks, a status report on the level of preparedness and intervention on disasters currently affecting various parts of the country. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, before I ask for secondment and before we formally put the motion to debate, can I ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to make a short statement?

4.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, on behalf of Government, let me reiterate Government’s sympathy with the people that have suffered the various problems that we have faced; natural disasters. A disaster is a sudden calamitous event, bringing great damage. By its nature, it is something that you may not prevent and that is why we have typhoons. We had the natural disaster that we witnessed the other day in Japan that caused much damage. That is why we have had hurricanes in America that caused so much damage. These are natural, sudden things that even when they are anticipated and all preparations have been made, like it happened in the case of the hurricane that destroyed parts of New York recently, they are still disastrous. Therefore, on behalf of Government, I would like to express our sympathy with those that have suffered.

Secondly, I would like to state that the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness will present to this House a full statement talking about the problems we face and the level of preparations we have in place to address the suffering of our people who become victims of these disasters.

Thirdly, I would like to say that indeed, this Government from the time we had an earthquake in Kabarole District some time ago and we held a special Cabinet meeting in Fort Portal, I think in 1989 – I am not sure about the year –(Interjections)- the knowledge is on this side. I was looking behind because that is where knowledge is –(Laughter)- from that time, when we held a special Cabinet meeting to talk about disaster preparedness, this Government has put measures in place, including the creation of the ministry that has been giving –(Interjections)- not enough obviously mainly because of the constraints we face as a country but all that we can put at their disposal to respond to disaster situations. 

I am happy to inform this House that the ministry, under the Prime Minister’s Office, has links with Government departments like, Maj. Gen. Oketta, who is a member of this august House and a coordinator for Response Preparedness to Disaster in that ministry. Many interventions, you will agree, have been carried out sometimes with a lot difficulty but there has been an effort. I hope all of you know that. We have used the military and all means available at the disposal of Government to try and respond to these disaster situations.

I want to assure the country that we will continue to build capacity of course, to the extent that we are able to do - I know with the support of this Parliament - for this country and this Government to respond to these situations. 

The problems that compound disaster situations like the state of the roads to Bukwo are problems that Government is fully aware of. That is why this Government has tarmacked the road from Mbale to Kapchorwa already. That is already tarmacked. Bukwo to Suam, 77 kilometres is under programme to be tarmacked. (Applause) Just to give an example. Therefore, this government is very conscious - as you know, this is a peoples’ Government. It is the NRM that has the greatest feel -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the Rt Hon Prime Minister who also happens to be my namesake for giving me this chance. You have talked about the tarmacking of the road between Kapchorwa and Suam. I am old enough in this Parliament and I have consistently sat on the committee that oversees the work of the road and transport sector in this country. In fact, I am almost a permanent member of that committee. I have been there since 2001 and I have 11 ministerial policy statements. In each of those statements, that road is mentioned. Even in the current ministerial statement, the road between Kapchorwa and Suam is included. I would like the Rt Hon Prime Minister to be honest to this House and give us a time table. When are the people of Bukwo going to stop suffering? What the MPs describe is real. I have been through that road. Would the Government like to tell us when this matter will be put to rest eventually? I hate to believe that in the next five ministerial policy statements to come, the same road will be mentioned and the people of Bukwo will continue to suffer.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Mr Speaker, thank you. It is a good idea to talk about the long term development problems, the road construction for example. For this particular case, where it takes four days to access Bukwo from Kampala and no ambulance for the hospital, the honourable members have said it, can we, on an emergency basis, deploy the Presidential chopper? (Laughter) If there is nothing else left but at least I know his Excellency the President has a chopper and a presidential plane; the presidential jet can fly from there to Entebbe to help in this emergency situation. Can we do something urgently today? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You know we act in an organised way according to plans and according to the means at our disposal at any given moment. He has been in Parliament for ten years and I have been here of course during those ten years all the time. As you know, I was here long before he came. That road was there all that time and I have visited Bukwo; I have been to Suam myself from 1986 when I visited it for the first time. So, all this time, this Government has been planning -(Laughter)- out of those plans, it has been producing programmes and we -(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)- just a second, my brother. I will give way, do not worry.

We draw programmes out of those plans and we come to this Parliament to seek resources to implement those programmes and that is what we have been doing in the case of Bukwo. As I said, we have been here many times. In the manifesto of the NRM, I know you may not know it, it is a priority road. Kapchorwa to Suam is a priority road and it is among the programmes we have for tarmacking. Now this cannot happen all of a sudden. We must come here to you - the other day I heard him talk. I want him to come and say, “Okay, let us cut here and do this instead”. I would like to hear him say that -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Prime Minister for giving way. At least for me, I am not going to talk about how long I have been here but I have also been here for many years. You remember the money, which did Kapchorwa road was the same money, which was supposed to do Bukwo road. This was the money from the East African Community Compensation Fund which was supposed to do the road from Sironko up to Bukwo -(Interjections)- Yes! I am telling you because I have -hon. Peter Nyombi, you relax, you are just a new Attorney-General, you do not know anything! That money, instead of going to do the road up to Bukwo, it did partly up to Kapchorwa and part of the money was diverted. That is the reason we have a problem of the Bukwo road. 

I was in the Ministry of Finance and I know this. [MS KABAKUMBA: “So, you diverted it”] You are the ones who diverted it. (Laughter) For you to say that you have been planning - Mr Prime Minister, I wish you could listen! You have not been planning for the people of Bukwo. You like the people of Bukwo only during elections but during the time when they need you, you do not do it. Bukwo has suffered since time immemorial and we want to know where you took their money from the East African Community Compensation Fund and that one applies to other roads like Lwakhakha, Budadiri and Sironko. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I thank the Leader of the Opposition, my honourable colleague and brother and I would like to confirm what he said that the NRM likes the people of Kapchorwa; there is no doubt about that –(Laughter)– that is absolutely correct. We like them during elections and after elections. 

Again, I will ask the minister responsible to come to this House as soon as possible and make a statement about the plans and programmes in place for Kapchorwa. I was being shown the Uganda Road Fund financing for road maintenance that this is the plan for 2011/12. I can see –(Interjections)– can I finish? I relate to disciplined behaviour – I was looking here and not that side when I said, “Knowledge is only this side and not there”. I meant from there to this way, not the other side –(Interjections)– Fungaroo, come this way. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened to the Prime Minister of this country make a statement. The first time he said knowledge was only behind him and not in front of him. I assumed it was a mistake; a slip of the tongue, because that is not the kind of a statement I would personally expect from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, whom I respect so much and he is also the Secretary-General of the ruling party. But he has deliberately repeated the same statement –(Interjections)– Members, I am not joking; I really mean this!

For the second time the Prime Minister stood up and looked at us and said to this House that on our part of the House, where the Opposition sits, there is no knowledge. What proof does he have to continue insinuating that the Opposition is not knowledgeable? Is he in order to insist – he said it the first time, he said it the second time and he is almost saying it the third time. Is he in order to insist that we in the Opposition have no brains? Mr Speaker, when you look at me, don’t I have a brain? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the statements made by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to the extent that it imputes lack of knowledge on the other side of the House is improper. But to the extent that he talks about reliability of information, which he wants to pick, it would be proper. However, in this particular instance, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is not in order and I ask him to withdraw those particular statements.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I was talking about knowledge of Government matters and this is the Government side. I do not expect the Opposition to have knowledge about Government because they are in the Opposition. But if I did not make it that clear and it appeared that I was saying they have absolutely no knowledge, I did not intend that and I am sorry, I withdraw it. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am lucky that I went to the Law School of Makerere University during the NRM regime. And I am the lawyer that I am because of the NRM regime and I will always be grateful. Of course I know hon. Amama Mbabazi went to the same law school during the regime of Idi Amini and maybe he is the lawyer he is because of the Idi Amini regime –(Laughter)– but at the end of the day, we are all lawyers and we need to respect each other.

On what he says that it is knowledge about Government and that the other side knows more –(Interjections)– I am sure even hon. Amama Mbabazi agrees with me that at that place where we go to work, one person speaks at a time; and we listen to each other. Obviously that is the difference between me and hon. Kabakumba Masiko. (Laughter) However, the procedural point I am trying to raise is that even on matters of the Government, we have knowledge because they are all here. Unless hon. Amama Mbabazi is saying that there are some matters of Government, which they keep to themselves and do not bring them here in Parliament? Therefore, is it procedurally correct to sit in this House thinking we are on the same wavelength when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is keeping some knowledge from us and giving it only to the other side of the House; because even in his apology, that was the ground of his assertion? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I ruled the Rt Hon. Prime Minister out of order and asked him to withdraw. He has withdrawn the offensive remarks and apologised – that is the implication of what he has done. He said that if it had offended the other side of the House, which indeed it did offend, to which you respond by a point of order - he said that to that extent, he withdraws and apologises. The statement has been withdrawn and an apology has been made to this Parliament. Hon. Members that is how it should be. When matters get tense, and order is made – a ruling is made directing the concerned Member to withdraw the offensive remarks. He has withdrawn them and apologised to the House. In the spirit of the House that matter stands resolved; we should move on with business. (Applause)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I heard the contents of the motion that hon. Alice Alaso had started making before you advised the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to first react to the issues that Members had generally debated. I notice that his reactions had similar views with what is contained in hon. Alaso’s motion; that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should come up with a comprehensive statement on the issues of disaster in the country. He only fell short of giving us a time frame. The motion had talked of two weeks, if I heard hon. Alice Alaso properly. Can we now hear from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister about the time frame within which the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness will appraise Members on the way forward?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yes there was a motion moved by the hon. Alice Alaso. It is also true that I sought her indulgence to allow the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to make a response before we put that motion to debate. That is where we were before we got into this situation of point of order, which pushed us into making that ruling. The situation, therefore, still is that there is a motion that has been proposed, though not yet seconded, by the hon. Alice Alaso. Even though that motion has not yet been debated, I think that the statement from the Prime Minster would guide us on the way it can be structured, if it is to be continued with. That is why I asked the Prime Minister to make that response before I get back to it.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: My apologies once again. As I was saying, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness will present a comprehensive statement to Parliament about the state of preparedness the country has against possible disasters, or those that have occurred. I would like to propose two weeks; that is reasonable time.

On Bukwo and the road from Kapchorwa to Suam, as I was saying, I know for sure that we have a programme for that road. However, I will also ask the sector minister to come and make a clear statement about the preparations that we have in place for working on those roads. It is true that we have heard about this road many times –(Interjections)– from this side. (Laughter) So, I will ask the minister –(Interjections)– I will not say that anyone has more information than another, so it will be from this side - to give us a programme for that. And because I was talking about the main programme of tarmacking the road, I will also ask him to give us the comprehensive programme for the maintenance of roads even before the tarmac comes.

But generally, I would say that the problems – I think the world has been changing as we have seen. What hit New York and the countries in the northern part of the United States of America were called tropical hailstorms or the hurricanes that turned into tropical hailstorms, yet these were not in the tropics. So, there is change of weather with the pattern of things happening in the world also changing. In that regard, I would like to ask my colleagues and our people in the country that yes, we can prepare ourselves, but the best thing we can do is to make sure we are prepared at individual level so that when disaster hits, it finds us prepared. 

This is because, as I said earlier on, it is very difficult to have preventive measures that will stop the kind of disasters we have been having. At an individual or survival level, it is very important that our people learn what dangers they face and prepare enough for them. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon is a group of women from Busoga, led by Mrs Florence Kyomya, the wife to the Bishop of Busoga Diocese. They made a courtesy call to the Speaker and are now here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. You are welcome! (Applause)

Yes, can we hear from hon. Alice Alaso?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have no idea what happened to my motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that is exactly what I asked. I called upon you to take over the Floor; you said that the matter had been answered and that it was okay. That is how I called the next item on the Order Paper.

MS ALASO: But, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alice Alaso, I called upon you; I did so after the Prime Minister had sat down. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I have a little problem with my ears and that is how I missed that bit. Anyway, thank you for the opportunity. As you noticed, I had moved a motion. In the circumstances, I still think that my motion is valid for the reason that I would like the House to be the institution to make this demand from the Government of Uganda. I do not want it to be left to Government for it to come back here and choose as and when they think they should bring in this statement. Otherwise, I do appreciate the commitment by the Prime Minister. And since the Prime Minister of the Government of Uganda is very agreeable, Mr Speaker, it seems he is seconding my motion. And since he is doing that, I pray that you put the question to my motion.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, since hon. Alice Alaso, the Secretary-General of the FDC Party, who more importantly is my friend –(Laughter)– is asking me to second her motion so that it strengthens my position, I second it. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that a report be brought to this House in two weeks. The programme of Parliament is such that as soon as we finish with the Budget, we will be giving Members a break. Since we started there has been no break and that break is estimated to take one month. So, if we take the decision of two weeks, that might not fall within the period when Parliament is sitting and we could run into that kind of situation. I am just guiding that the period of –(Hon. Members rose_)- excuse me, can I guide? Unless you have more information on the Parliament calendar than I do, I would allow you to contribute. I am guiding that the two weeks might find people still on recess so you should bear that in mind while you are proposing a period within which it is opportune to bring a statement to Parliament. 

5.20
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance on this matter. In that case, we would amend the two weeks to be two days from the resumption of Parliament after this recess. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion now is that the report on the matters raised by hon. Alice Alaso be brought back to this Parliament immediately upon resumption of the House and in any case not exceeding two days after resumption of the House. Is that proper?

5.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): I think that might cause problems. Supposing the House resumes on Thursday and adjourns? You are better off saying a week after the House has resumed so that whatever day the House resumes, a week will bring you to a working day. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the two are actually workings days. We talk in terms of working days because even a week after resumption could be Sunday but I am talking about two working days after resumption. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, two parliamentary days after resumption, in which case it would be on a third parliamentary day. Is that clear now?

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion proposed by hon. Alice Alaso, and as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE

5.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you. We have had a problem with the machines and as a result we do not have copies ready for Members. We tried to get over that but we failed. Unless, Mr Speaker, you will allow me to read without Members having copies? Otherwise, we would have to do it tomorrow. 

DR EPETAIT: The Budget Committee is about to present a report, it is about the national budget. We directed the committee to go and look into figures. Members do not have copies, as the chairman has reported. It would be practically very difficult for Members to follow-up those figures, if we allowed him to proceed and read when we do not have copies. I think it would not give us any meaningful debate thereafter. I would urge that the chairman considers producing copies for Members such that we are all on the same page. I beg to propose. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the implication of what hon. Epetait is proposing is that we should adjourn, but the situation we are handling now is fairly tight. According to the Order Paper of today, we should have accomplished a few things, including finalisation of this report from the Budget Committee, which would have been the basis for us to go the Committee of Supply. And because the Committee of Supply has not sat, we cannot have an Appropriation Bill ready for presentation to this House. It is only upon supply that they can generate an Appropriation Bill. That means if we adjourn now and consider the report of the Budget Committee tomorrow, we would agree to proceed the whole day tomorrow, which would enable us go into supply and finalise, and ask the ministry to liaise with the Government printer to have the Appropriation Bill ready tomorrow or Saturday for purposes of presentation Monday morning. Would that be proper? And if it is done then, we go through the process of finalisation of these things. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, it is your discretion to vary the items on the Order Paper. The impression I was getting is that apart from the Committee of Supply, there is no other business. However, we have the Income Tax Bill and we are ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I had got information from the sponsor of the Bill that they were not ready and that is why I was not bringing it up.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, you have given us guidance in as far as the workload that is left is concerned. I am worried because according to the Budget Act, we should have been done with this Budget by the 31st of last month but using Section 2 of the Budget Act, you did inform us that you were using your powers to extend it for one more week, which one more week, according to what I know, should have ended today -(Interjections)- today is 8th September. 

It has now emerged that Government is dragging us back in this process. Why do I say Government? The finance committee and the Budget Committee are committees of Government -(Interjection)- Yes, I know what I am saying. They are headed by Members of Parliament from the ruling party. Therefore, even to say that we go up to tomorrow, hoping that we will finish - although we are not supposed to act on speculations, yesterday in my standing committee, I was reliably informed that next week, our brothers and sisters from the NRM party will be having their seminar or retreat in Kyankwanzi -(Interjection)- it is not a rumour because this was formally communicated. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the guidance I am seeking from you is: if we are not able to accomplish this work tomorrow or make further sacrifices to be here on Saturday to do it, and our brothers and sisters go, what happens? Are we going to say preference is given to the retreat in Kyankwanzi as opposed to the national interest of this country? That is the guidance I want to seek from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is the Office of the Speaker that grants permission to Members to leave. The Office of the Speaker will not release any Member of Parliament for any purpose until the Budget process is complete. There will be no other activity for this Parliament until we conclude this Budget. There will be no other activity that may affect the numbers of Members thus leading to lack of quorum to make decisions. Nothing like that will take place.

MR SSEKIKUBO: We had intended to proceed with the report from the Budget Committee with a lot of difficulty. I find it strange that our printing system, which is one of the best and most reliable, can hold us in abeyance. Can we first verify? I was there this afternoon and business was moving on very well. It is just one floor down here. If we cannot proceed to listen to him, can we suspend for 30 minutes to find out whether we can do it here or outside? We are in the centre of the city. We should be able to proceed with this very important report as we see how the progress shall be. 

Most importantly, Mr Speaker, I beseech your respectable chair not listen to flimsy excuses that the printery is down yet we appropriate monies to run it. The printer is sound and we can prove that it is working. The picture we are giving to the country is not the best.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reason I was trying to give this outline of the complication the adjournment of this House without hearing the report would present was going to lead me to ask the Members accept to receive the report from the Budget Committee so that we can make progress. The concern is being raised by the Members that they do not have copies. I am giving this background to request the House to proceed to listen to the report.

5.33
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): It is very unfortunate that the Chairman of the Budget Committee is behaving as a minister. This is a report of Parliament and should have been printed here. For the whole chairman of the committee to come and tell us that we cannot proceed because the machine has failed signifies that your office has failed. We are aware that your office has not failed, we need to identify where the problem is. The issue that is bringing all this is one item: we wanted you to identify for us money to increase the teachers’ salaries, and we shall be there -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have a copy of the report of the Budget Committee. I am saying I have it because I do. For clarity and for purposes of us not referring to issues that were not referred to the Budget Committee, I have the following. From my communication they extracted terms of reference; on the basis of that the terms were as follows:

“That the Chairperson of the Budget Committee convenes a meeting of the Budget Committee to consider:
a)	Matters that were raised in the course of debate on consideration of the ministerial policy statements on the budget that needed resolutions by way of translating them into actual estimates of expenditure.
b)	Whether some of the budgetary provisions that were given did not follow the orders given by the President on the reduction of expenditure on; a) purchase of vehicles b) seminars and workshops c) travel abroad et cetera.
c)	Whether a circular instruction issued to accounting officers by the Treasury on the reduction of 30 percent on votes relating to some expenditures were followed. 
2 (a) To look at issues raised in (1) above with a view of harmonising and allocating funds for such activities in the Budget: 
b) In cases where guidance on priority areas were not followed, then re-allocation of funds be made. 
3. The committee reports its findings to Parliament by Thursday, 08 September 2011.”

Those were the instructions given to the Budget Committee. I suppose that is what is contained in the report. That is what is extracted from the Hansard about a statement I made to this House directing the Budget Committee on what should be done. I thought I should make this clear to Members because I stated this three times at different occasions for clarity so that issues are properly captured and the matters that we are trying to resolve would be clear. 

If the issues that were raised included matters of teachers’ salaries, then that is accommodated within this framework but not as a single issue to be considered by the Budget Committee –(Interjections)- can we have some orderly procedure in this House?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you so much for those terms of reference and we believe the reasoning was to get resources so that we immediately solve the issue of where there was under-funding. One of the areas that we identified as a Parliament was the teachers’ salaries. I recall hon. Opendi said that; “I have been bleeding ...” - when they talked about the teacher’s pay. I have heard the concerns of the Members; I want to request this House, like the woman representative for Kayunga did. I heard her identify some things in the ministry of trade. The hon. Member for Kayunga had raised issues on page 55 of the report of the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry where we have Shs 105 billion being spent on activities, which we believe are covered under ministry of finance. Hon. Frank got up to say that these things are already in their report and we thought that this money could be used to do this.

I think we should face reality. The issue is that we wanted money to increase the teachers’ salaries. The answer is clear and if there is a problem with the printing machine, 20 of us can go out, go to the printer find out if Muchope cannot do it then see what to do. We can even photocopy here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you saw me consulting with the Clerk at Table. The information I have now is that sufficient copies for all the Members will be available by 10 O’clock tomorrow. If Members insist that they want to hold copies in their hands before we proceed, then I have no option but to adjourn and this will be the basis:

Hon. Members, given that I had given an extension on 31st August up to today, 8th September, and looking at the volume of business still available, I will still use my prerogative under Section 21 of the Budget Act to extend the period, which initially is prescribed under Section 8 of the Budget Act up to Wednesday [HON. MEMBERS: “Thursday”] there is a proposal that we put it to Thursday but hold on! Hon. Members, I extend the period initially levied by Section 8 of the Budget Act up to Wednesday, 14 September next week. 

The implications are that we will meet tomorrow from 10.00 O’clock until when we are ready to go home and then we will meet from Monday morning and thereafter we will continue meeting in such manner until the entire budgetary process is completed. But in any case, it will not go beyond Wednesday, 14th September; even if it is just a few minutes to midnight of that day, we should have finished. This House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 9 September 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)

