Friday, 2 September 2011 
  
Parliament met at 10.40 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 
  
(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, hon. Members. I thank you very much for yesterday because we were able to make headway and I hope it is the same spirit that will carry us today. It is now obvious that whatever we are going to take decisions on will have to go back to the Budget Committee and the committee has to come back to Parliament with a report that will enable us to go through the financial Bills, including the Appropriations Bill towards the end of the discussion.
 
For the information of the Members, we asked for the Supplementary (Appropriations) Bill, that is for the money that has already been spent but the Appropriations Bill itself cannot come before Supply. We need to first meet as a Committee of Supply and pronounce ourselves and it is then that the Minister of Finance will have an opportunity to prepare the Appropriations Bill that will come and finally pass the appropriation. 

Because of these reasons, I am going to request that the Budget Committee should meet tomorrow. That includes all chairpersons, vice-chairpersons and members of the Budget Committee. If they start meeting tomorrow, then that would facilitate the process so that by Tuesday, we are ready to engage in whatever would have gone through the Budget Committee. It is very important that they should start meeting tomorrow so that the whole process can move on faster.

I am, therefore, directing the Clerk to notify members and have the meetings commence from tomorrow henceforth. Mr Chairman, I will also be calling your colleagues so that you can have these meetings and we see how to finish. I thank you very much.

10.43
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to briefly give an outline as to what happened in Bulambuli as a result of the mudslides. There have been conflicting reports from the media that we lost 39, 40 or 43 people. I have even been getting calls from international media like BBC and CNN. The actual position is that we lost 26 people in separate mudslides of whom 15 were female and 11 were male. We managed to retrieve all the bodies and they were buried by Tuesday. The number came to 29 because in the course, the landslides damaged three graves.

We are facing challenges. First of all, the road network is cut off entirely and whatever was given to us has not been distributed as of yesterday - I came back this morning. We need urgent intervention for the roads to be opened.

Those in risky areas were, as agreed here in the minister’s statement – we have to establish the camps to help because where they are integrated with other families, it is not possible. We have a total population of about 156 people affected in upper Bulambuli and the lower belts because of the rain from our neighbouring districts of Kapchorwa where there are now floods which have also affected the crops. Therefore, we need increased intervention from the Government and other humanitarian organisations to help the victims of the mudslides. We also need to resettle the affected areas in low lands. 

I thank Government for the support and much as hon. Ecweru indicated that he had dispatched 800 bags of posho, only 200 were received in the district and I do not know where the balance is. We need to take action and get the balance because it seems other people are also benefiting from this confusion. 

I also thank you, hon. Members, the media and other humanitarian groups. We need your help. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This matter was received and discussed. We even observed a moment of silence. This is, therefore, an update from the hon. Member who has just come in from the constituency and it does not attract any debate. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDEGT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday, we received the report of the committee and also received the submission from the shadow minister responsible for the sector. What is now left is for us to begin our general debate, which I will limit to 30 minutes and each contributor will be using two minutes. 

10.47
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): I thank you very much. I just have four issues to raise.

First, I would want to agree with the statement that NEMA is almost completely incapacitated to be the custodian of our environmental resources in this country. I want to cite an example in Kayunga District where River Musamia that we used to read about on the maps of Uganda. This important river in this area is now history, owing to the massive encroachment and destruction of all the wetland resources. The papyrus has been destroyed and I want to report that pumpkins that we eat in this city actually come from what used to be River Musamia. 

We have a serious problem that the micro climate in this area has completely changed. We are right now in a rainfall shadow because we do not receive as much rain as other areas and we suspect that it is because of the destruction of this river. We call upon the ministry to intervene and restore this very important resource.

My second point is on the investment in the electricity distribution that seems to be lagging far behind with only seven percent of households being able to access power. I would like to recommend that as we look for more resources to fund other sectors, we should also look for more resources to fund the disbursal of power to rural areas. I still believe that this area is grossly under-funded because many of our people – over 90 percent cannot access power. We need to invest more resources in this area and secondly, we need to further support the supply of solar energy especially to schools and health centers in rural areas -(Member timed out_)

10.50
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on two points. One is about Umeme. You realise from the report that the tariffs have remained high compared to the tariffs within the region. You will recall that in 2009, an investigation was conducted under the famous Gen. Saleh Commission and recommendations were made. Up to today, nothing has been done as far as that report is concerned.

In this report, we continue to see the committee making recommendations basing on the information from the ministry that Umeme is working towards reducing power losses to 29, whereas in their concession agreement, they were supposed to reduce to 28 by 2008. So, I request this House to call upon the Minister of Energy, where Umeme falls, to implement the Saleh report and recommendations so that our fellow Ugandans and the people we represent do not suffer because of the high power tariffs in this country bearing in mind that an investigation was made and recommendations were made.

The second one is about rural electrification. My colleague has just talked about the low levels of coverage and one of the issues which was raised in this report is that the Rural Electrification Agency is still being run under the ambit of the PS -(Member timed out_)

10.52
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is on Vote 019. Owing to the fact that there were various districts which were created in Uganda and the fact that we lack water in these districts, I would request the minister responsible –(Interjections)- I am talking on behalf of Kween County. I will not talk on behalf of other districts because I am representing Kween County, which is also a district at the same time. There is no water in this district, it is a new district, the district headquarters has no water and we are also at the same time a source of water.
 
When you hear of floods, you talk of wastage of water flowing towards the Nile and we do not use the same water in our area. So, we need to tap this water for domestic consumption and for other use within the district and also provision of boreholes in the lower areas of the district and in parts of Kween sub-county and Ngenge sub-county, which is also faced with the problem of resettlement at the moment.

On the issues of water springs because we use water springs in parts of Kween District, we need some funding at least to the local communities for them to use these water springs. 

The issue of National Forestry Authority -(Interruption)

MRS TETE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from the same region, Kween in Sebei. I would like to inform this august House that as we talk now, because of the heavy rains, all the waters in the region are contaminated. We have many rivers. In Sebei, the rivers are red. We do not have water and according to the report, I do not see anywhere, where Kapchorwa, Bukwo or Kween are reflected. 

In 2009/2010, the minister of finance mentioned in her speech, the gravity flow scheme in Bukwo or Kween but nothing has been done. There is a big problem in that area and that is why our athletes and everybody there is sick. Hon. Minister of Finance, please save us, we need water!

10.55
MRS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the work done because they have presented a good report. 

My concern is on page 23 where they reported encroachment and degradation of the wetlands being high in Uganda. When I was growing up, I used to hear that all the wetlands belonged to Government but I am shocked and surprised that today, many people are rushing to go for the wetlands as if they are forgetting the roles of these wetlands in this country. 

I keep on wondering who these people are. Who is behind giving away these wetlands? It is like we are betraying our country and the future generation. 

Today, we are crying that the climate is changing and many things are turning upside down but these people are in their offices getting salaries and not taking any action. I think it is high time that we did something to protect our environment. Otherwise, at the end of the day, we shall all cry and there will be no solution. We are looking at forests being cut down and it is a hot issue but it is we who should protect all these forests. When we are silent about these issues, at the end of the day, we shall all cry and even our grandchildren will ask: “When our parents had the mandate to do something right, what did they do at such a time?” So, it is high time we came up to protect the environment so that -(Member timed out_)

10.58
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the report. I would like to ask the minister, why the craze over Mabira? Mabira Forest, as we know, provides an ecological system that is responsible for maintaining the level of water in Lake Victoria. As you are aware, we are very much reliant on hydro-power electricity in our country. Have you reviewed the effects of cutting Mabira, Madam Minister? 

I understand that the Minister took journalists to show the world the degraded part of Mabira and, therefore, using it as the reason to mow down the rest of the forest. What we should be talking about now is re-grading Mabira not degrading Mabira. I think Government needs to stand warned because the public out there is not going to tolerate these threats and intimidation of war as we watch our life going to the drain. 

Secondly, when are you going to explore other forms of energy, notably geo-thermo energy, which is being exploited in Kenya, just across the border? We see Kenyans getting 105 Megawatts of electricity using geo-thermo energy and we have the potential to -(Member timed out_)

11.00
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. I have two concerns. The first one is on water. We have one secondary school in my district; the only in the district, and it is faced with a water problem. Government tried thrice to drill a borehole but their efforts failed. 

We are talking about quality education but these students move three kilometres to the trading centre to fetch water. When they reach there, there is congestion. They struggle for water with the community and at the end of the day they lose a lot of time out there. 

So, I call upon Government and the ministry in particular to come to the rescue of this school so that instead of wasting funds drilling water without any forthcoming returns; let the ministry apply another technology. For example, try piped water so that the students can save time.

The other comment I have is about page 6 of the report, where activities for this financial year are indicated. They say that there will be sensitisation of local governments on loyalty issues and the role in mitigating illegal mining in some districts. 

Amudat District was curved out of Nakapiripirit District. But in this report, it is Nakapiripirit District which has been reflected. We have mining of marble which Tororo Cement ferries to Tororo. It is mined in Amudat District and I am surprised to see Nakapiripirit District appearing here –(Member timed out_)

11.02
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the report. There are two issues that I would like to address. Time and again, Government has been talking of economic transformation and development across the country. And in order to achieve this, we are supposed to have reliable electricity services. 

I speak on behalf of West Nile. Ever since the Owen Falls Dam was constructed in 1958 - if you go to the archives, the people who provided labour for it were from Northern Uganda. And at that time, whenever a black man fell into the water and drowned, they would say, “Musomari ameanguka kwa maji, twendelea na kazi”; meaning, a nail has fallen into the water, let us continue with the work. If an Italian who was a prisoner of the Second World War fell into the water, they would say, “Nyondo ameanguka, kwa maji, tupumuzike kidogo”; meaning, a hummer has fallen into the water, let us retreat and wait a bit. And if a Mzungu fell into the river, they would say, “Muntu ameanguka kwa maji, akuna kazi”; meaning a human being has fallen in the water, there is no work, let us go and mourn. 

The price that the people of West Nile are now paying for the sacrifices we made is to be in darkness twenty four hours a day. Not only that – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, even during the day? (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Yes, I am talking about electricity. I am not talking about the sunlight. Mr Speaker, as you may realise, for the last seven or eight years, Government has been talking about the construction of Nyagak Hydro Power Plant. This project has taken substantial amounts of money, which money could have been utilised to connect West Nile on the main grid by having a transformer either from Gulu or Lira, so that even if the whole country goes into the dark, like it is here is Kampala –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, a few more minutes.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Therefore, my appeal to Government is to hasten the construction of Nyagak Hydro Power Plant and to inform them that River Nyagak is a dry stream bed. In December and January, the river dries up. I wonder how they are going to generate electricity. 

Luckily, hon. D’Ujanga, the minister in charge of power comes from there. His home is not far from that dry river, he is a hydrological engineer and former MD of UEB. I wonder what kind of technical advice they gave to Government to spend that amount of money on a river that flows for only six months in a year! For the rest of the year, it is dry.

I say this knowing that the honourable minister is there. Let him advise us on what they are going to do about the issue of perpetual darkness in West Nile. We want to be part and parcel of Uganda; we want small scale industries to develop; we need electricity. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.06
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the committee. My concern has to do with the petroleum sector of this country. The ministry has persistently refused to bring to this House the framework that will ensure transparency in the oil sector. Right now, the oil revenues are flowing through the capital gains. We do not know how transparently these resources are being managed.

My view to the committee is that you should not have gone through this policy statement for the sake of these revenues. My proposal to the House is that we should stay the approval of their budget until the ministry comes here to show us the proposed Bill. Without the relevant Bills, I can assure you this is going to guarantee the mismanagement of the resources in this sector. Where is the national oil fund; where are we putting money? You are not going to get oil resources and spend them directly. It never works like that, the world over. There are best practices. What Government is deliberately doing is to go on mismanaging oil resources as we all watch. The framework is not there and the policies that would help us scrutinise are not there.

Yesterday, I was listening to the radio and they said that there is now mediation on oil conflict going on in Europe, as if we do not have our own jurisdiction which would have helped us mediate on the oil conflict. Why Europe? The simple reason is because there is a murky world out there; of all sorts of dirty things in the oil world –(Member timed out_)

11.09
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I rise on two issues, on page 16, about rural water and sanitation, especially water. I thank the Government for the efforts they have made to drill boreholes; the water coverage has improved. Unfortunately, the boreholes that have been drilled are left with no plan to maintain them. As such, most of the boreholes in the rural areas have broken down. They have been left to the effort of the wanainchi in the villages who are too poor to afford pipes and other accessories for maintaining these boreholes.

The other issue is about water for production. For example, water from valley dams - and let me talk about valley dams, Mr Speaker. All the valley dams that were built during the British Rule have broken down; they are full of silt. I want to suggest that Government, as it prepares to restock North and Eastern, should rehabilitate these dams. The reason boreholes are breaking down is because they are being shared by both people and animals.

I do not know how long it will take Government to rehabilitate these dams, but it is very important that that is done.

In addition to that, I would like to ask Government to find money and build simple dams in places like Eastern and Northern, that is Karamoja and Teso areas. I am saying this because these dams are very easy to construct. It is all about putting a heap of soil on either side to have water collect in one area.

11.11
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to talk about water for production. But before I talk about that, I would like to appeal to you hon. Members, to desist from the threats that discourage us from approving the budget or the reports. This is very dangerous and it is also not necessary. If there are any elements that you do not agree with in some report, just point them out and suggest a solution. These reports serve many interests in this country.

Uganda has many water bodies and we cannot just go on depending on nature. We should just concentrate on areas where we have a competitive advantage in this country. Now that inflation has risen, the only solution is to improve and modernise agriculture.

In that regard, I would like to propose that we concentrate on the improvement and modernisation of agriculture. But you know that we cannot do that without investing in water for production. But also, in this report, I do not see any seriousness on the investment in water for production –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I made a proposal that without bringing to this House the relevant framework for managing the oil resources in this country, it would not be prudent for us to proceed by approving the budget for this sector. I base this proposal on the fact that this demand that has been on for the last seven or so years. Even before the production sharing agreements were arrived at, this demand was already on.

My argument is that if we are to have transparency in this sector, it must be based on the legal and policy framework. It is these that will allow transparency and serious scrutiny by this House to take place in that sector. Right now –(Interruption)

Is the hon. Member in order to insinuate to the House that my argument is out of order, when as we speak, the lawyers representing Uganda in the negotiations in the UK require Shs 11 billion, which the ministry has actually already given out as supplementary  budget, to pay those lawyers for representation? The money was paid because Uganda has failed to manage this sector. So, is he in order to discourage my proposal and want the country to move in a haywire manner?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have given a very good defence, hon. Member, please speak to it.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, I will not allow the hon. Member to divert me from my point. I do not think I mentioned anything to do with what she is saying.

Anyway, as I was saying, I am appealing to the House to look at the elements that can develop this country. That is why I said that we can use the much water that we have. We should concentrate on investing in water for production. As you all know, I come from Nyabushozi, a water-constrained area. It is part of the cattle corridor from where we get milk, beef and other products that are needed for our industries and feeding.

Unless we invest in agriculture that includes beef and dairy products, we cannot go on lamenting about inflation, job creation and all those things you are talking about, without paying attention to agriculture. For example, there was a time when we were called to a conference to support a loan of $50 million. I would like to propose that when this loan is secured, water for production and modernisation of agriculture –(Member timed out_)

11.16
MS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just have two points to talk about, the first one featuring on pages 10 and 11 of the committee report. On these pages, the committee notes that the Uganda Rural Electrification Agency lacks autonomy. This is very absurd because to the best of my knowledge, this agency is a fully-fledged Government project that has the capacity and ability to run its own affairs. So, I wonder why such a huge national project can be put under the supervision and control of one man, the PS of the Ministry of Energy. That is unacceptable. The ministry needs to look into this matter with a view of making it an autonomous body.

I would also like to talk about the agreement between Umeme and the Government. In its report, the committee noted that this agreement was poorly negotiated. No wonder that is why we have all these problems of excessive charges on electricity tariffs, problems of lack of proper supervision, corruption and so on. Government needs to look back because it is being cheated; Umeme is taking the lion’s share. Government needs to review these agreements so that we get something out of this; it is a big thing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Victory Learning Primary School, represented by hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Masaka Municipality. You are welcome. (Applause) 

11.19
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two years ago, Government undertook to provide equipment to excavate dams. The understanding was that this equipment would be placed at a regional level with farmers contributing fuel and water for themselves. That would be the contribution by the farmers. 

This equipment was taken to Lyantonde to provide water for Rakai, Lyantonde, Mbarara, Isingiro and Kiruhura. Because of overwhelming demand, this equipment has been in Kiruhura since then. We were promised that Government was going to procure more equipment for other water-stressed areas.

When I look at this budget, I wonder what I am going to tell my people. I represent people of Kashari whose animals have been dying over the years, due to lack of water. Where is this equipment?

Secondly, in the budget, there is a grant for sanitation, which is normally sent to the districts. Some districts are getting this money but other districts are not. Hon. Minister, what is the criterion? Why are you discriminating?

Lastly, water, especially safe water, was decentralised. Out of about Shs 200 billion in this budget, less than Shs 60 billion goes to local governments. Grants going to local governments for safe water have been declining over the years -(Member timed out_)

11.21
MR MICAH LOLEM (NRM, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is on page 14, Vote 019: water for production. On page 14, on the budget allocation; where I come from, the only resource is cattle. However, the Ministry of Water and Environment has not assisted the people in my county to allocate even just one dam.

There was no achievement in 2010/2011. In the planned activities for 2011/2012, there is no dam for a desert like Amudat district.

Mr Speaker, my community rears cattle but it is unfortunate when I see the Ministry of Water not even allocating a dam for just one sub-county. We have over 40,000 cattle but my sister in her ministry cannot even assist my community with one dam. I have four sub-counties but there is no single dam. During the dry season, cows go to Kapchorwa, 50 kilometers away, to look for water.  

In a sub-county where I have 10,000 people in one parish, they have only two boreholes. You can imagine how my people, especially the women, suffer when looking for water. 

My brother from Nyabushozi was saying it is -(Member timed out_)

11.24
MS SARAH KATAIKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you. I thank the committee for the report. I would like to address my concerns to the Ministry of Water and Environment. First and foremost, my concern is on sanitation and hygiene in this country. 

On page 15 of the report, they highlighted that some effort to carry out sensitisation about sanitation and hygiene was done. What I noted was sensitisation was carried out in remote places like Kibuku, Kabura, Kakongo among others. 

However, you would wish to note that the hygiene and sanitation conditions - particularly in our cities - is very appalling especially in Kampala, Iganga among others. You find sewage running in the city and nothing seems to be done. I feel concerned that this year nothing is mentioned about the sanitation and hygiene situation. 

So, I appeal to the committee concerned and the minister that the issues of sanitation be addressed. 

My second issue is about polythene bags. Once again, the committee continues to urge that the ministry to put a ban on polythene bags but nothing seems to be done. Can this House and the committee advise us on what we are going to do because the buveera are everywhere in the city? This is really embarrassing. I urge this august House to address this issue. 

Lastly, on the issue of water for production, being a farmer and an agriculturalist myself, I feel that we are not giving enough support to water for production. (Member timed out_)  

11.26
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On reading the committee’s report, there is a specific recommendation made about Umeme and power tariffs. I have been in this House a little bit longer and I witnessed the unbundling of UEB for the creation of the three companies and the basis for doing this was that we were going to get improved delivery of services. Secondly, that the cost of losses was going to go down and thirdly, that it was going to attract private players in the energy sector.

I am disappointed that over a period of time, none of this has happened. The delivery of energy has become very inefficient and expensive. 

When I was a small boy, I was told that hydro-electricity is the cheapest form of energy in the world. Progressively we have seen that in Uganda, the reverse is becoming true. May I, therefore, call upon the committee chairperson that upon the approval of this report, these recommendations, which require external intrusion, cause them to occur by writing to the Auditor-General and inviting him to do the forensic audits?  

Secondly, the other issue we need to critically look at is the composition of the tariff. Ugandans employed in UEB were earning about Shs 200,000. When Umeme was created, you find that the MD might be earning close to Shs 20 million per month. And all these are factored into the tariff that people are paying.

How is Uganda going to industrialise if this is the way we are going? (Member timed out_) 

11.28
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the chairman and the Minister of Finance how much they have in the Escrow account. Can we have a report before we approve this budget?

Secondly, can the minister of finance create a vote for REA before we approve the budget?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is REA?

MR EKANYA: Rural Electrification Agency. 

Thirdly, I do not think it is proper –(Interjection)– with your permission, Mr Speaker, the item is on page 11 of the report.

MR WERIKHE: For purposes of our record, I would like to request hon. Ekanya to clarify which agency he is referring to Rural Electrification Agency or Electricity Regulatory Authority? They are two different and distinct institutions.

MR EKANYA: I am referring to Rural Electrification Agency (REA). So, may I request that the vote be granted this financial year before we approve this budget? I do not agree with the proposal of the committee that we transfer the project supported by European Union from Vote 157 to Vote 109 under the ministry. 

11.30
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I want to know from the water sector because when we came to Parliament, they told us to tell them the boreholes that were not functioning in our districts and we did. We in turn raised hopes of our people thinking that some of those boreholes were going to be handled. Sheema is one of the affected areas and during my campaigns, one of the issues that were affecting women was actually the issue of domestic violence due to lack of water. 

When I read through the report, I do not see boreholes mentioned anywhere.

In addition to that, there was a promise that the water from Kitagata was going to be constructed, to flow through Sheema to Bushenyi district. This was going to be effected this year. That would have helped us as a district so that our town of Kabwohe which does not have water would benefit from that project. I find it very strange that Sheema where water originates, supplies Ntungamo District and yet it does not have water. Much of the water that supplies Ntungamo comes from Sheema.

We are talking of forest conservation; these newly created districts do not have reserve forests. We have district officers for forests but I have not seen any funds from the ministry on how such districts can be supported in terms of growing more forests. How can we promote the growing of forests in such districts where our hills are bare? 

11.33
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth County East, Kaabong): I have been attending this committee of natural resources.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: No, I have been attending because I have interest. Karamoja is an area that is highly water-stressed. The issue is that Karamoja is an area where there is need for water. A number of studies have been done by the Koreans and Israelites on how to get bulk water for this region. For instance, Lopeyi is supposed to provide water for supply to towns like Kotido, Moroto and also that for animals. They even need electricity. I presented those issues to the committee but nothing has appeared here. If we lack support, then our neighbours from Lango and Acholi would help us because they know that our conflict was coming from water. I have not seen any Member of Parliament supporting us because this is our “Mabira”. 

I was looking to see if the hon. Ekanya’s would come. We would walk and say we need water, otherwise, I do not see why the Government of Uganda has failed to provide water for the people of Karamoja in the last 20 years. This can be a once for all programme that would see the region with enough water.

Currently, if you go there, you will see that bridges have been washed. What type of water are we looking for?

MS BANGIRINA: I would like to inform my colleague that the committee has looked into the Karimojong issue and other water-stressed areas. There is a programme in this current budget to work on water development under the Prime Minister’s Office and under Ministry of Water. We looked for Shs 2 billion for areas that were stressed. Karamoja is one of the areas that the committee has emphasised.
 
MR SAMSON LOKERIS: I think what hon. Kawooya is raising is not true. There is an illusion now in Parliament that when the First Lady is in charge of Karamoja, then everything will be got.

She is only coordinating and there is no budget for that ministry. For example, she has introduced production in agriculture but the Ministry of Agriculture has no plans to bring us tractors. She has been trying to do restocking but the department of animal husbandry has no plans for Karamoja. 

What hon. Kawooya is saying not true. This is how Karamoja has always been left out. I believe that Members of Parliament from there should support us. This is a region that has been neglected and we should be given support.
 
11.37
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): I rise on the recommendation by the committee that Government tables before Parliament all the relevant oil and gas Bills before December.

But transactions are taking place in the oil sector already. We know that Heritage Oil got US $1.45 billion just out of two wells and Tullow Oil to which it sold them was able sell its interests at US $2.930 billion.

Under what framework and mandate is Government handling such hefty sums of money? Just these two transactions are over our annual financial budgets. While we may be concerned with other issues, I would propose that Government comes forward with this and we have the matters worked on transparently. 

As hon. Alaso said, Government is already paying Curtis, Mallet and Prevost law firm of the United States Shs 11 billion to represent us because Heritage refused to pay tax when they sold to Tullow. Under what mandate are we as Ugandans the owners of this resource handling it before others rip off this country.

Out of their transactions, they could finance the entire budget of this country. For us, the nationals are only looking on. Can we as Parliament be told under what mandate and regulatory framework Government is transacting business on behalf of Ugandans?

MR ALEPER: I wish to appreciate the recommendation that was brought by the Committee on Natural Resources. One thing I can add here is that whereas the committee called for a forensic audit, we need to set a timeframe. It is not a matter of putting a recommendation and we leave it at that. There must be a timeframe when this Parliament will hear the findings because as we speak, the rate of load-shedding in this country is too high and our industries are losing a lot. So, we need a time frame to be set. 

On the issue of water, I appreciate what the committee chairperson and the Shadow Minister for Water and Environment said yesterday that water is life. This is true. On 15, there are districts which benefited from piped water supply. I wonder and I would like the minister to make it clear to this Parliament about the criteria he uses to pick a few and yet we know the number of districts in this country that are facing a problem. For example, in Moroto Municipality, pipes were put from the time of colonialism and to-date, the system still has a big problem. Women leave their husbands in the house at 2.00 a.m. to go and struggle for water from the few wells. So, the minister should come out and tell us how these were selected and why such areas like Moroto Municipality have not been included in the Financial Year 2011/2012. How was this plan drawn? We would like to hear from the minister –(Member timed out_)

11.41
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something on this subject. Water is life and the environment is our home. So, we should handle the two jealously and properly. Having made that statement, I would like to say the following:

One, I will start with the wetlands. I am concerned, as a Member of Parliament, about the Namatala wetland which has been degraded. It is an area of conflict but the Central Government is keeping quiet. I would like the responsible minister to look into that to ensure that we go back to secure that place so that it is properly looked after and for the conflict to be resolved. 

The other issue is about energy. In the presidential pledges, one of the things that were promised to my people was electricity supply to the sub-counties of Kameruka, Iki-Iki, Mugiti and Lyama. I want this to feature in the Government plans for this year. So, I expected something to be talked about in that respect.

The other issue is on water and environment. I do not see anything about boreholes and yet these are very useful sources of water –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have one more report to consider. We need to prepare and hand these matters back to the Budget Committee so that they can comprehensively handle all the details and come back to us before the deadlines we have set for ourselves. I gave an extra 30 minutes from the initial 30 minutes I had given and at this time, I am going to close the debate and ask the minister to respond in 25 minutes. 

11.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is always grateful for points raised in this august House because these issues help us improve where there are difficulties. I will specifically go to the issues that were raised by the committee and I will pick on the issues raised by Members before I can comment. 

One thing that has featured prominently for the last few months is that of the Umeme agreement. As the committee notes on page 6, the concession for Umeme is 20 years and in the agreement, it was agreed that after seven years, there be a review and this review is ongoing. The committee notes on pages 6 and 7 that this discussion of renegotiation is not backed by a comprehensive negotiation framework. I would like to inform you, Mr Speaker, that there are indeed some terms of reference that we have been working on in carrying out this review but as a ministry, we are open to the committee or to the House for that matter through the natural resources committee, to have an improvement on this and this is the opportune time where an improvement can be put into this framework which we are using at the moment. (Interjections) If hon. Alaso could be attentive, I would like to reiterate that the high tariffs – and members who were in the Seventh Parliament will agree with me, that these high tariffs were brought about by the emergency power supply that was discussed here. 

At the time there were two roads to follow; either to have no power in the whole country or to have expensive power and a decision was made that we go for expensive power as an emergency. So, the problem of high tariffs is due to the cost of fuel. If we were to pay commercial tariffs, we would pay Shs 1,000 per unit but because of a subsidy which we have been discussing even in the Ninth Parliament recently, the consumer is paying Shs 400. In other words, the subsidy covers Shs 600 per unit. 

All is being done. As I reported last month, that we have started decommissioning these high sources of generation. We commissioned Kiira last June and in December, we should commission the other expensive source as we commission hydro electricity [MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: “Clarification.”] let me finish this, I will give you time. One other thing that has been persistently on this Floor is Saleh’s report. Saleh’s report was received in October and there is a letter forwarding this report to ERA. This letter was written on 27 October 2009; it is a three-sentence letter. It says, “We received the above report from the committee on 7 October 2009. I am directing the board to implement the recommendations as summarised on page 59 of the report. You may consult power operations where necessary.” This was signed by Eng. Hillary Onek who was the minister then and this letter was addressed to the board chairman of ERA.

So, Government is taking action and as the chairman of the committee will report, ERA appeared before the committee and they gave a position on this. I would like to lay this letter on Table. It is not right to say that Government is doing nothing about Gen. Saleh’s report. Something is being done. 

The other thing -(Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)- I have only 15 minutes and the shadow minister, with due respect, has already made -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, hon. Member; just proceed. 

MR D’UJANGA: On page 8, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way at long last. I am rising on a point of clarification. Following the tragedy which befell the generation of electricity between Kiira Dam and Nalubaale in recent years, which tragedy is still remembered up to now, what scientific facts can the minister produce in Parliament to allay our fears that the development of Bujagali Dam will not follow suit?

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, this was raised yesterday by the shadow minister and I have a response. After this, I will respond to the shadow minister’s issues. This was raised yesterday, I think. Hon. Member, you remember you raised this yesterday -(Interruption) 

MS NABBANJA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister for giving way. I need more clarification about Gen. Saleh’s report. As Members of Parliament, we want to know what was in the report. You told us that you were given the report. What specifically was in the report that they brought to you, so that you give us the information?

Then you told us that you received the report in October and that was last year. Today is September 2011. What has the Government done in that period?

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, if Members were attentive, I said the chairman may have something to say about that. And for the information of the hon. Members, the issue of tariffs is handled by the ERA and the law says the minister must work with ERA at arms’ length. So, the minister received the report and passed it on to ERA, which is implementing this report. But what was in the report?

The report has a series of recommendations on page 59, which must be carried out and as I stated, the chairman of the committee interacted with ERA and there should be a report on this. 

The other issue is on page 8. The committee recommends a forensic audit in the ministry and also some Members here have referred to a forensic audit. There are two things to say here. One is that this august House has an ad hoc committee carrying out this under the chairmanship of hon. Oboth with a number of members. I think this was done only two weeks ago and therefore, it should be fresh in our memories -(Interjections)- therefore, this is already being handled. 

The other one is on page 9, that the Auditor-General institutes a special audit. I am here to report that the Auditor-General is already in the ministry. 

On page 10, the committee recommends that Government integrates the oil and gas sector development in its National Development Plan. There are flag bearer projects in the National Development Plan. The refinery is one of them and the power generation from the oil is the other. 

I would like to come to the issue of transparency on oil matters. This has been raised by hon. Alaso and hon. Ssekikubo and the Shadow Minister of Finance in his reply to the budget speech. Mr Speaker, my ministry has been very transparent with this Parliament. First and foremost, the National Oil and Gas Policy is on the website of the ministry. The website is www.energyandmineraldevelopment.go.ug for the whole world. But we also gave each member of the Eighth Parliament a copy and as I said last time we are making arrangements to supply each member of the Ninth Parliament with a copy. So, we cannot be more transparent than that.

Mr Speaker, in February 2010 my ministry appraised the Committee of Natural Resources on the status of current issues in the oil and gas sector. We spent some time with them and if I am not mistaken, we had a workshop. In June 2010, my ministry laid on the Table of this House, the production sharing agreement, which Government had concluded with oil companies. I am being told that these agreements are in the library of this august House. 

In April this year, my ministry reported to this House on the sale of the Heritage Oil and Gas interests to Tullow. The Hansard can bail me out. 

In August this year, another set of production sharing agreements was made available to the new Committee on Natural Resources. My ministry will continue to work with Parliament on matters pertaining to energy, gas and oil -(Hon. Members rose_)- please, sit down. I am going to answer what you asked.

On the issue of what law we are using, currently, we have two laws which are with the First Parliamentary Counsel. I would be surprised. A veteran MP should know the procedure we follow when we are making laws in this House. These laws are with the First Parliamentary Counsel and my senior minister has said before, that in fact, it is in the interest of the ministry to have this law before this House before October and members are going to dissect this law as we always do. So, what is the worry about?

As managers, there are some activities which we carry out in parallel and others which we carry out in series. So, while those two laws are coming, we have a law which we are using. We cannot sit. There are activities going on in the oil field under the old law and this law is called the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, Cap 150, revised edition of 2000. Everybody, including hon. Ssekikubo, could go and look at this law and find out where we have not fulfilled the provisions of that law. We are not doing what is not covered by that law. (Hon. Members rose_) Mr Speaker, I would like you to help me choose, which one to sit down for.

THE DEUTY SPEAKER: It is your prerogative.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Minister for allowing this. Mr Minister, it is true that there has been an old oil law but from the explanation we got from Government, it required the overhauling of those laws. What I would like to point out clearly and which you know very well is that, for instance, in March, Uganda signed a Memorandum of Understanding to cushion Tullow revenues of the Shs 2.930 billion from the tax accruing from Heritage Oil.

You are also well aware that Parliament demanded that before you go ahead to transact this oil, can we have the matters agreed upon by Parliament? 

Thirdly, we asked what the cut for Uganda is as much as other companies are ripping off to the extent that Uganda Commercial Division is not even entitled to arbitrate within tax matters related to our oil as they are referred to other countries. What is our stake as a country in all this?

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker, if I have got to entertain all these clarifications, I will need some more minutes. I am prepared to handle all clarifications but I will need some more time. So, I would like to be allowed to continue then we can handle some of these things within the committee.

Hon. Ssekikubo, you will have to help provide for me that information about cushioning a company because I am not aware about that. But I agree with you 100 percent –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I seek your help concerning the way we are proceeding. These matters of oil are very important. Would it be procedurally okay if you exercised your discretion and gave us another five minutes to clarify matters so that the hon. Minister becomes a bit more flexible? We have been responding to these things this way and I get the feeling from the House that there is something serious that we are not getting to. The Minister understands it differently and we understand it differently but it requires some little time, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I am going to discount the time you will be dealing with the clarification that will be raised by hon. Alaso, hon. Tumwebaze and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi only. The rest of the time will be taken from yours.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your kind consideration on this matter. I would like to inform hon. D’Ujanga, the minister in charge of the sector, first and foremost that the issues we are raising are bigger than him and the sector. They are issues of institutional capacity and those that should far outlive the present framework. That is why we raised this.

I do not think it is good for him to really worry about veteran politicians raising the same matters over and over again.

The clarification I would like to draw the attention of hon. D’Ujanga to are; one, that there are gaps in the present oil law and it is those gaps that we insist must be addressed in an amendment or in a new oil law that will help us address the present concerns.

I insist that it is bigger than mere production sharing agreements. If what we were asking for could adequately be covered in the present law and in the production sharing agreement, there is no way a sovereign country like Uganda would have decided that matters of arbitration in the production sharing agreement are carried exclusively to UK. What happened and where did we cede our sovereignty? I am sure we ceded it because there was no framework in place.

It is also matters beyond policy when we talk about a national oil fund. We understand the capacity of oil to generate money beyond that that can be appropriated in one financial year. You will be crazy if you just send it direct to the Consolidated Fund.

We understand the multi-sectoral capacity of oil to undermine agriculture and every sector and create chaos wherever it is. That is why we are asking that we have these new frameworks in place. It is not enough to promise us year in, year out. I understand the work of the First Parliamentary Counsel, I am not in Cabinet but I understand. It is not enough to promise us for two to five years that you will bring the law. Bring the law; that is what we are asking. Thank you.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My clarification is really brief. Last year, we passed the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill. It was more or less solely on oil and gas. It was to enable the Ministry of Finance and the taxation agencies to collect tax from all the activities before production. It was really comprehensive and I remember there was a lot of debate here from Members whether we should have passed it then before a comprehensive oil and gas law is concluded.

We justified it strongly that there was need to have it to enable the Ministry of Finance, URA and Ministry of Energy to tax - you are nodding and you were refusing my clarification - to tax the activities prior production. I remember that we even had to allow the commencement clause to be retrospective. We asked the lawyers and they said it was okay.

The reason they said they had to allow the commencement to be retrospective was to make sure that the provisions of that income tax amendment get harmonised with the production sharing agreement.

When we hear disputes going to arbitration, my question is, do we have any other bi-lateral law or undertaking that supersedes the Income Tax (Amendment) Act that we passed? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you. Mr Minister, we are concerned about the spectrum of oil production because we know that many countries have ventured into oil production and have ended up with oil as a curse and we want to avoid that. That is why we are putting questions before you.

One point of inquiry I want to make is, the law you referred to, namely; the 1985 law on petroleum has very little relevance to the venture of oil production we are addressing right now.

Two, are you aware that during the time when the framers of the 1995 Constitution talked about petroleum, little did they know we would have oil the way it is now?

Are you also aware that Article 244 of the Constitution does not succeed to prescribe the oil product in the way oil is known ordinarily? How will you venture into producing those two laws you are talking about namely; the law to manage oil without getting a proper definition of oil? The definition of oil I am referring to is constitutionally is ambiguous. You need a concrete start; tell us what is going on. 

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleagues for these issues. Hon. Tumwebaze, I was nodding because I wanted hon. Alaso to listen. (Laughter) 

We want this law as much as you do, hon. Ssekikubo. I want to repeat, as managers, we know that there are activities we can do in parallel with others. In other words, the current law of 2000 has its scope; we can use it to continue activities in the oil and gas sector. 

As a ministry, we realised that we could not make an agreement with a company or give consent on transfer of interest. If we want to go into production, then we need a new law to deal with the field management – environment, maintenance and so on. The other law is to deal with revenue. But I am glad that my colleague remembers that when we had some difficulty with taxation, we came here and I am grateful that you gave us something to use to tax those companies. 

Mr Speaker, we cannot just sit when there are issues we could handle under the current law. And this is the current law we are using. 

Hon. Alaso, we agree that we need this new law urgently so that we can proceed. That is why we are saying that we think by October, this law should be on the Floor here. I was told yesterday that these laws are concluded now from the First Parliamentary Counsel. The next thing is to take them to Cabinet and then after that they will come here. We will dissect them from first reading up to committee stage. So, you will have the opportunity to include anything that you think is not included.

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, we are aware of the “Dutch disease” and that people will want to rush into oil and leave agriculture. We have put in the new law measures to cater for whatever you have mentioned. Please, when it comes here, look at it in detail. I urge members to read the Oil and Gas Policy; it is not cast in stone and if there is anything you want to be included, please let us know.

I will wind up by looking quickly at the issues that have been raised, first by the shadow minister, to do with tariffs. I think I have already talked about that. But hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raises some very interesting issues, for example, he says every household should have electricity; we agree. However, in the next minute, he says there should not be dams built. How can we then provide those people with electricity? He talks of solar; yes, it is good but with the research so far done, a unit of solar will cost US $40 c – that is without storage. This is what I mean: If you have a solar panel and you do not have a storage unit for it, you will use it only when the sun is shining. So, if you have such a system, then you pay US $40 c. If you add storage, it is well beyond, US $50 c. So, cost does not allow us to have solar on a massive scale except on small applications.

On wind energy, the cutting speed for wind generation is 4m/s and yet our winds are normally below that. However, there is a research going on to produce turbines that can cut in less that 4m/s. 

On geothermal energy, I should have been in Nairobi this morning to present this project – we have a conference of all the ministers of 10 Rift Valley countries, right from Eritrea to Mozambique, meeting there. We have written a project and sent it there with the technical staff who will present on my behalf because of the importance of this meeting. But on the 19th we shall have a similar conference of all these 10 countries again here in Kampala and I am asking Members to take off time to attend some of the presentations on geothermal at Serena Conference Centre. We are taking seriously development of geothermal electricity because it is renewable and clean and we have capacity in the Rift Valley to the tune of 450-500 megawatts. 

On the issue of Umeme and Tullow, I think I have reported on that already. 

Now the big one: how will the water at Kiira help us in Bujagali? Kiira and Nalubale use the same water of River Nile but this is what we call in engineering “Cascade Hydropower Development”. In other words, this same water downstream four miles, will be used to generate electricity at Bujagali. We are almost finalising putting together another project of 145 megawatts at Simba Dam South. In January, the contractor for Karuma Dam North will be on site to build an underground station at Karuma. As the river continues to flow towards the Mediterranean Sea, we keep on tapping power off it; this is not unusual because it is a very old technology. We also have Ayago North and Ayago South.

On laws again, which my colleague raised yesterday, I have already extensively reported on that.

Hon. Lugolobi, yes, we need to get our country from 10 percent electrification to 20 percent in the next five years. So, we have Shs 200 billion for a start this year to begin.

To the hon. Member for Amudat, the Nakapiripirit you see on page six includes Amudat. I am sorry that the producer of this policy statement did not reflect Amudat. It is included there.

Hon. Wadri, Nyagak has never dried up, but all rivers have got their lows and highs. That is why we use a statistical method when we are planning to build power stations. We use “confidence level” and we usually take 50 percent confidence level for any river. If I may inform you, the designer of Nyagak actually left some more water in the river; we shall discuss this later.

To hon. Ekanya, on page nine: Escrow Account holds Shs 97 billion.

The other thing is the Vote for REA; this is a matter we are discussing with the committee already. ERA has a vote already and we are seeing how we can make a vote for REA but it is not a thing which should just be made in a hurry. We need to study it carefully and see how a vote will help. 

There has been a lot of say about the PS. It is a legal provision which makes the PS of the Ministry of Energy the chairman of that board but if the House wants this changed, we can look at the law and we see how we bring an amendment here. It should not be a thing that should tear down the roof.

Finally, I thank you all, hon. Members, for the continued support they have given my ministry. I thank the committee and the shadow minister with whom we interact a bit and that is why our issues are normally not controversial on this Floor. I am requesting the House to pass our budget so that we continue serving you. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity.

12.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to very much thank the chairperson and members of our committee for doing a good job. Apart from some few discrepancies, most of the issues reflected in the report are clearly the situation in the ministry.

I would also like to thank and acknowledge the response by the shadow minister, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and the members that have made remarks and compliments. Permit me to thank all the members for their very keen interest to participate in the various programmes under my sector. I am impressed by the manner in which our colleagues have taken interest in tree planting, community mobilisation for water supply and sanitation and the general debate on environment management. 

The ministry appreciates all your efforts and urges you to continue with us on this noble cause. I would like to assure you that we will do all it takes to deliver the services you require. I would also like you to know that my technical staff are here to support and answer some of the questions that I am not able to deal with –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I should not throw the House into a panic.

I will first respond to the committee report after which I will respond to hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s report and then I will respond to specific issues that have been raised here.

Let me start upfront with the issue of the budget in my ministry. This is the most under-funded ministry. Speaker after the other talked about the importance of water and environment, we cannot talk about economic transformation or water for production when the ministry is badly under-funded. The budget allocation for the Financial Year 2011/2012 is only 3.2 percent of the national budget. Each time I come into this Parliament, I go back with about 50 notes from members appealing to the ministry to help them either construct valley dams, drill or repair boreholes.
 
We cannot talk about hydro-electric power without water. We cannot talk about fisheries without water which is not polluted. Agriculture, health, education and transport all rely on water and therefore, very important. I am calling upon the hon. members here to give this ministry support so that the budget can be raised and we deliver the services that you require.

I would now like to return to the issues that were raised in the report. I will start by correcting a few errors that are in the report. Turn to page 14; on the third line after “non-wage”, insert, “Shs 65.43 billion.” On page 15, on performance (ii) after “completion of”, insert, “piped water supply at Adwari.” Again on page 15 (iv), Anaka is in Nwoya and not Amuru District. On the same page (viii), Akwera Dam is in Otuke and not Lira District and Arechek Dam is in Napak and not Moroto District. Page 16 (vi), Nakakabala Valley Tank is in Kyankwanzi and not Kiboga District.

I am going on to page 17 on rural water supply. The report states that water facilities are inadequate. It is true that some of these facilities are very old and in some places, totally inadequate. The Ministry has trained pump mechanics in every sub-county for minor repairs of boreholes. I also do realise or acknowledge that we still have shortage of trained people to conduct the repairs of the bore holes.

For operation of piped water systems, the umbrella organisations are also in Lira for Northern Uganda and Wakiso for central Uganda. Water for production on pages 17 to 18, it is not true that the cost for water for production facilities is always abnormally high. The unit cost of dams constructed by the ministry ranges between Shs 5000 to Shs 8000 per cubic meter of water storage created which is quite low compared to international costs of US $5 per cubic meter.

It should also be noted that the ministry is now constructing bulk water systems. Those are dams with capacities ranging between 1.4 to five billion litres for multipurpose water use. The cost of such facilities is generally high due to heavy earth works. They excavate gravel and clay, take them long distances and then compact them to create an impervious embankment. It is generally a costly exercise.

On functionality, the ministry has put in place a management framework for operations and maintenance of the water for production facilities. Only recently, constructed facilities are functioning except for some valley tanks that were trade off pumps that have broken down. The ministry will replace them and would like your support to acquire motorised pumps for this financial year. The ministry has also prepared a plan to rehabilitate old dams and valley tanks but the funds are still lacking but the plan has already been worked on. 

The fencing of water for production facilities constructed with public funds is illegal to fence them. The report insinuates that some of these dams have been fenced. What is usually done is that negotiations are carried out with the owners of the land, so that there is access for both people and animals to the dams.

On value for money, the recommendation that was made by the committee, the ministry jointly with the Ministry of Finance and the Auditor-General usually carry out value for money audit of these programmes. Currently, this audit is ongoing. 

The recommendation that more resources for water-stressed areas should be given – I totally concur with the committee recommendation that some resources should be increased. The provision of water in the water- stressed areas needs substantive resources. The water sector investment plan provides the investment requirements per year which can be used as a basis for allocation of resources to the ministry.

On Value Added Tax, the ministry concurs with the committee’s recommendation that VAT on water bills be exempted. The ministry will continue to discuss this with the Ministry of Finance. (Interruption)

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving me this opportunity to give information. Aware that you are new in the office, I would like to inform you that the valley tanks that you are mentioning of Kagango, of Bwenjerero and Kagamba, I may say, are not there and you are saying they are about to be commissioned. Kagamba; there is no water and it has been raining heavily. By the way, there are floods. Kagango; the dam burst and you may need to recall what happened to the dams which were being supervised by the Vice President. Hon. Minister, to save you from this embarrassment since you are new, you need to take note of this. Thank you.

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you very much, hon. Member. (Mr Kakooza rose_) No, I have got to complete this. Thank you very much for the information. You also acknowledge that the dam was there but it burst. That does not say that the dam does not exist. It did exist but there is a problem with it.

The ban on polythene material, the regulation to implement the ban on kaveera was made on the 20 August, 2010 –(Interjections)- and that is ready for implementation –(Interjections)- and I do acknowledge the fact that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order, please!

MRS BIGOMBE: There has been delay in the implementation of the ban. 

On procurement of transport and other equipment, the procurement of vehicles worth Shs 1.2 billion are a basic requirement for facilitation of project implementation. The breakdown of this is one mobile laboratory van, this is for testing water. It is a very specialised vehicle that is already equipped with facilities for testing water. It includes purchase of 50 motorcycles for sub-county forestry extension staff, one bus for Nyabyeya Forestry College, which is at the moment using a lorry for transport and you all know that Government has come out clearly to stop transportation of students on trucks and then 10 motorcycles for meteorological field staff.

On procurement of radar, the ministry concurs with the committee and requires urgent funds to procure radar for the aviation services. May be I should explain this a little bit more. This is equipment that detects weather and advises aircrafts as they come to land. It is also equipment that detects if there is a storm somewhere and communicates. Not to frighten the House, because of lack of this equipment, there have been several narrow misses.

I am going on to Vote 150: National Environment Management Authority - this is page 23 of the report. The committee raises concerns on the rapid degradation of wetlands. It is true that the degradation is ongoing and some of you have raised the same concerns here. At the moment, the ministry is in the process of restoring river banks through tree planting. The places where restoration has already started include Isingiro, Nakivale, Mukono, Namilyango, Jinja, Wanyange, Mayuge, Kyebando, Bugiri, Wakawaka, Masaka, Kitabona, Rakai, Bethlehem, Kayunga, Buganda Martyrs SSS, St Kalemba SSS and district headquarters –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the minister accepted that degradation of wetlands is on-going. She has also given us the plan for restoration. I just want clarification on the on-going degradation. How can this degradation be stopped so that as the effort is made to restore, we do not have more work to restore what is going to be re-degraded?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister about the commitment of Government towards the protection of wetlands. When you go near Kawanda Research Institution, the wetland there, which used to be a passage for water has been blocked with large tonnage of murram being poured there by Indians known as investors. These people are protected by Uganda Police. If you go there right now, you will find the place secured by Uganda Police and the people in the neighbourhood are already drowning in the swamps because the water no longer flows. 

How can you assure us, hon. Minister, that Government is determined to protect wetlands when it is using its agents to safeguard those who are degrading the wetlands?

MRS BIGOMBE: Hon. Member, if only you were patient, you would not have wasted time asking that question because I am going to address it. It is in my response. First of all, as far as wetlands are concerned, the demarcation process has commenced starting with the Greater Kampala. The demarcation for Nakivubo and Ntinda is expected to be completed in the next three months. 

One of the steps the ministry has taken to reverse degradation of wetlands and deforestation is to recruit an environment protection squad. The process has started; so far we intend to recruit 600 of them, purposely, to combat encroachment and degradation of the environment and ensure compliance with the regulations. 

On environmental pollution, it is true that environmental pollution is on the increase –(Interjections)– please, my time is being eaten up. Environmental degradation is on page 25. The capacity constraints noted on NEMA and other relevant agencies, particularly the Directorate of Water Resource Management, is mainly due to limited budget for monitoring and inspection so as to be able to regulate these charges that take place especially in the night. This area definitely will need more allocation -(Interruption)

MR OMOLO: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Hon. Minister to continue something which is not directly concerned with what the member raised? He said that the Police are guarding people who are degrading the wetland, and she is telling us that she is creating another parallel squad. Are they going to be any stronger than the Police?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a procedural point? Hon. Members, please, let us observe the rules. That is not a point of procedure. You should have sought clarification from the honourable Minister which she had a right to reject. Now, do not avoid the rejection by hiding under some other provision of the rules. You are ruled out of order, hon. Omolo.

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I was going to respond to that bit, but let me first of all draw my attention to this problem. Please, give me time to go and investigate and then I will come back and report to the House. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I still seek clarification from the hon. Minister. I have been very clear about the places; I have mentioned Kawanda Research Institution and Kyebando, which do not even require three days to carry out the investigation – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, the way I understood the minister is that you have just given her the information. She is going to investigate and come back to Parliament. Can she investigate while in this House here?

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I said and repeat that I appreciate and I am grateful for the information you have provided. But I cannot give you an answer on the spot when I do not know the situation yet. So, give me time to go and investigate and I will report back to the House. 

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Thank you, hon. Minister. You have talked about Government taking steps to protect the wetlands; good enough, they have mentioned some wetlands which are being abused. If you come to Kawempe, they have dumped Lorries of soil and they were given a green light by NEMA, which she has been talking about. The water is not flowing. Are we going to continue this way, where Government chases away encroachers and then Government itself comes and dumps truck-loads of murram blocking one of the biggest swamps that filters the water flowing to Lake Victoria? Very soon, they will come back here asking for loans to transfer pipes deeper into Lake Victoria because the water here has silted. We are doing a lot of havoc on our wetlands. What steps are you going to take to restore Lubigi swamp when people are busy building truck-loads of murram into that swamp? 

Therefore, I would like clarification - using a lot of money to dump truck-loads of - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba, can you allow the Minister to finish her presentation?

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My response to that is different from what I said earlier. I would only like to add that honourable members should not wait to report such incidences when we are already in the House or only when we are dealing with such issues as budgets. (Applause) You know where our offices are. You know the problem, but you wait until we are here that you can report it. Please, I am accessible; my office is accessible. So, please bring all these issues. You will only have the right to accuse us after we have failed to handle them.
That said –(Interruption)

MS NEBANDA: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I want more clarification on how long it will take to carry out the research to give us the report. You might tell us here that you are going to do research to get to know what is happening, but that might take like a year yet this is an urgent matter. So, what is the period this will take you?

MRS BIGOMBE: Okay, do you want me to be specific on the date and time? Okay, let me say that on Monday, the technical team will get there to start the inspection of the area.

Mr Speaker, besides the steps we are taking to establish an environmental protection force, according to the recommendations by the committee, the ministry is also in the process of having discussions with the principal judge to establish the environmental court to keep this problem. This will ensure that issues that members are raising in here can be resolved from such a court in case of any non-compliance.

Let me now move to Vote 157 for the National Forestry Authority – budget performance for the Financial Year 2010/2011 appears on page 26. The actual funds for NFA for the Financial Year 2010/2011 were Shs 7.7 billion. The actual development budget performance is at 46 percent but not 13.2 percent. NFA Board of Directors – see page 29 – comprises professionals. It also takes into consideration regional balance. Its chairman is Prof. Buyinza Mukadase, a forester and a professor at Makerere University. Other board members had their CVs submitted to Cabinet and studied before they were confirmed as board members. So, the perception that they are not professionals is not correct. 

In regard to staffing at NFA, I would like to say that most of the senior management positions have been filled. These include the director for corporate affairs, director for finance and administration, director for natural forests and human resources manager. Recruitment for the vacant positions is still ongoing. It is also our hope that we fill these positions as soon as possible so as to strengthen the activities of NFA.

In regard to the recruitment of the executive director for NFA, I would like to say that the process has dragged on for a long time. It is also true that there were some irregularities. These irregularities prompted the ministry to stop the process so that it would be restarted in a checked manner. Furthermore, we are also waiting for reports from the IGG so that the process can move as fast as possible.

On solar production grant scheme, I would like to say that this project has already been transferred to Vote 19. On the land titles for forest reserves as reported on page 33, I would like to say that the ministry strongly agrees with the committee that the land titles issued must be cancelled. We are also going to investigate the circumstances under which those land titles were issued. And the ministry concurs with the committee’s recommendation that NFA has a deficit and consequently should be supported by the Government.

That is the response to the committee’s report. I would like to ask for more time to enable me respond to hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s issue on the monitoring of funds. I would like to say that to address that, among other things, the ministry is setting up a good governance working group. It is also setting up a functional sector working group. In addition, the ministry is holding annual sector reviews involving all stakeholders. The ministry is also preparing quarterly performance reports submitted to the Office of the Prime Minister.

He also raised an issue on climate change. On this, I would like to say that the ministry has already established a climate change unit that reports directly to the permanent secretary and among other responsibilities, to spearhead the development of the Climate Change Policy and coordinate both mitigation and adaptation action by the different players.

On the issue of synergies, in conjunction with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries with respect to water production, the ministry is responsible for all farm functions while that of Agriculture is responsible for on-farm functions. Permit me to say that there is really no duplication and as a matter of fact, the two ministries had a meeting and agreed on the responsibilities.

On the question of high water tariffs from the National Water and Sewerage Corporation supplies, I would like to point out that the main reason for increased tariffs is the increasing cost of production of water. This is due to the high levels of pollution. But also the other factors include the existence of Value Added Tax and the high costs of power and chemicals. However, I would like to inform the House that National Water and Sewerage Corporation charges a subsidised rate for the poor at Shs 25 per jerrican.

In regard to irrigation, it is true that at the moment, there is a stand-alone irrigation policy. However, chapter six of the National Water and Sewerage Cooperation policy provides for clear allocation, planning and management of water for agricultural productivity including irrigation. 

On the issue of oil and gas, although the minister has already addressed it, I just would like to assure the House that preparation of the oil spill contingency plan is ongoing and it involves all stakeholders. It will be ready before production commences. 

On the issue of Mabira, the truth is that no formal presentation has been made to Parliament. At the moment, what we are reacting to is what is reported by the media. Therefore, I cannot involve you in the discussion of Mabira because so far it is all hearsay -(Interjections)- it is all in the media. No documentation has been presented to Parliament regarding Mabira so we cannot discuss it. (Hon. Wadri rose_) If you give me time, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kindly state the point on which you rise.

MR WADRI: I am seeking clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But then you need to state it before you press the microphone, hon. Kassiano.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. And before I get to that, I would like to say that we should not trivialise the issue of Mabira. This Parliament enacted the Whistle Blower’s Act and therefore we cannot take it for granted that any information that we get through the press is hearsay. We should interest ourselves in that. Can I seek this clarification from the honourable minister; if it is just hearsay that the President has not vowed to give away Mabira, why hasn’t Government come out to say the President has been quoted out of context and that it is not the position of Government to dispose of Mabira? Can the Minister clarify on that? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as if what hon. Wadri has said is not enough, under Article 245 of the Constitution, Parliament has an obligation and duty to protect and preserve the environment from abuse, pollution and degradation. I have come here on two consecutive occasions to report the allegations attributed to the President vowing to give away Mabira forest reserve to SCOUL.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, according to rule 67 sub-rule (2); the hon. Minister has said there is nothing substantially before the House in the form in which the House can debate. And we have a clear rule on anticipation. It is prohibited by these rules to anticipate issues that might come before Parliament and engage in debate. (Applause) Why are we anticipating? There is no matter substantially before the House on Mabira.

MRS BIGOMBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If you would allow me a few minutes to respond to some of the issues that were specifically raised by the Members today –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please allow the honourable minister to finish. We still have a lot of business to transact. 

MRS BIGOMBE: The grant for sanitation; all districts are allocated Shs 2 billion except six new districts that will be included under Global Sanitation Grant under the Ministry of Health. You can see page 430 to 432 of the policy statement where it talks about the grant that is to be given to other districts. 

Sanitation and hygiene are a shared responsibility between the Ministry of Water and Environment, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Water and Environment was allocated Shs 2 billion as sanitation grant to districts. This of course is peanuts as far as work on sanitation is concerned. Sanitation is sometimes treated as an orphan.

It is also not true that Karamoja has been left out by the ministry in provision of water. Clearly there is allocation of funds for water in the ministry for Karamoja and NUSAF. 

From the MP of Kween - Kween District will receive conditional grant for water and sanitation development like all other districts. Boreholes will be drilled in Ngenge. District headquarters are provided for by the ministry and will be included in plans in the next financial year -(Interjections)- I am not taking anymore clarification, Mr Speaker, please protect me. 

The hon. Member for Amudat; the ministry together with the district and Ministry of Education and Sports will undertake detailed studies to get appropriate technology and find out why drilling of the boreholes failed and develop another method of providing water.

Plans to maintain boreholes; currently the ministry is conducting an assessment in all the districts to find out the conditions of the boreholes. If they are broken down, to find out whether they should be repaired or not because some of the equipment is very old and may require modern equipment. 

The honourable member from Usuk asked about valley dams. The ministry has plans for rehabilitation of old dams including Katakwi District but the ministry lacks funds at the moment. 

For Nyabushozi, the ministry has deployed water for production equipment in Kiruhura and it is being used on a co-sharing basis and it will be shared with Lyantonde and some other districts. 

On the encroachment of wetlands in Namayingo District, the ministry continues to support local governments to protect wetlands with the introduction of the Environmental Protection Force. We hope that enforcement will take place. 

The MP from Kaabong - the dams require $20 million to construct. The ministry is trying to mobilise funds to construct the dams but we also hope the House will give us support in mobilising the funds. 

I would also like you to realise that the budget for water for production is only Shs 21.69 billion, which again is peanuts if you look at what we need to construct dams –(Interjections)- it was him who said that we can answer some questions but now he is sending me away. I do not understand this.

I would like to end by stating that the ministry is ready to implement the relevant recommendations of the committee. We welcome your participation in the drive towards sustainable management of this country’s environment and natural resources.

1.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Kafabusa: I beg to lay a copy of the report of the committee on the Table. Most of the issues were directed at the ministers and the specific ones are to do with the process of creating a vote for Rural Electrification Agency (REA) raised by hon. Ekanya. I would like to assure hon. Ekanya that the process is ongoing and the committee is going to follow up on this, you will be informed as a House about the progress. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we are going to appropriation, may I get assurance from the Chairperson or the Minister that during appropriation, we are going to appropriate money in that specific vote. The process is very simple because it entails just the Accountant General issuing a vote. 

MR KAJARA: I want to clarify on the issue of a Vote for the Rural Electrification Agency. The Ministry of Energy did write to the ministry of finance requesting for a vote to be created and the Accountant-General took steps to create a vote and gave it a number. The same ministry of energy wrote back to say that they should not have that vote for the time being because they would survive on subvention. It is on record that the ministry of energy wrote to that of Finance requesting that.

MR KAFABUSA: That is why I was saying, let us actually see how far the process has gone and we will be able to get back to you. When I am saying that we shall come back to the House, it does not mean that we shall take a whole year. 

On the issue of having the legal framework for oil and gas production; I think this is a matter of urgency and we all agree about it. I am happy that we are all moving in tandem over this issue. The ministry is notified to move expeditiously so that we can have this legal framework. This can be about new laws or the revision of the existing laws; we need to have them before the House.

Water for production; this is as important as water for human consumption and therefore we need to seriously advocate for an irrigation policy in this country. This is something for which we should move together as a House and I think the relevant ministries should come to us with this policy.

The Saleh report has actually been alluded to several times in our interface with various stakeholders in the energy sector. When you look at page nine of our report, we have strongly recommended that the Saleh report contains proposals and best practices which should be taken on by the sector or by Government.

On water for municipalities –

MS NEBANDA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman, for giving way. I sought a clarification from the hon. Minister who sent me to you to get an answer. The clarification is about Parliament’s query about the Electricity Regulatory Board. A committee was formed and produced a report in October 2010. When I looked at the Electricity Act in sections 5 and 17, it mandates the minister to react accordingly. He has the powers because these people are under the Government. Since the report came, almost one year ago, what has been done? When the minister sent me to you, I thought maybe you are the state minister but I realised that you are the chairman. What have they done up to now?

MR KAFABUSA: I think the report has not come to the House. It is not correct to say that the Saleh report has come to the House. There is a process through which a report like that one comes to the House. It has to go to Cabinet, there is a White Paper that has to be prepared and it is the White Paper that comes to the House. As far as I know, we have not got that report here yet. It is still an internal document but the best practices that you are alluding to are enshrined in that report and already Electricity Regulatory Authority is actually implementing some of those practices and when we called them they indicated to us so. But we can demand that the report be presented to the House through the proper procedures.

Water for municipalities, town councils and other urban areas; there is a study going on to make provisions for National Water and Sewerage Corporation to cover these areas. We will bring this report to the House at a later stage.

As I said earlier, most of the issues were ably responded to by the two ministers. May I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to present the report? I would also like to thank the members of the Natural Resources Committee for their enormous input in this report. I wish also to thank the ministers in the Energy and Water sectors for their cooperation in shaping this report. This also goes for the shadow minister for this sector. I would also like to acknowledge and appreciate the contributions and support by the hon. Members of the House to this report. 

Mr Speaker, I move under rule 177(2) of our Rules of Procedure that the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2011/2012 be adopted. I beg to report. (Mr Lugolobi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do you rise for?

MR LUGOLOBI: An amendment, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you a member of the committee? 

MR LUGOLOBI: I did not sign the report. 

1.21
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, MOROTO MUNICIPLITY, MOROTO): Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of amendment on the recommendation on page 8 that a forensic investigation be carried out to, among others, ascertain the extent of energy losses, Umeme’s level of investment in the power sector, income tax reporting of Umeme, metering system and intra implications of thermo energy suppliers of the Government and submit a report or its findings to Parliament within a period of two months. This amendment that I am adding here arises from the fraudulent acts which are taking place within the Energy sector and more so the losses that our country, the industries, the business sector are incurring because of the load shedding. So, we want to have this report within a period of two months. I beg to move. 

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, I think we already have an ad hoc committee which is going to look at this but I stand to be advised. Are we going to harmonise this because if you give us two months and the ad hoc committee is also given three months, I don’t know how we shall move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this House approved a motion which led to the creation of an ad hoc committee to do the same thing. It would therefore not be proper to again give this mandate and a timeframe to the committee responsible for this. You had an amendment?

1.23
MR AMOS LUGOLOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am proposing an amendment on the recommendation on page 23 which reads that “the committee recommends that NEMA expedites the process of physical demarcation of wetlands throughout the country and steps up its efforts to protect lake shores and river banks.” In my presentation, I mentioned that River Musamya has been completely eroded. So, considering that this problem continues to happen at such a sporadic pace, I propose that instead of mentioning lake shores, the statement should read “…to protect existing lakes and rivers…” because that would include the lake shores and river banks. 

I had a second proposal – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with that first? You cannot do a double amendment. Can I hear the chairperson on this particular amendment? 

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, I think that is a good point and I concur with him. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, we will take out banks and say “…protect lakes and rivers.” 

MR LUGOLOBI: Mr Speaker, the second amendment is on page 24. Considering again the pace at which our environmental resources are being degraded, I suggest that the creation of this force should be given a timeframe and I am proposing that after the full stop, we add another sentence that “…the force should be in place beginning this Financial Year 2011/2012.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are already three months into the financial year.

MR LUGOLOBI: Mr Speaker, in bullet 2(i), there is an indication that Government has started the process of recruiting an environmental protection force - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am saying is that we are already three months into the Financial Year and you are still talking about the beginning; or are we talking about within the financial year? 

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, that is acceptable and I concur because it is already provided for, anyway. 

1.27
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The amendment I want to add is still in concurrence with what hon. Lugolobi said. I realised that they are talking of lake shores and river banks but there are areas that I know in this country where there are streams of bigger capacities although they are not gazetted as rivers that have been depleted. I think it would be right for us to add this –(Interjections)- these are actually bigger streams that have a direct implication on the livelihood of the people on to this recommendation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And I am sure people are going to talk about swamps too. (Laughter)

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, I don’t know whether they are streams but I think these are seasonal water channels because if they are big, then they qualify to be rivers. They are either big or small rivers. I don’t see why we shouldn’t say streams or wetlands. I am reluctant to actually take on that amendment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What would be the word that takes care of all those situations? Wouldn’t wetlands do?

MR KAFABUSA: Probably, we would say, “water bodies” to mean lakes, rivers, streams, etc. If it is acceptable, then we can move in that direction. 

MR ATIKU: The reason I brought this is the municipality and the district of Arua depend on a stream; that is Enyau. It is not gazetted as a river, it is just a water body which is being used to supply water to the whole of Arua Town and it is in this interest that I am raising this issue because some of these water bodies have not really been clearly identified. I think it would be in our interest to put it in general terms and have “water bodies” so that they cannot be left out. Thank you. 

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, it seems there is value addition and there is no harm in adding value to what we already have. I accept. 

1.29
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, mine is an amendment on page 29 (ii) regarding the NFA Board of Directors. That first sentence on (ii) brought in a very big allegation. “Even now when the NFA board of directors is finally duly constituted, it continues to lack a tinge of professionalism.” The minister in her response rebutted that allegation that the Board is actually a professional one. Therefore that lack of a tinge of professionalism was not rebutted by the chairman finally. I therefore move that we delete the first sentence of (ii) since the minister explained that the Board has professionals. I beg to move. 

MR KAFABUSA: Yes, I concur with the minister and I do accept hon. Epetait’s proposal. There is no harm in removing it. I accept it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. (Hon. Ssekikubo rose_) Hon. Member, all these are amendments? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I would like to revisit page 23 on the recommendation that NEMA expedites the process of physical demarcation and restoration of wetlands throughout the country. If you follow the spirit of the debate on the Floor, Members were concerned about the arbitrariness of the manner in which these wetlands have been abused and degraded -(Interjections)- page 23. 

I would like us to have physical demarcation and restoration - say “restitutio integram” to apply even on the wetlands because this debate does not mean we sanction the harm that has been done. The spirit in this House is to restore what has been degraded after the physical demarcation and then the restoration should take place.

MR KAFABUSA: Accepted, Mr Speaker.

1.32
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make an amendment by way of deletion and insertion on page 4 where it is titled “Budget allocation for financial year 2011/2012.” Just after the numbers Shs 1,202.49 billion, we delete the word “billion” and insert trillion -(Interjections)- delete “billion” and insert “trillion”. I think when you go back to the statement you will find that what we are referring to is a trillion because you will find non-wage has 980.63 billion -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is that? 

MR CHEMASWET: That is page 4 just after the title, “Budget allocation for financial year 2011/2012”. The 980 billion is on the upper side. Now, 1,202 cannot maintain the word “billion”. It maintains the word “trillion”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, when they put it as - because what that figure is saying is that it is 1,000 billion. So, it is still billion. What they have put here is 1,200 billion which is a trillion. That is true. But here it is ok. It does not need to be amended. It is 1.2 trillion but 1,200 billion. So there is no harm. 

1.35
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I want to amend the recommendation on - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Propose an amendment.

MS NAMUGWANYA: I would like to propose an amendment on the recommendation on page 18 under “Water for production”. The committee recommended that Government prioritises and allocates more resources to bulk water supply systems. This is what I want to amend so that we recommend the purchase of machines for construction and maintenance of water facilities in the districts. (Applause)

I propose this because I had an experience in Mubende where we had one valley dam which required de-silting but the bills of quantities read Shs 3 billion. I think it will become much cheaper for Government to purchase these machines and give them to districts and the districts do the maintenance and construction of the water facilities. Or they can even be put at regional level. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think in the last Parliament, we pronounced ourselves on water for production and Parliament took a loan strategically to buy equipment for almost 111 districts. So, maybe the minister could have updated us on the process because some districts have got while others have not. And it was a strategy of Government that they increase water for production and the loan was passed and the minister for water could have given us the update now. 

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, I agree with the proposal of actually having this money. We discussed this in the committee that this money be put to the use of purchasing equipment for various districts and I think we can amend that to reflect the understanding that transpired in the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, hon. Nebanda. 

1.36
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I want to make some recommendations. If you go to page 8 - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to propose an amendment?

MS NEBANDA: Yes, an amendment. When you go to page 8, where the committee recommends that an investigation should be carried out among other sectors - the extent of energy losses. Before carrying out this other investment, if you go to point 2, it still says that in 2009, Government commissioned an inquiry into the escalating electricity costs in the country with the view to reduce the tariffs. This commission came up with pertinent recommendations, that is, the famous Gen. Saleh Report. But up to now, Government has made no effort to address them.

So, before they set up this, I want to add something that this report should be brought to this House and they also give us some explanation why Government did not address the issues in the first report. Because if these investigations are done, the report will not come out and we will not know what the Government had not addressed. So, let that report also be brought before this other one is brought.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did I hear somebody say that the report was laid before this Parliament? By whom? 

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I did not want to talk because I am a member of this a committee but allow me to give information -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was the report laid before this House?

MR MUJUNI: This is what I am giving you. Hon. Baryayanga, by way of information, laid the Saleh Report before this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it is in the possession of the House now? Then the committee should pick it up from there because it is within there and that was the basis on which this ad hoc committee was set up. So, the matter is taken care of, hon. Nebanda. Any other matter on that? Yes, I saw the hon. Member rising.

1.39
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): My major concern is about the budget. I am of the opinion that we should include specific –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the amendment you are proposing, hon. Member?

MR LUBEGA: An item for repairing and maintaining all these -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the specific amendment you are proposing?

MR LUBEGA: This is my observation, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please sit. Can I put the question that the report as amended be adopted? I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is 20 minutes to 2.00 p.m. Let us take a break and come back to start with finance. We have all been waiting for this particular report on finance and I am sure when we come back, the House will be full because there are serious matters that we have to engage in this afternoon.

Before we do that, hon. Members, on a sad note, death has occurred of the Agong, wife of His Highness the Won Nyaci of Lango, Won Deo Yosam Odur. She passed away suddenly yesterday in Apac. Funeral arrangements will be announced later. Members of the Lango Parliamentary Group are invited for an emergency meeting to be held immediately after this plenary in the Speaker’s dining room. May her soul rest in eternal peace!

Signed hon. Benson Obua Ogwal; on behalf of the Lango Parliamentary Group.

May I ask hon. Members to rise and observe a moment of silence?

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

(The House was suspended at 1.42 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.53 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT ON THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

2.53
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, Rule 133 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates sessional committees to critically examine Government’s recurrent and development budget estimates and to make recommendations for general debate in the House. Pursuant to this rule, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development examined seven votes under its jurisdiction. These include: Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Vote 130 -Treasury Operations; Vote 108 – the National Planning Authority; Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor-General; Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority; Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics and; Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority.

The report highlights the findings of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development during its dealings with the seven votes and gives a brief summary of budgetary allocations for the Financial Year 2011/2012, observations and recommendations made accordingly on each Vote.

Please allow me to go to the observations on the respective votes. On Vote 008, Vote Function 1401: macro-economic policy and management programme, the proposed allocation is Shs 58.73 billion reflecting additional funding of Shs 5.956 billion against the Financial Year 2010/2011 approved budget. This was on account of new projects coming on board. These include Support to National Authorising Officer (Shs 1.67 billion), Belgo-Uganda Study Consultancy Fund (Shs 1.52 billion) and FINMAP Component I (Shs 1.95 billion).

Under the same vote function, we have the Tax Appeals Tribunal. The proposed allocation to Tax Appeals Tribunal is Shs 998 million. The committee notes that initiating amendments to the Tax Tribunal Act and translating the Client’s Charter into two local languages (Lugbara and Ateso) are among the planned activities for the Financial Year 2011/2012. The two activities mentioned will be carried out at a cost of Shs 60 million. The committee observes that initiating amendments is the mandate of the ministry and not Tax Appeals Tribunal per se, while translating Clients’ Charter into local languages cannot be an urgent priority in light of the economic challenges being faced now. The committee recommends that only Shs 938 million be allocated to the Tax Appeals Tribunal and the balance of Shs 60 million be reallocated to other priorities.

On tax exemptions, the committee observes that Uganda’s domestic revenue mobilisation which is estimated at about 13 percent of GDP is substantially lower than the Sub Saharan average of about 20 percent. The committee further observes that issuance of tax exemptions and waivers worsen the already narrow tax base. 

The committee recommends that the ministry explores more policy interventions to broaden the tax base and minimise the issuance of tax exemptions and waivers. The committee further recommends that the ministry reviews the performance of the existing tax exemptions and waivers and their impact on the economy.

Regarding the Capital Markets Authority public education campaign, the committee observes the budget allocation for Capital Markets Authority in the Financial Year 2011/2012 is Shs 2.5 billion of which Shs 126.345 million has been allocated to undertake public education campaigns. The committee feels that Shs 63.17 million can kick-start the campaign. The committee therefore recommends that out of the proposed allocation of Shs 126.345 million for the public education campaigns, Shs 63.17 million be reallocated to other priority interventions. 
 
For the National Lotteries Board, the proposed allocation is Shs 200 million. The committee however notes that there is no board in place as stipulated in the Act and the required regulation for the National Lotteries Board has never been laid on the Table. The committee further notes that national lotteries are a potential for revenue generation but its management structure is ambiguous. The committee was informed that the board is run by only three members of staff. 

The committee observes that the activities of the National Lotteries Board are not clear and therefore, monitoring its performance is a challenge. The committee recommends that the National Lotteries Board be restructured and that out of the proposed allocation of Shs 200 million for the National Lotteries Board, only Shs 100 million be appropriated and Shs 100 million be reallocated to other priorities. 

As for the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal (NPART), the proposed allocation is Shs 450 million of which residual winding up activities of NPART take Shs 219,480,000, staff wage of NPART Trust is Shs 124,764,000 and staff wage of NPART Tribunal is Shs 105,761,000. The committee noted that during the last financial year, Parliament appropriated funds for the residual winding up of NPART and agreed to reject any further request for more funds. 

The committee is concerned that time and again the committee is informed that the Bill to wind up NPART is before Cabinet. The committee recommends that within six months, the minister should table the winding-up Bill before Parliament. The minister should also report on the status of assets under NPART and incomes recovered, if any, from the sale or hire of these assets. The committee further recommends that only Shs 250 million be allocated to NPART and the balance of Shs 200 million be re-allocated to other priority areas.

Vote Function 1402: The proposed allocation to Budget Preparation, Execution and Monitoring Programme is Shs 12.917 billion, reflecting additional funding of Shs 2.59 billion against the Financial Year 2010/2011 approved budget. This was on account of a new project, FINMAP Component II resulting into Shs 3.768 billion coming on board.

On budget release performance, the committee noted that resource mobilisation had a satisfactory performance. Tax revenue collection amounted to Shs 5.114 trillion against the target of Shs 5.034 trillion, representing a performance of 101.6 percent. Non-Tax Revenue amounted to Shs 86.3 billion which represents a performance of 94 percent against the set target of Shs 91.5 billion while external resources mobilisation amounted to Shs 2,681.2 billion representing a performance of 130 percent against the set target of Shs 2,051.6 billion. The committee however notes that despite this satisfactory performance, releases to ministries, departments and agencies performed below the programmed allocations on account of supplementary pressures that suppressed several spending agencies. The committee urges Government to observe budget discipline to avoid budget distortions.

Regarding the alignment of budget strategy to the National Development Plan, the committee observes that the Department of Public Administration under Budget Preparation, Execution and Monitoring Vote Function plans to align all sector budgets in the economy to the National Development Plan. This activity is also being undertaken by the National Planning Authority and therefore appears to be duplication. The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 90 million that had been budgeted for this purpose under budget preparation, execution and monitoring be re-allocated to other priorities.

As for national budget translation, the committee observed that the ministry intends to translate the national budget at a cost of Shs 341.52 million into local languages of Luo, Ateso, Luganda and Runyakitara in the Financial Year 2011/2012. This activity falls under FINMAP Component II (Project 1197b). The committee further observes that this activity is not a priority especially in light of the country’s budget constraints. In this regard, the committee recommends that Shs 341.52 million intended for this activity be re-allocated. 

Vote Function 1403: Public Financial Management

The proposed allocation to this vote function is Shs 43.2 billion representing an additional funding of Shs 16.3 billion on account of FINMAP II Components 3, 4 and 5. The committee is satisfied with the activities under this vote function and recommends that Shs 43.2 billion be appropriated.

Vote Function 1404: Development Policy, Research and Monitoring
All these are under one vote, Ministry of Finance.

Presidential Initiative Banana on Industrial Development (PIBID)  

The committee observed that despite PIBID’s continuous budget allocations or funding since financial year 2005/06, the initiative has not transited into a sustainable commercial venture. Efforts by the committee to have a report laid before Parliament on the status of the factory and the transitional or future plans of the initiative were futile. 

The committee further observed that there is lack of clarity in terms of supervision of PIBID. The committee noted with great concern when the Executive Director of PIBID informed the committee that she only reports to the President and not the line Minister through which PIBID funds are appropriated. The board of the Initiative was also appointed by the President and is supervised solely by the President. 

While the committee notes with appreciation the strong commitment of the President to support research and scientific initiatives, their managers should not use his name to avoid the oversight “eye” of the relevant line ministries. Further still PIBID is faced with accountability issues according to the Auditor-General’s report of 2010. 

The committee further appreciates some of the achievements PIBID has registered although the initiative needs a clear transitional plan towards a sustainable commercial venture. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should strengthen its oversight role over PIBID and ensure clear structure of accountability in this transitional period.

The committee therefore recommends that out of the proposed budget of Shs 10.2 billion for the Financial Year 2011/2012, only Shs 5 billion be appropriated to PIBID as a transitional plan to a sustainable commercial venture is being prepared and the balance of Shs 5.2 billion is re-allocated to other priority areas. 

Sub-County Development Project: 0998

The proposed allocation to this project is Shs 5.88 billion. The committee observes that there is no legal and policy framework in place to effectively guide implementation of the activities under this project. In absence of the legal and policy framework, the objectives of the project cannot be achieved.

The committee therefore recommends that the implementation of this project be stayed until a clear framework is in place and consequently the Shs 5.88 billion of the projected be reallocated to other priorities.

Vote Function 1406: Investment and Private Sector Vote Function

Enterprise Uganda - Youth Entrepreneurship 
The committee observes that a proposed budget of Shs 4.8 billion has been allocated to Enterprise Uganda for youth training in entrepreneurship skills which will take Shs 2.872 billion, staff salaries for Enterprise Uganda Shs 927 million and youth training programmes with Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) and the Uganda Small Scale Industry Association –USSIA Shs 1 billion.  

The committee further observes that although Shs 1.8 billion was appropriated to Enterprise Uganda for entrepreneurship training in the Financial Year 2010/2011, the impact of the training could not be ascertained. The committee also observed that the current training framework of Enterprise Uganda is ambiguous and other potential training institutions like universities have not been considered to carry out entrepreneurship trainings.  

In this regard, the committee recommends that a clear training framework be developed and agreed upon by all stakeholders, other tertiary institutions like universities be allowed to compete to undertake entrepreneurship training and a study on the impact of prior trainings by Enterprise Uganda be carried out. 

The committee further recommends that out of the proposed allocation of Shs 4.8 billion, only Shs 2.9 billion be reallocated to other priority areas.

Soroti Fruit Factory 

The committee observed that the budget allocation for the Soroti Fruit Factory was reduced from Shs 5 billion in the Financial Year 2010/2011 to Shs 2 billion in the Financial Year 2011/2012 in anticipation of a grant from the Korean International Cooperation Agency (KOICA). The committee further observed that although the Government of Uganda secured a turnkey grant from the Korean International Cooperation Agency, these funds have not yet been disbursed. 

The committee notes that this factory is critical for value addition of fruits and in line with the Government’s policy of value addition. Whereas the committee appreciates the proposal, it recommends that Government reinstates the budget allocation for the Soroti Fruit Factory of Shs 5 billion until funds from the KOICA have been received. 

Uganda Development Corporation (UDC)

The Uganda Development Corporation was established by the Uganda Development Corporation Act, 1952. According to Section 6 of the Act, the operations of the corporation shall be managed and controlled by a board of directors. The committee observed that this provision of the Act has not been complied with since no board is in place, and therefore, this undermines the supervision or control of the corporation. The committee further observes that UDC has never laid its annual accounts before Parliament as required by law.

In this regard, the committee recommends that a board be put in place and a review of the UDC Act of 1952 is undertaken in light of new legal and policy developments the country has experienced since 1952. The committee further recommends that the current acting Executive Director and the skeleton staff in place be confirmed so as to enable them work in a stable environment and cause them to be more committed and efficient.
 
Private Public Partnerships (PPP)

The committee observed that the PPP Bill has not been submitted to Parliament despite its urgency and the huge PPP projects being implemented. The committee was informed that the PPP policy was in place but that the Bill is still before Cabinet. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the PPP Bill be expedited and submitted to Parliament at least in the Financial Year 2011/2012 and that no further PPP commitments should be entered into before the enactment of the PPP law.

Vote Function 1408: Micro-finance

Rural Financial Services (Project 0031)

The committee observed that the rural financial services project is faced with a number of challenges like violation of Memorandum of Understanding between UCSCU and SAACOs; poor programme asset distribution strategy; delayed delivery of MoU with SACCOs that have impacted negatively on SACCO performance; among others. The committee further observed that the budget allocation for this programme has increased from Shs 10.25 billion in the Financial Year 2010/2011 to Shs 11.182 billion in the Financial Year 2011/2012 reflecting an additional allocation of Shs 923 million. 

The committee also notes that the identified challenges signify lack of value for money previously appropriated and therefore the proposed increment is not justified. The committee recommends that the proposed increment of Shs 923 million be reallocated as the ministry explores strategies to resolve the above identified challenges.  

Micro-finance Legal Framework

The committee observes that micro-finance institutions have grown substantially in terms of number and size of portfolio and some of the MFIs have started engaging in lending operations. However, these institutions are operating without supervision and a comprehensive regulatory framework.

The committee recommends that the ministry expedites the regulatory framework, that is, a comprehensive micro-finance Bill - Tier 4 Bill, for the micro-finance industry including the SACCOs in order to strengthen the protection of clients’ savings.

Vote Function 1449: Policy, Planning and Support Services 
 
National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) 

The committee observed that the budget allocation in the Financial Year 2011/12 for NEC Subvention and Project is Shs 2.8 billion. The proposed allocation to NEC services is Shs 2 billion of which Shs 1.9 billion is for staff salaries, Shs 0.1 billion is for other operational costs. The proposed allocation to NEC project (0046) is Shs 0.8 billion for provision of tractor services, bush clearing services, agriculture workshops and promotion of tractor use. 

The committee recommends that the budget allocation for promotion of tractor use and monitoring of farmers of Shs 200 million be reallocated as these activities are duplicated. 

The committee further observed that NEC is a commercial arm of the Ministry of Defence. The committee is concerned about the increasing absence or lack of commitment by the Ministry of Defence in supervising NEC and appointing a board which is currently not in place. 

Custodian Board services

The committee observed with concern that the Auditor-General had raised queries on the manner in which resources of the Custodian Board were being managed. The committee noted that a lot of funds and assets are unaccounted for to-date. In this regard, the committee had earlier recommended that the Minister of Finance who chairs the custodian board tables a report before Parliament on the management of the Board in line with the Act highlighting a list of assets as they existed by 2001. It should also be noted that, at the interface with the ministry, the minister was not able to provide information to the committee on the current management of the Custodian Board. The committee therefore, recommends that funds amounting to Shs 200 million that had been allocated to the Custodian Board be reallocated to other key priority areas. 

Donor off-budget projects

The committee has observed that resources for donor off-budget projects are not captured in the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee notes that without financial details and activities of donor off-budget projects or interventions, the committee is not in position to scrutinize effectively for resource and activity duplication. The committee, therefore, recommends that all sectors should always include off-budget interventions or support in their policy briefs to Parliament.

Gender and Equity

The committee observed that the ministry does not have an explicit gender policy and it has not conducted a gender audit to determine the priority actions required. The committee recommends that the ministry undertakes a gender audit to establish the key gender issues in the ministry and also provide recommendations for action.  

Appropriation-in-Aid

According to Section 17 (1) of the Budget Act, a minister responsible for any Vote on Appropriation-in-Aid shall make a quarterly report to Parliament on the manner in which the funds from that vote are expended. The committee observed that this provision of the Budget Act is not being complied with. The committee recommends that the ministry complies fully with the Budget Act in regard to Appropriation in Aid.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation

The committee recommends that Shs 14.9 billion be reallocated in total from Vote 008 to National Planning Authority, Uganda Bureau of Statistics, Office of the Auditor-General, PPDA and URA to cater for their urgent funding gaps as per the Annex 1 and 2. We recommend that only Shs 303.149 billion be appropriated to Vote 008 which is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Vote 130 - Treasury Operations

I will not go through the mandate and performance and will go to page 18. We have an observation there on that vote function and our observation is on the Contingency Fund Bill. The committee observed that whereas Article 157 of the Constitution of the Republic Of Uganda establishes the Contingency Fund, to operationalise this provision, the Contingency Fund Bill is required. The committee recommends that the Contingency Fund Bill be expedited to have the law enacted.

Vote 108 – National Planning Authority

Its mandate is there, budget performance is well captured in the report. I will go straight to observations on page 21 and our first observation is on the governance of NPA.

The committee observed that despite its earlier recommendation for the governance structure of NPA to be streamlined, it still remains flawed. The board and the management are fused. This causes a mix-up in the accountability process. The committee had earlier observed and queried the competences of the key authority staff like the accountant. Consequently, the committee asked the Auditor-General to carry out a management audit on NPA and awaits this report. The committee reiterates its recommendation that the NPA Act, 2002 be reviewed to rectify this governance constraint.

The 30-year national vision and 10-year outline perspective plan: Subsequent to the adoption of the national vision statement of “A transformed Ugandan society from peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30-years”, NPA took on the task of developing a 30-year shared national vision and 10-year outline perspective plan in 2007. The committee observed however, that these two frameworks are yet to be finalised or produced. The committee recommends that NPA expedites the production of the 30-year national vision in this financial year.

African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM)

The committee notes that NPA is tasked to coordinate the country’s self assessment exercise under the APRM which is one of the initiatives under the NEPAD. In this regard, NPA ensures that the integration and harmonisation of recommendations of the APRM Country Review Report and the Ugandan National Programme of Action (POA) are part and parcel of the national, sectoral and local government planning frameworks.
 
However, the committee is not convinced that NPA is effectively carrying out this task and therefore, the committee recommends that NPA makes a comprehensive brief to Parliament on the coordination of the APRM initiative in Uganda. 

Uganda Country Capacity Building Programme 

The committee notes that NPA is tasked to coordinate the implementation of the Uganda Country Capacity Building Programme (UCCBP) which focuses at addressing capacity constraints in policy formulation, planning, accountability and monitoring and evaluation. The committee was informed that in financial year 2009/2010 and financial year 2010/2011, mid-term evaluations of the programme were undertaken to assess the extent to which the programme contributed to economic governance. However, the committee is not convinced that the mid-term reviews are having an impact on improving the effectiveness of the UCCBP as capacity constraints like monitoring and evaluation are not being addressed. 

National Manpower Survey

The committee observed that the national manpower survey is yet to be undertaken irrespective of funding commitments made. The UCCBP and the EAC Secretariat committed to contribute US $193,000 and US $90,000 respectively towards the survey and Government of Uganda committed to provide co-funding. The committee further observed that the stakeholder modalities between NPA and UBOS were not clear. Both institutions were somehow in conflict. The committee however, reiterates its earlier recommendation on the need to fast-track the national manpower survey in Uganda in line with other East African partner countries and the stakeholder modalities be clarified as a matter of urgency.


Alignment of the budget with the National Development Plan 

The committee observed that although sector and local government framework papers (BFPs) are being aligned with the NDP priorities and interventions, the sector strategic and investment plans of some sectors are yet to be reviewed and aligned to the NDP.

The committee recommends that NPA prioritises the review of all sectors strategic and investment plans that have not been reviewed in a bid harmonise the planning framework. 

The National Development Plan, Monitoring and Evaluation Framework/System

The NDP M&E framework outlines an integrated system for monitoring the progress on the NDP at both the central and local government levels. The committee observed that only a draft NDP M&E framework was produced in the Financial Year 2010/2011. The committee therefore, recommends that the final NDP M&E framework is produced in this financial year as any more delays will undermine the effective implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the NDP.

Recommended Budgetary Allocations to the Vote of the National Planning Authority

The committee recommends that Shs 2.3 billion be reallocated from the Vote 008 to NPA to cater for the funding gaps for the National Spatial Plan and the wage shortfall. The committee recommends that a total of Shs 12.624 billion be appropriated to Vote 108 - NPA.

Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor-General

Its mandate is there, budget performance is there, performance for key planned outputs is also there. We move to page 27 about observations and recommendations in regard to that vote of the Auditor-General.

Audit of Private Public Partnerships

Section 18 of the National Audit Act, 2008 mandates the Office of the Auditor-General to inquire into the expenditure of public monies disbursed, advanced or guaranteed to a private organisation or body in which Government has no controlling interest. However, the Auditor-General is constrained with some of the PPPs undertakings especially where public funds are mixed with company private funds with no clear separation of accounts. The committee notes that Government is already implementing PPPs. 

The ambiguity surrounding the PPPs affects the smooth work of the Auditor-General. The challenge with implementing this mandate is that the Office of the Auditor-General finds it extremely difficult to examine only public monies without having to examine the entire accounts of the private organisation in question which contravenes the Companies Act. 

The committee recommends that as the PPP law is being drafted, guidelines should be put in place to ensure that accountabilities of public monies in private organisations is streamlined for easy identification, auditing and accountability. 

Outsourcing Audit Services, which is called consultancy; the committee observed that due to capacity challenges and the ever increasing demand for forensic and value for money auditing, the Office of the Auditor-General has no choice but to outsource some of its activities to private audit firms. The committee noted the ever increasing demand in all forms of audit is due to increase in the national budget from Shs 7.5 trillion in the Financial Year 2010/2011 to Shs 9.8 trillion in the Financial Year 2011/2012; increasing number of districts and huge projects being undertaken that will require forensic and value for money audits. 

The committee further observes that the budget allocation for consultancy services (short-term) for the Financial Year 2011/2012 is Shs 4.42 billion can only enable the Office of the Auditor-General to audit about 60 percent of the work. The committee recommends that more funds be provided so as to scale up the Office of the Auditor-General capacity to 80 percent.
 
Audit of the Education Sector

The committee in the Financial Year 2010/2011 observed that several public (Government-aided) schools charge almost the same amount of tuition fees as the private schools. This justifies a critical need for an audit of public schools. The committee recommends that the Office of the Auditor-General conducts a sample audit of all public schools and an attempt be made to ascertain the unit cost. 

The committee notes with appreciation that the Office of the Auditor-General intends to audit a sample of 800 Government aided secondary schools. However, this activity requires Shs 1.2 billion which has not been provided for in the budget estimates. 

Engineering and Energy Sector Audits

The committee observed that one of the priority audit activities that the Office of the Auditor-General is to undertake in the Financial Year 2011/2012 is auditing of the engineering and energy sector. However, the committee notes that the Office of the Auditor-General has limited in-house technical expertise in the mentioned sectors and therefore plans to outsource private audit firms to carry out this activity.

The committee recommends that the Office of the Auditor-General in the medium term builds the capacity of its staff to carry out specialised audits like the energy sector audits.

Special Audits

The committee observes that in the Financial Year 2011/2012, Office of the Auditor-General plans to undertake 60 special audits. The committee however notes that these special audits are either solicited or requested implying that if no request is made, no such audit can take place. The committee recommends that the Office of the Auditor-General should have a mechanism to be pro-active especially in activities that have attracted huge amounts of funds like the recently concluded electoral process.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation

The committee recommends that Shs 6.75 billion be reallocated from the Vote 008 to Office of the Auditor-General to cater for the funding gap of the emerging priorities in the staff structure, appointment for the auditor of the Office of the Auditor-General, audit of public schools, and consultancy to improve the performance of the Office of the Auditor-General. 

The committee therefore recommends that a total of Shs 40.356 billion be appropriated to Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor-General.

Vote Function 141 – Uganda Revenue Authority

Their mandate is there on page 30 and page 31 – on page 31 we start the observations on Uganda Revenue Authority. 

Tax Audits

The committee observed that whereas URA had targeted to carry out 2,426 audits in the Financial Year 2010/11, only 825 audits were undertaken. The committee was informed that during this period, some staff was reallocated to the re-registration of taxpayers section in order to lay foundation for future automated auditing. The committee recommends that URA reports on tax audits to ascertain whether there is increasing tax compliance and whether government is benefiting from the tax audits.

Small and Micro Tax Payers

The committee observed that 97 percent of the collected tax is paid by large or medium taxpayers who are less than 2,000. The committee further observed that the risk of non-compliance is higher in the small and micro taxpayers than in the large. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that URA puts more emphasis registering more small and micro taxpayers so as to generate more revenues. This can be done by exploring clientele database of existing institutions like National Water and Sewerage Corporation and Meme. That is why URA is here to help everybody get a Tax Identification Number; to help them widen the tax base.
 
Non-Tax Revenue (NTR)

The committee observed that NTR contributes only about one percent of the total domestic revenue collected by URA. The committee is not convinced that URA is putting enough effort to realise substantial increments in NTR collections. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that URA explores more strategies in order to substantially collect more of these taxes. The committee further recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tables all institutions that collect NTR and those that spend it at source, what we call Appropriation-in-Aid.

Transport Availability for Revenue Collection

The committee observed that URA requires 68 new vehicles to improve its operational efficiency. URA is currently operating a very old fleet that has become very expensive to maintain. Currently, on average the old vehicles spend three to four months in garages for repairs thereby undermining revenue collection. The committee was informed that URA will save at least Shs 200 million in repair costs if it acquires these new vehicles. URA requires Shs 6.5 billion to acquire 68 vehicles. If acquired, the vehicles will facilitate physical movement of Officers to monitor the porous borders in an effort to curb smuggling of goods, escort high value and high risk transit cargo to eliminate dumping in the local market and transport IT officers to URA IT installations to support the provision of IT network services especially as e-tax is being implemented. 

The committee is convinced that the immediate way to increase revenue collection is by improving on efficiency and availability of transport facilities is therefore essential. The committee recommends that Shs 3.0 billion be provided for, to partially fund this budget item. The Shs 1.0 billion deficit can be covered in the Financial Year 2012/2013.

Protected Items/Sole Agents

The committee noted that presence of protected items like the case of Tiger batteries creates artificial shortages on the market. The committee was informed that sole agents arise from manufacturers notifying URA on who the preferred agent is. This gives the sole agent an advantage over other intending traders which defeats the intensions of liberalisation and limits expansion of tax base. The committee recommends that monopoly of importation of such items be outlawed to allow any Ugandan be free to import.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation

The committee recommends that Shs 3.0 billion be reallocated from the vote 008 to URA to cater for the funding gap in the transport facilitation for the collection of revenue. The committee therefore recommends that a total of Shs 117.273 billion be appropriated to vote 141 - URA

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS)

On page 34, we can leave those details for your free time reading. We now go to page 37. 

Observations and Recommendations 

Statistical collections by other agencies: The committee observes that section 4 of UBOS Act mandates the bureau to be the principal data collecting and disseminating agency responsible for coordinating, monitoring and supervising the national statistical system. The committee notes that some government agencies disseminate their own internally generated statistical information without authentication of UBOS. 

Also, when UBOS releases official statistics on similar indicator, the data sets sometimes do not tally with those disseminated by other government agencies. This conflicting information on indicators has led to confusion and dilemma in the public, on which data is reliable. In addition, the committee observed that the UBOS Act does not stop any agency from releasing statistical information without authentication from UBOS. 

The committee recommends that the UBOS Act be reviewed to compel all government agencies to disseminate statistical information only after authentication by the UBOS. The committee further urges UBOS to always harmonise the data which is disseminated to the public. UBOS has of recent picked up our recommendation that is why you see them every month coming up with inflation figures. That is a dissemination strategy upon which the committee observed that UBOS’s statistical dissemination strategy is inadequate. 

In spite of a dissemination unit in UBOS, statistical information dissemination is a serious challenge. The committee noted that the number of institutions making use of data from UBOS is minimal. Information sharing of UBOS and other government agencies is inadequate. The committee recommends that UBOS takes statistical dissemination as a priority and avails key stakeholders reports on statistical findings.

Investment Statistics

The committee observed that UBOS does not capture statistics on actual investments in the country but only captures information on planned investments from Uganda Investment Authority. The committee notes that although information on actual investments is vital for planning purposes, UBOS should undertake this activity as a matter of urgency. 

The committee recommends that UBOS carries out a survey on service delivery in the country with special interest on the interventions of the pressing needs of society. The committee is particularly concerned that the employment data captured by Uganda Investment Authority is faulty as it does not reflect the actual investment in the country but only the wishes of investors.

Census of Business Establishments (COBE) 

The committee observed that Census of Business Establishments (COBE) is still a key activity that is underfunded. The COBE is carried out every five years and is intended to establish the structure of businesses in the country. The COBE survey has so far been partially covered in 50 districts out of 112 districts.  The committee notes the critical need for statistics of business establishments for national planning purposes and other institutions like URA can explore this data to increase on tax base. In the FY2011/2012, no funds have been allocated for this activity. Shs 309 million is required to undertake this activity in 20 districts. 

The committee recommends that Shs 309 million be provided for this activity.

Population Housing and Census (PHC) 2012 Preparatory Activities

The committee observed that PHC 2012 preparatory activities requires a budget allocation of Shs 46.5 billion, but only Shs19 billion has been provided for in the budget of 2011/12. The committee notes that a shortfall of Shs 27.5 billion is required to effectively carry out the preparatory census activities in the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

It should be noted that the preparatory census activity is very critical as it has a big impact on the success of the PHC 2012 Census. It is worth noting that this activity is done after every 10 years and data for the interim period is dependent on extrapolation/projection. They keep using the data to project the figures. Therefore, data on which projections are to be made has to be very accurate. 

The committee recommends that Shs 27.5 billion be provided for this activity in this financial year. The committee further urges government to treat the National Population and Housing Census as a project outside the MTEF and provide it with the necessary funding since it is a onetime activity that should form priority of Government.
 
Community Information System (CIS)

The committee observed that the success of the Community Information System hinges on the synergies or inter-sectoral collaborations of the key implementing stakeholders - UBOS, Ministry of Gender, National Planning Authority, and the Ministry of Local Government. The committee observed that the synergies between these implementing agencies are non-existent.  The committee recommends that UBOS undertakes all activities in regard to the CIS that the Ministry of Gender and the National Planning Authority was undertaking. 

Plan for National Statistical Development (PNSD)

The objective of the PNSD programme is to monitor and improve data management in ministry departments and agencies under the national statistical system. The committee observed that due to poor funding, the implementation of this important programme has greatly slowed down with no budget allocation in the Financial Year 2010/2011 and that of 2011/2012. This programme requires Shs 0.82 billion per annum. 

The committee therefore recommends that the funding gap of Shs 0.82 billion be provided for in order to implement the PNSD.

Internal Audit 

The committee observed that the finance audit department should ensure that funds disbursed for statistical activities in local governments are utilised for the intended activities. The committee recommends that the capacity of the internal audit department be strengthened and a Memorandum of Understanding be entered into with district departments, committing the accounting officers to be solely responsible for activities.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation

The committee recommends that Shs 1.52 billion be reallocated from the Vote 008 to UBOS to cater for the funding gaps in COBE, CIS, and PNSD as highlighted above. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that a total of Shs 51.916 billion be appropriated to Vote 143 for UBOS.

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act
	
Budget performance is indicated there from pages 41 to 42. So let us go to page 43; observations and recommendations.
		PPDA Regulations

The committee observed that subsequent to amendment of the PPDA Act, the PPDA Regulations, Guidelines and Standard Bidding Documents have to be reviewed in line with the amended Act. The committee therefore recommends that PPDA expedites the reviewing of the PPDA Regulations, Guidelines and the Standard Bidding Documents in cognisance of the amended Act.

Procurement Plans

The committee observed that most procurement plans as approved by Parliament were not implemented in line with the planned budgets of Procurement and Disposal Entities (PDEs). This lack of alignment has contributed to the low absorption of funds released to MDAs. The committee recommends that PPDA monitors and ensures that MDAs align their procurement plans to their budgets.

The Procurement Performance Measurement system (PPMS)

The committee observed that the total number of entities under the PPMS is now 60. Notwithstanding the improvements in the procurement process as a result of implementing the PPMS, the committee further observed that weaknesses still exist in contract monitoring, record keeping, bid evaluation, use of standard bidding documents and development of specifications. The committee recommends that PPDA expands its capacity building programme by engaging some training institutions.

Disposal of Public Assets

The committee observed that the timely disposal of public assets is still a big challenge facing MDAs. The committee noted that if obsolete public assets were disposed of in time, public entities would receive better value from the disposal of these assets. The committee also noted that most PDEs do not have a disposal plan and those with these plans are not implementing them. The committee recommends that PPDA finalises the draft guidelines, builds capacity for PDEs to have disposal plans and monitors the implementation of disposal plans in a bid to recover more value out of the obsolete assets.

List of Common User Items

PPDA is mandated under Section 102 of the PPDA regulations to come up with a list of common user items and average prices to guide entities in their procurement planning, among others. In this regard, the committee observed that in light of the frequent price changes, PPDA needs to periodically update the list of common user items and their average indicative prices. The committee therefore recommends that PPDA ensures that it undertakes a survey of the list of common user items and updates this list during the Financial Year 2011/12 and further measure the updated list against the current price quotations PDE’s are using.

The PPDA Tribunal

The committee observed that with the amendment of the PPDA Act, a PPDA tribunal to scale up the timely procurement arbitration process be set up. However, no funds have been allocated to kick start the PPDA tribunal in the Financial Year 2011/12. The committee is aware that before the Executive tables a Bill or proposed amendment of the Act, a Certificate of Financial Implications is prepared and this is very important. You always plan for what you bring here. The committee therefore recommends that Shs 1.34 billion be availed as a matter of urgency to have the PPDA tribunal established. 

Sustainability of Audits

The committee observed that of the 74 procurement and disposal audits that were undertaken, 24 were carried out under Government of Uganda funding and 50 outsourced under a direct financial support of FINMAP, which is a donor component. 

The committee further observes that of the 90 proposed procurement and disposal audits to be undertaken, four will be outsourced under Government of Uganda funding, 70 will be outsourced under FINMAP and 16 will be conducted in-house under Government of Uganda funding. The committee observes that majority of procurement and disposal audits are financed by donors which raises the concern of sustainability. The committee recommends that government should increase its funding to procurement audits so as to ensure continuity in case of donor withdraw.

Recommended Budgetary Allocation

The committee recommends that Shs 1.34 billion be reallocated from Vote 008 to PPDA to cater for the establishment of the PPDA Tribunal. The committee therefore recommends that a total of Shs 8.321 billion be appropriated to Vote 153 - the PPDA. 

General Conclusion

Revenue mobilisation is key in executing the budget. The committee interfaced with the relevant institutions and the immediate available option is improving the efficiency of URA. 

Value for money is also key in ensuring confidence of the public and the donor community and it also ensures that the budget is executed efficiently and effectively. This justifies the proposed increased funding to the Office of the Auditor-General and PPDA. 

I move that considering the observations and recommendations of the committee, Parliament appropriates the following estimates for the respective ministries, departments and spending agencies. They are highlighted on page 46. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am going to ask the honourable Shadow Minister of Finance – he is not responding to this because he already made his statement earlier but I am going to give him five minutes to make a short contribution which he wanted to make. 

3.44
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Under the Constitution, Article 155, the President is the minister of finance. Based on that, I think I shadow His Excellency the President on this matter. 

And since I responded comprehensively to the budget, I am just going to make a brief comment on the ministerial policy statement so that I do not cause Members fatigue because the other one was –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have given you five minutes to do that.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I would like to invite my colleagues to look at the ministerial policy statement of the ministry of finance. The ministry of finance is supposed to focus on macro-economic policy and management, tax policy, fiscal policy and support Bank of Uganda in monetary policy, policy planning and support services. However, the Opposition is very disappointed that the ministry of finance has lowered itself to “projectisation” no wonder the country is now facing a huge economic crisis. The Opposition would therefore like to recommend the restructuring of the ministry of finance as follows:

That Uganda Development Cooperation (UDC) reverts to Ministry of Trade and Industry. (Applause) That certain votes and components within the ministry of finance like Uganda Investment Authority, which deals with industrial parks, reverts to Ministry of Trade and Industry. The National Council of Science and Technology reverts to Ministry of Trade and Industry; Private Sector Competitiveness reverts to Ministry of Trade and Industry; Investment and Private Sector Promotion reverts to Ministry of Trade and Industry and Investment and Private Sector Promotion deals with projects like Soroti Fruit Factory, tea industry, Luweero industries – these are small things that the President should not handle. It should be handled under the Ministry of Trade and Industry. For example, the Presidential Initiative on Bananas – these are small things that the ministry of finance should not handle.

Sub-county development project – Mr Speaker, can you believe that the ministry of finance is engaged in sub-counties. My I recommend that sub-county development projects revert to Ministry of Local Government. (Applause) 

There is a programme called Policy Planning and Support within which there is National Enterprise Corporation. This is under Ministry of Finance. Can this programme revert to Ministry of Defence so that the ministry of finance can focus on bigger issues? 

There is another programme called Global Environmental Facility which deals with energy, appropriate technology, stoves for villages. The focal person is the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury. This should be under the Ministry of Energy or Ministry of Water. Stoves for villagers are small things and should not be handled by the ministry of finance. I therefore wish to urge for restructuring in the ministry of finance so that it focuses on macroeconomic issues. 

I want to call upon the ministry of finance and this House – for the last 15 years, we have been passing loans and guaranteeing them for the private sector. We would like to get a financial statement on repayment of these loans by the private sector. 

I have information that commercial banks that participated in this programme have over Shs 100 billion lying in their banks and officials in Finance are aware of this money. They just send people to pick this money at very low interest rates. A case in point is DFCU Bank which has over Shs 34 billion in the European Investment Bank. This money has not been declared in the budget. Stanbic Bank, Barclays Bank, all details are here of the loans we passed but were passed through commercial banks to the private sector. Can we get all these statements of this money that is available so that we appropriate it properly?

In conclusion, I have here a letter written by the Prime Minister which was laid at Table yesterday in Parliament. The letter was directing a freeze on the purchase of vehicles and non-essential consumptive items. The President supported institutions like Parliament, the President’s Office, Security, Missions abroad, Social Service and Local Government. It is the ministry of finance supposed to ensure implementation but to my disappointment, if you look at the policy statement of the ministry of finance, they have budgeted for vehicles, travel abroad, and advertisement among others. I recommend to this House that we cut all that money and put it in the right sector. Thank you very much.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Shadow Minister for Finance. I now open debate, which will take an hour because the matter is critical. 

3.51
MR VICENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me thank –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The time allowed is two minutes. 

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much. Allow me thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee members for this elaborate report. Because two minutes is 120 seconds, I will rush. 

In the mandate of the ministry of finance, just as the Shadow Minister has said, I think it is very important that the ministry of finance helps us to undertake prudent monetary and fiscal policies. When you look at the rate of inflation now that was supposed to be contained at five percent, and is now 21.4 percent, it raises a number of questions. Where did we go wrong? There is information that Shs 500 billion counterfeit notes are in circulation. Who prints Uganda’s money? Why do we operate two currencies?

To me the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – economic development, in my simple economics, means economic growth plus institutional change. Now, should we call this ministry “The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Growth” because we only see quantitative increase? You see six percent but you will not see it reflected in the welfare of citizens. The welfare of citizens would include roads, increased salaries, reduced income gap among others. We are wondering why we see 6.3 percent economic growth that is not reflected in the standards of living of our people and the welfare of our citizens. It raises a lot of questions.

I am surprised that we have not had a 30-year vision or a ten year vision. I want to thank the committee chairman - how can a country run without a vision? A country that fails to plan is actually planning to fail. This is the reason that this country needs a vision. I thank you very much.

3.54
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): I am going to tackle only one issue that comes from page 27, section 6.7 part one; Audit of the private, public partnerships. I have got a feeling that liberalisation of the economy is quite okay but when we talk about partnering with the private sector, in my view, apart from the urban districts of Kampala, Wakiso and Mpigi, we do not have a private sector elsewhere. We do not have a dynamic private sector in our district of Buhweju. 

Can the committee recommend that a nation takes a step back so that we can build a dynamic private sector and in future, the State can partner with them? We talk about issues like the banana project, Soroti fruit factory and others like that; you will find that such things are managed by foreigners and people who are not ours. We need to pull our natives such that when we talk of privatisation, we have got what we call indigenous privatisation not exotic privatisation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Mangiya Primary School and Mayok Bright Parents’ Primary School represented by hon. Chekwel Lydia woman representative for Kween District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. 

3.54
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): I want to talk about youth entrepreneurship fund; what the chairperson has read out today does not indicate the other monies that we have been hearing about. In the budget speech of the minister, we heard that Shs 44.5 billion was going to be provided. Unfortunately, we do not see the other money, which is the Shs 25 billion. It is not mentioned in this report and of course the Shs 16.5 billion is not talked about. 

This goes on to confirm what has been rumoured in the public that there is no money for the youths. I would like the minister to address this concern because out there the youths are expecting this money to roll out this very month and unfortunately we are only hearing about the money for training.  I would like the honourable minister to clearly talk about this funding and address this concern once and for all. 

The second issue is about gender audits; I am glad that the chairperson has raised the need for the ministry to conduct gender audits. When you are planning a national budget, it needs to be founded on the needs of the various categories of women, men, girls and boys. Allocation should be based on that framework. I wonder how the ministry of finance would come up with allocations going to priorities that we do not know how the gender parities are benefiting. 

I would like to go to the recommendation made by the committee that gender audits are to be conducted by the Office of the Auditor-General. The National Audit Act, 2008 mandates the Auditor-General’s Office to conduct these kinds of special audits such as environmental and gender –(Member timed out_)

3.58
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman representative, Lira): I raise about the issue of Uganda Revenue Authority; the observation and the recommendation from the committee is saying that whereas they targeted 2,426 audits in the Financial Year 2010/2011, only 825 audits were undertaken. 

I do not know whether it is because of this that my district suffers. It was in 2005/2006 that URA failed to do their internal audits and they went to my district where they swept Shs 426 million and what surprises me is that they had already waived off the tax. The announcement came in the afternoon but at around 11.00 a.m., the money was swept from the district account. This money was meant for NAADS and some other item.

Last financial year, the district suffered the same to a tune of about Shs 526 million. These are monies that are supposed to help the local person. I am wondering what the ministry of finance and URA are doing? Why do they wait for a long time?  Pay-as-you-earn is the reason they are taking this money. This is money that is offset from the source. It is offset from the district but it is not submitted to URA. In the end, it is the local person who suffers –(Member timed out_)

4.01
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): I want to thank the chairman for his elaborate report. I am concerned about the rural financial services. I know that there are challenges of coordination between the centre and SACCOs. The ministry should explore ways of resolving these small issues of poor coordination. We should not tamper with funds going to the SAACOs because as we talk now, most of us are campaigning for opening of new SAACOs in those sub-counties where we do not have them. I think this reallocation is really uncalled for. 

I want to talk about page 43, the committee observed the untimely disposal of public assets. There is also a problem of procurement of works. It takes a lot of time for PPDA to procure and this is going to affect the timely implementation of work on the ground. I think something should be done to see that procurement of works is separated from procurement of other services. This is because works has a big budget and we expect a lot of work from this sector –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have noticed with great concern that we are always violating rule 62 of our Rules of Procedure on newspapers and periodicals not to be read in the House. I have seen people reading newspapers and magazines in this House. I have noticed all of you and none of you will speak this afternoon. (Laughter)

4.03
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good presentation. However, I have a few concerns to note. I have observed that the committee had a number of reallocations after discovering that there are some monies that lay redundant and they tried reallocate them. However, some of the monies were not given priority areas where they could be reallocated. 

On page 8, there was Shs 90 million, on page 9, there was gender with Shs 41 million, on page 10, there was Shs 5.2 billion, on page 10, there was another Shs 5.8 billion and many others. It is only in one instance where they allocated the money to another area. On page 10, it is indicated that there is a juice factory in Soroti that will be built and that Shs 5 billion had been allocated to it and only Shs 2 billion had been transferred to that account. The committee noted that if only Shs 2 billion is taken, it will not be a viable project. But I notice there was a time when the minister for trade was here and hon. Alaso noted that there is only a signpost but no factory in that area. So, we would like to know more about that. 

On page 33, the committee recommended that Shs 33 billion was supposed to be given to that project and that Shs 1 billion becomes a deficit. However, why should we have a deficit of Shs 1 billion yet there are other monies that they had said would be reallocated to other areas? (Member timed out_)

4.06
MRS SSENTONGO NABULYA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. My question goes to the minister of finance in regard to the over 3,000 former workers of NEC who have not been paid since they were laid off. I want to know how they are going to be paid and what arrangement is in place to do that. Thank you. 

4.06
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Members for the report. I rise on a point of the census - you realise that when a census is done, it is usually the household head that is asked many questions. So, for the sake of people with disabilities, some people have negative attitudes about bringing them out. So, I would like to call upon the ministry to ensure that we have a system where people with disabilities will be counted so that they can be well planned for because sometimes people feel shy to bring these children to be counted. So, I want to ask that this point be brought on board and I also ask that as we recruit the enumerators at the sub-counties, let us have people with disabilities. We have very many of them who are now qualified and so they can be part of the enumerators and guides to know where these people with disabilities are living in those villages. Thank you. 

4.07
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee and the entire committee for the report on finance. I want to bring out one issue on the population and housing census which is due in 2012. The committee has reported that the census requires Shs 46.5 billion and there is a shortage of Shs 25.5 billion. I raised this issue because of the fact that some two years ago, when we were preparing for the general elections which we concluded in February, there were inter-linkages with the Electoral Commission where this Parliament and the ministry of finance provided Shs 30 billion, which procured information capturing gadgets – these were over 4,000 computers which were used to capture data for the Electoral Commission. This is the data, which was not used by the Electoral Commission but it is lying idle under the national information security system under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Can the minister of finance integrate the so much expensive information data which was captured and the gadgets which were used so that we are able to minimise on the cost of procuring the information capturing gadgets which are going to be used in the national census? I think this is an area which we need to quickly look at. 

How do we integrate them? If we are going to have a national information system, then it means that at a later stage, there will be a continuous gathering of information right from the villages and sub-counties so that we are able to minimise double expenditure –(Member timed out_)

4.10
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I will straight away go to page 13 where the committee recommends that a comprehensive Micro-finance Bill be tabled before this House. This is a timely intervention because in my district, we have had over 10 Micro-finance institutions whose monies have been stolen by the managers and no action has been taken. Therefore, I ask or request the committee to give a timely allocation for this and I propose that in this financial year, this Bill be tabled. 

Secondly, you rightly guided that after this exercise of discussing the report, we shall have the Budget Committee going through the entire budget to do reallocation for the sake of catering for our teachers and other urgent –(Interjections)– yes, specifically teachers. So, I feel excited to realise that the committee has already realised that there is some money which can be reallocated and we should start with this, specifically the Shs 17 billion that they are talking about. I propose that we start with this money as we reallocate money from other sectors. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was never the guidance of the Speaker or his ruling that such a matter be done that way. What the Speaker said was that after the committee reports have been adopted, the Budget Committee would meet to look at the details of the budget before they are presented for appropriation. 

4.12
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am very happy that it is hon. Kajara that is in for the minister of finance. He clearly remembers 2009/2010 that he sat with us in Soroti Hotel and told us there was an allocation of Shs 5 billion for Soroti Fruit Factory. In 2010/2011 there was another Shs 5 billion allocated. Can he tell this country what the Shs 10 billion has done towards the construction of the fruit factory?

Two -(Interjections)- yeah, he should tell us because I have got land just opposite the industrial park. There is not a sign of any activity going on apart from the sign post. 

Two, a tea factory was built in Bushenyi in a matter of a pronouncement that let there be a tea factory and next morning there was a tea factory. Why should we be subjected to anticipation of a grant from the Turkish Government? Why should we? I mean, this is being very unfair to us. We are citizens. We pay taxes. You must budget for us like you budget for other regions of this country. Why should you leave us to anticipation? In this House we do not do things out of anticipation, we have to do things out of planning. You have to budget for this factory. I am asking the Budget Committee to revisit this Shs 2 billion allocated to Soroti Fruit Factory and put it to Shs 15 billion because the tea factory was built at Shs 23 billion -(Applause)- and we are not going to be given peanuts and then left to anticipation. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.14
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to make a few observations on page 7 of the committee report. But I can only do that after adding my voice to those of others who have thanked the members of the committee for doing an elaborate work.

Mr Speaker, on the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust, it is written that the proposed allocation to NPART is so much of which residual winding up activities of NPART is so much. The committee noted that during the last financial year, Parliament appropriated funds for the residual winding up of NPART and agreed to reject any further requests for more funds. This Non-Performing Assets Trust has been in place for more than 20 years. Is there any rationale for keeping this trust in place? If you look further down, there is an allocation for wage bill of Shs 124.8 million. I would like to know whether during the work of the committee the committee was given a list of assets which for 20 years have not been performing and there is still some reason why we should spend some more money on keeping them around with the staff to be paid so much for that.

And having noted that the committee had already rejected any further allocation to this particular function, why did the committee go ahead to still recommend that it should be given some more money? (Member timed out_) 

4.16
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising an issue which should have been on page 39 on the population and housing census 2012 preparatory activities. As I stand here, over a 100 families on Buganda Road are being unduly harassed through the non-intervention of Ministry of Finance though in the Eighth Parliament there was a directive that the people who own pool houses of Buganda Road be treated equitably like their colleagues in other pool houses like Bugolobi. On Monday, they were given a directive to pay over Shs 100 million as opposed to the Shs 50 million that was previously directed through the President’s Office and through the Ministry of Finance. I wonder how the committee was not acquainted with this new development.

So, the Minister of Finance should come and explain to us what is happening to the families that are risking eviction because they have been given a deadline of this week. The minister should explain to us because it is in the docket of the Ministry of Finance and the directive from this House was to Ministry of Finance -(Interjections)- Buganda Road Flats. Thank you.

4.18
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On page 11 of this report, the committee has talked about Enterprise Uganda, something which has come up quite a number of times in this House, and they have made their recommendation. The Shadow Minister for Finance has enumerated a number of Government projects and departments which fall within the Ministry of Finance which should not have been there. Enterprise Uganda is a private company where we find that money has been budgeted to cater for their salaries. 

Therefore, may I suggest that we adopt it also as a recommendation that an investigation be conducted to establish which people are behind this Enterprise Uganda. How are its dealings with this Government? Because while it is suspicious, and I am speaking from the report of the Budget Committee- and besides on page 33 the committee noted that there is urgent need to avail Shs 6.5 billion for the acquisition of vehicles and the committee recommends that Shs 3 billion be provided to partially cover that item and moreover the committee goes ahead to state that Shs 1 billion deficits be covered in the Financial Year 2012/2013. Could this be a mistake? Is the committee only making a mistake because the figure could have been like Shs 3.5 billion to cover the Shs 6.5 billion that is reported by the committee? I thank you.

4.21 
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to slightly address myself to the general question of budget performance. I am now looking at a letter written by the ministry of finance to all accounting officers, dated 25 May 2011. Under paragraph 7 it states, “The exchange rates to be used against US $1 for financial year 2011/2012 and the medium term are as follows: financial year 2011/2012, Shs 2,442; financial year 2012/2013, Shs 2,593; financial year 2013/2014, Shs 2,734; financial year 2014/2015, Shs 2,889; financial year 2015/2016, Shs 3,052.” 

Mr Speaker, are we being realistic about what we are discussing now? The dollar as we talk now is Shs 2850, which is the projected one of 2014/2015. I think Finance, this is the time to tell us whether actually you are on target in your revenue collection and we are not wasting time. Are you going to realise this money? (Member timed out_)

4.23
MS MARY TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good report. My concern of the performance of the Ministry of Finance is on the structures and institutions that are supervised by the Ministry of Finance. The question in point is the National Rotaries Board, which according to the report has only three members of staff as a managerial structure and yet this is an institution, which is capable of generating a lot of revenue for this country.

The other institution is Uganda Development Corporation, which has no board at all. So it is no surprise that some of these institutions are not performing to their expected potential.

The other issue I have with the Ministry of Finance is I wonder, just like one honourable colleague had said, what a factory like the Soroti Fruit Factory would be doing under the Ministry of Finance as well as the Presidential Banana Initiative. I wonder what the Ministry of Agriculture or even the Ministry of Trade and Industry are doing if these institutions are being managed under the Ministry of Finance.

The other thing is the Public Private Partnerships. I think it is high time, as Parliament that we put in place a legal framework because a lot of monies are being invested and projects are being run under the public-private partnership and therefore it is important that we put in place a functional policy and a legal framework. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.25
MR SEMPALA MBUGA (NRM, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am the mother or father or parent of NRM. I want to thank the chairman of the committee for this very good work. I want to also agree with the committee’s recommendation that Shs 6.75 billion be reallocated from Vote 008 to the Office of the Auditor-General. As we have realised, the Auditor-General is doing very good work. In fact, that is why our Public Accounts Committee here is always busy and also doing a good job resulting from that.

This Shs 6.75 billion should be reallocated to that office. They have indicated that they are not able to do all the work by themselves, in which case they want to hire the services of a private firm. I would like to caution them that in doing so, they should go in for indigenous local firms thereby providing employment to them and building up their capacity. They should not repatriate their profits outside this country –(Member timed out_)

4.27
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising a concern from the Uganda Revenue Authority and questioning the criteria of clearance of consignments at the Uganda Revenue Authority.

There is a company in the US; the Toms Company, which donated 33,000 pairs of shoes to schools in Bududa, Mbale and Manafwa. For six months since the shoes arrived at the Uganda Revenue Authority, they have been held there yet we got clearance from the former Minister of Finance. Schools are opening on Monday but they have not released the shoes to the beneficiary schools in the names districts.

I appeal to the Minister of Finance to come to our rescue because the shoes were donated during hon. Bbumba’s regime. I have tried to consult her and this information has been given to the Minister of Finance but nothing has been done.

This is a donation so I do not see why they should hold on to them as they are not for profit. They are to help these schools. You have seen the lightning hitting children in Kiryandongo so if good Samaritans come up to help us, they should come to our rescue and make sure the shoes get to the right beneficiaries. Thank you.

4.29
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a comment on the issue of national manpower service on page 23. When you look at the recommendation of the committee, it is not the first time they are making it. They are reiterating what they had already recommended earlier.

So I would like to request ministry of finance to make this a priority among priorities because we need to make these surveys to know the kind of manpower we have in this country. At times we even import manpower where we have the skills. So we need to know what we have in store and then we get a way forward.

On the same page on the issue of the National Development Plan, it is reported that the M&E framework is not ready and they are yet to complete it. I would request again that this is expedited because the plan we are looking at is a five-year plan and if the M&E is completed in the fourth year then we shall not have means of evaluating our performance.

So my request is that immediately the NDP plan is completed, the M&E framework should also be on board. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.30
MS MARY TUUNDE (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee of Finance. Since Finance is the granary of this country, I was so attentive that I captured two things for example the auditing of public schools and widening the tax base.

We have gone very far in Uganda and even privatised social services like education but there is a problem in Makerere University. Is Ministry of Finance following what is happening, for example the money that is paid by the private students? Is it put to best use? Why is it that the workers are handling Government by the horns?

I think Ministry of Finance should make sure that whatever it does, it evaluates and monitors very well. That money is being misused. I know, I am a Workers’ representative. The money is being misused and there is need to follow-up and even audit Makerere University.

Secondly, I would like to know if Government is not against taxing the salaried worker. For example we have seen so many taxes. When it comes to widening the tax base, it is the workers being taxed. So please next time, look at those people who get a meager salary and do not punish them again. Thank you.

4.32
MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 12, the Private Public Partnerships; I have seen the recommendation of the committee but I am wondering what the fate of those several projects that are ongoing under this arrangement will be. This is because we do not have the Bill presented in this House yet huge projects are going on. 

There is a recommendation that the committee has given to the effect that there should be no further arrangement as far as PPP is concerned before we enact a law. Where are we as Ugandans standing? All along the President has been talking about PPP and indeed we have had several projects going on. 

Under which legal regime are we going to benefit as Ugandans? I will urge the ministry of finance not to take the whole financial year 2011/2012. We should give a deadline that within two or three months, this Bill should be out of our way. Thank you.

4.34
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the committee and I would like to direct my attention to pages 11 and 38 about Enterprise Uganda and investment statistics. The issue of the youth should not be looked at as only a matter of social justice or sympathetic inclusion but as a matter of economic prudence and security importance. 

I have seen the chairperson making a recommendation that Shs 2.9 million be re-allocated to another priority. I suppose that it should not be a preferential option because we, as the youth, are the majority in the country. When you look at it from the pessimistic side, you can say that this is the business I will deal with in the normal way. However, from the optimistic side, one would say this is an opportunity I should exploit. 

So I would urge that instead of us saying the money should be re-allocated to another priority, we should emphasise that the money should be given to the youth. This can be done through the youth council or somewhere else but still for the youth.

When we talk about the Uganda Investment Authority capturing data about investors, it concentrates on foreign investors. This brings me to the point why we look at the youth as people who are not contributing to our country. I heard the chairperson saying that Uganda Revenue Authority gets 97 percent of its revenues from big companies. This is the reason we are omitted because you do not realise our importance. 

I urge that whenever Uganda Bureau of Statistics does the survey, it should take into consideration the employment census so that we know the actual unemployment and underemployment such that it gives a good framework for structural reviews that will see the youth included in the development of the country.

4.36
MS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Mr Speaker, my issue is on page 37 and it is on UBOS. It says that: “Section 4 of UBOS Act mandates the Bureau to be the principle data collecting and disseminating agency responsible for coordinating, monitoring and supervising the national statistical system.” 

I have one observation here where UBOS did not visit the newly created districts. As a result, all this financial year budget allocation was done basing on the data of the mother district. For instance, the one of Kole was done basing on the data from Apac District and this data was underestimated. If you look at the indicative figures which were allocated to the new districts, you will find that all of them were underestimated. UBOS should take that into consideration and make sure they visit all the new districts in order to come up with correct and independent data.

Secondly, I have a concern on the budget of the Ministry of Finance concerning the arrears. I also raised this issue during my committee scrutiny of the budget; the arrears were given zero and even now it is still zero. When I raised it during the committee meeting, I was told that the ministry has a better answer. May I be made to know as to why these arrears are given zero? 

4.32
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for providing us with a big booklet thinking that we would forget the pertinent issues. (Laughter) The Ministry of Finance is mandated to know who imports what. The reason some people were walking to work was because of the increase in fuel prices. 

They have not told us which people are responsible for creating monopoly of importing fuel, resulting into problems. One time I read in the newspapers that all the fuel meant for Uganda was bought by an unidentified company and that is why the prices are high. 

Mr Speaker, the ministry of finance is fond of taking what does not belong to it. If a project has a lot of money, the ministry will retain it. It is even fond of underfunding other ministries, leaving their funds at its own disposal. For example, how can you say the Uganda Revenue Authority should purchase vehicles of Shs 6.5 billion when the Ministry of Gender is only taking Shs 22 billion?

Lastly, I would like [HON. MEMBER: “Information.”] we are given only two minutes and if I take the information, it will eat into my time. If you look at pages 37 and 39, you will find that just one activity of census needs Shs 46.5 billion, that is twice the budget for Ministry of Gender. (Member timed out_)

4.41
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their good report. I would like to address myself to the issue of the legal framework for microfinance, which started in 2006. The stakeholders’ meeting was held but I would like to know from the Ministry of Finance, why they do not want to table it in Parliament, thereby putting our people and money at risk. This way, we may not be voted back to Parliament because the voters’ money was eaten by the managers. I would recommend that within two months, they should present the Bill to Parliament and we see how we can guard the peasants’ money.

Secondly, on the issue of PPP, we should task the ministry of finance to produce the legal framework before they appropriate any money to those big projects. Before the end of the second quarter, they should have tabled that legal framework so that we are on a safe side. We are tired of seeing our monies being eaten anyhow and people are not followed-up.

I would also like to know how our reserves are being managed in New York because we do not know and yet we may be losing a lot. The committee should get interested in that and see how our reserves are being managed in the banks in New York. I thank you.

4.43
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): I thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee for its very good report. My comment is in relation to page 13, about micro-finance. When you look at the findings of the committee, this micro-finance project or programme seems to be having more challenges than the achievements which indicates that there is a problem. 

When you look at the recommendations of the committee, it recommends that the proposed increment of Shs 0.923 billion be reallocated and the ministry explores strategies to resolve the above identified challenges.  We need to improve on this. We should be concerned about the timeframes in this case because we seem to be seeing a lot of problems here. So, what timeframe can be given for this to happen because we want this programme to also succeed?

On page 15 concerning donor off-budget projects, the committee recommends that all sectors should always include off-budget interventions or support in their policy briefs to Parliament. 

My point of concern here is what about earlier on? Were these ministries not aware that Parliament was to get this? How sure are we that this will be done? (Member timed out.)

4.46
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): I want to thank the committee for a very smart report and I will limit my comments on two issues. 

The first is about the many research initiatives in this report and some pilot projects which some members say do not even exist. I think if we strengthen UDC and took it out of Finance and put it under Trade and Industry – (Applause)- this would be an investment vehicle for research, projects and they can nurse them for some time and if need be, off-load them to the stock exchange and the public can  buy shares. 

We are running this economy without participating. If you go across to Kenya, members of Parliament and other people are even given money by the Government to jointly invest with investors in some of these companies that are in Kenya.  We could do away even with the difficulty of the Auditor-General having difficulty in auditing money that we put into some of these ventures. If you are giving money to UDC, then it is easy for you to audit through UDC.

Secondly, I am glad that the committee has voted for some extra money for the National Planning Authority. I do not know how seriously we take this National Planning Authority. If it was given its due share of what it was supposed to do and given enough enhancement, even this selective piecemeal we are dealing with of salaries – one sector coming after another one – this would be part of the National Planning Authority function –(Member timed out_)

4.48
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): I thank you for this opportunity and I want to thank the committee for the report. My comment is on pages 12 and 13 with regard to the popular PPP and then the lack of a comprehensive micro-finance law. 

I seek guidance from you, Mr Speaker. Well as all implementable policies should have laws, are we letting the cart before what? Who is failing who? When we see policies being implemented but without enabling provisions of the law, it is quite sad that we are talking this in Parliament where all laws of Uganda are made. Is it the Ministry of Finance failing Parliament or is it Parliament failing the Ministry of Finance? We know that the Ministry of Finance cannot make the laws but has there been any attempt to bring those laws here and they fail and we are now heaping blame on them? Maybe not!

The committee has recommended that the PPP Bill be expedited and submitted to Parliament in this financial year. However, there are so many projects of Private Public Partnership being implemented. What is enabling the implementers? And this private-public, we are yet to watch a saga in this country – a very good policy but I am afraid, maybe because I have a weak heart but let us be cautious about it and have the law in place immediately. (Applause)

4.50
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): I thank you Mr Speaker. I will first begin by thanking the committee for the report that they have presented before us. My main concern is on page 10 concerning Enterprise Uganda. After going through it, Enterprise Uganda seems to be more concerned with staff salaries taking its chunk and then the training programmes in the Kampala City Traders Association have their chunk and then maybe the small-scale industry. 

I was in my constituency last week and they were very excited about the youth scheme but that was from the President’s speech because up to today, nobody in Apac District knows what these Enterprise Uganda youth entrepreneurship is about. The programme is not reaching the North and given the problem the North has had, I think there should have been special attention given to the youth from the North just as the youth in Kampala. 

I would want to know more about this, especially for my youth in Apac. I know that at least my colleagues from the North will agree with me on this. I also agree with my honourable colleague who said there are too many of these private organisations taking their chance and diluting the weight of the money. Why wouldn’t this thing be given to one old company that has given development in this country before UDC?

UDC I am sure already had a framework. We tend to just get organisations, throw money at them without a framework, without anybody knowing what to do with that money and I think the way Government is working is breeding corruption-(Member timed out_)

4.53
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am raising a point on page 9 which talks about the Presidential Initiative on Banana and Industrial Development. The committee notes that the Chief Executive of this programme insinuated or indicated to the committee that she does not report to anybody else apart from President Museveni and not even the board that has been put in place to run the organisation. 

My point of concern here is that this is not the first time this kind of situation arises in Uganda. I remember a case in point when a public servant refused to come before Parliament saying that she only reports to the President. 

I do not know if the President is aware of this kind of situation in this country. If he is aware and he is encouraging it, my query is why do you create institutions and then intend to destroy them by denying them to do the very work they are created to do?

These workers in these institutions are being paid by the tax payer of Uganda for not doing what they are supposed to do, something that the President is usurping. I would assume that our President has a lot on his plate. If he is not aware I want to request the ministers, please convey this message to him. If he has to appoint, let him stop at appointment but not patronage. If we want any semblance of efficiency in this country, this system must stop. I thank you.

4.55
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I will speak about two issues; Enterprise Uganda and National Enterprise Corporation. But I would like to say bravo to the committee for well done job.

Enterprise Uganda is a very important organisation and it is doing well to bring skills to our youth. Mr Ocici who is in charge of that organisation is a very resourceful person and it is high time we started valuing our people. If you discourage Enterprise Uganda, Mr Ocici will go to Tanzania, South Sudan; they want him everywhere. So, I appeal to you, please interface with Enterprise Uganda so that you understand what Enterprise Uganda is doing before you condemn it.

The National Enterprise Corporation on the tractor service: NEC initiated a tractor assembly plan and Uganda Government has not actually encouraged that project. If we are to mechanise and commercialise agriculture, we should support this initiative by giving more funds to National Enterprise Corporation to actually set up an assembly plant. The plant is given a piece of land in Namanve but it lacks funding so this fund for monitoring and what not should actually go to tractor assembling plant. 

This organisation has actually contributed a lot to mechanisation of agriculture by supplying tractors to the North, central region, according to actual competences not according to some other considerations as people were saying. I have a list here. When I was still in NEC, we sold 15 tractors to East Mengo; we sold 10 tractors to the North; five tractors to West Nile. So I have this information. I will bring it at an appropriate time- (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the time I had allotted for this debate has expired, I have extended it by 10 minutes. 

4.58
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the chairman for a good report. I rise to support the recommendation for a legal framework for microfinance institutions; because there is no legal framework, so many of these microfinance institutions have sprung up everywhere and anyhow. They charge high interest rates of up to about 25 percent; some of them have taken peoples’ money and just closed shop. An example is COWE which was operating in Mitooma and the whole of Western Uganda. They just disappeared with people’s money. So, it is high time that a regulatory framework was put in place so as to protect our people’s savings and create confidence in the industry because it is so important for the banking sector.

Secondly, Enterprise Uganda; if it is a private organisation, why is Government paying salaries to the tune of Shs 927 million? I do not mind that they have the capability and they can do the job but why should Government pay salaries [MS NANTABA: “Information.”) Thank you.

MS NANTABA: She has given way for information, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, she has finished. Have you finished hon. Member?

MS NANTABA: She had not finished.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, we could receive the information. (Laughter)

MS NANTABA: I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, page 11, the first paragraph, first line has Shs 2.872 billion that has been allocated for staff salaries for Enterprise Uganda.

In my committee, we called the Director, Enterprise Uganda, Mr Ocici to the committee. He was asked to give us a list of his workers and the structural organisation of Enterprise Uganda. He was only able to tell us that they are five people in his office. Then when he was interrogated more, he then said, “No, we are 16.”  We requested him to submit a list of the workers; up to today he has failed. We could only see himself, the Executive Director and his finance, whatever- the only two people we saw have been allocated Shs 2.8 billion for salaries.

The National Planning Authority, a fully fledged organisation has been allocated Shs2.2 billion. The same amount has been allocated to Enterprise Uganda with two staff. Something serious must be done to rescue this country. I beg to submit -(Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I remember we agreed here on the Floor that the youth fund should be shifted from the ministry of finance to Gender. So the moment you put in Enterprise Uganda, then you are tempting ministry of finance to rejoice that the fund is still with them. I, therefore, urge this House to insist on the position we made here that the youth fund and its accessories, that is Enterprise Uganda and so forth should shift to the ministry of gender. 

5.03
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive work they have done –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: He is a member of the committee -

THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MR OROMAIT: Mr Speaker, I withdraw. 

5.04
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the Ministry of Finance that inflation is standing at 21.4 percent now and it is on rampage. I would also like to let them know that the Shilling against the Dollar is not above Shs 2800. 

With that preamble, I would like to pose a question: do we have a budget? The Uganda Shilling is known to be the worst performing currency in the world. That is a fact that has not been disputed by the Ministry of Finance and I would like to speak authoritatively. 

We may be citing billions in our budget, but all this money is going to be eaten up by inflation. This money is going to demand supplementary budgets even before we blink and open our eyes a second time; I wroth the idea that whereas we are discussing the budget now, we will come back probably in October to pass a supplementary budget. So what are we doing, if not wasting time?

I think the Ministry of Finance needs to fix this problem; and you are not moving in the direction of solving this problem. I would like a minister to come up and assure this House that something is being done about this run-away inflation. 

Secondly, I believe in auditing and on page 28 the committee talks about the importance of both forensic and value for money audit in areas of engineering and energy. Whereas I support them in this, I also think the money that is going for consultancy, Shs 4.2 billion to perform 60 percent of the audit is a colossal amount of money – (Member timed out_)

5.07
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My contribution is from page 14 on National Enterprise Cooperation. They say the proposed allocation for the National Enterprise Cooperation project is Shs 0.8 billion for provision of tractor services, bush clearing services, agriculture workshops and promotion of tractor use. 

The committee recommends that the budget allocation for this promotion be reallocate as these activities are just duplicated. But I say since we are advocating for commercialisation of agriculture; we were even complaining that the funds allocated to agriculture, being the backbone of our country, are very meager – I propose that we leave this vote of 0.2 to go to National Enterprise Cooperation promotion and we just monitor it. It will supplement our agriculture budget. Thank you. 

11.09
MR GEOFFREY OMARA (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this last opportunity. I have an observation that I would like to bring forward. I have observed that when we talk of economic development, we must think about productivity. And when we talk of productivity, we must think about science and technology development. 

For that reason, I would like to strongly recommend that on page 10; where it is written: “The committee further recommends that out of the proposed allocation of Shs 4.8 billion, She 2.9 be allocated to other priority areas”. I would like to say that this money be allocated to technology transfer. 

To explain a bit, I believe all honourable members in this House know that other countries are ahead of us because of technology. And to give an example, in Katwe, we have welding sets made in Uganda and they have guarantee of up to ten years; that is stronger than some machines which are imported from outside. We are only let down because of the finishing technology.

Why can’t Government buy some of these machines and put them into an institution like Kyambogo University so that it becomes an income generating subject there so that other people can take their properties to be completed from there –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Member. I now revert to the minister of finance. I will give you twenty minutes. 

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. I would also like to thank the Members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the critical analysis and the important issues which they raised in the committee report. I would also like to thank the honourable members of the House for their comments on the report. 

From the onset, I would like to say that this budget was developed after a long consultative process. And during the budget process consultations were made with different sectors and stakeholders including this Parliament up to the Head of State. It is from this that we shall continue fine tuning this budget.

In preparing this budget, there were a lot of cross-sectoral factors, which were considered. I can appreciate the honourable members wanting to amend or move some financial provisions from one sector to another. However, I would like to advise that since this budget was prepared after a long consultative process, it may not be wise to hastily –(Interjections)- because Mr Speaker, that will distort – first of all when the sectors came, they had work programmes. Some of them, if not all of them are in line with the National Development Plan. So, when we make these recommendations, we should bear in mind the fact that we have a deliberate or that we had taken a lot of efforts – (Interruptions)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable minister to tell this august House that it is not logical to make any amendments to the budget yet the purpose of our being here is to come to a compromise? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we have been sitting here until late in the night to achieve exactly what you are saying we are not supposed to do. So, you are out of order, Sir. (Applause)

MR KAJARA: I would like to thank the Speaker, for his wise ruling though I would have wanted to comment on it. Anyway, all I said is that as we make these adjustments, we should bear in mind issues that were taken into account.

But first, I would like to say that the ministry has taken measures to improve efficiency and effectiveness of the budget in order to reduce wastage and improve responsiveness to service delivery. We have accordingly and we will maintain close dialogue with the committee to ensure information is shared. We will also ensure recommendations are taken into consideration in a timely manner.

Let me now go to specific issues. For example, there has been a recommendation on the Tax Appeal’s Tribunal; the cost of translating the client’s charter into languages is at a cost of Shs 60 million. Also there was something on initiating amendments to the Tax Tribunal Act.

The Tax Appeal’s Tribunal’s is an agency that receives a subvention from the ministry. Amending the tribunal law should be a consultative process with all the stakeholders being involved. The Tax Appeal’s Tribunal should undertake this process to enable the honourable minister articulate all issues under review.

On the other hand, however, the client’s charter is part of the training provided to taxpayers on handling tax disputes in the tribunal. Since taxes are paid by all Ugandans, the translation enables all taxpayers to clearly understand why, when and how they can address tax disputes. 

In the same vein, taxpayer education is equally very important for enhancing tax compliancy and widening the tax base. So, if we cut the budget, it means we may not enhance tax compliance; we shall not widen the tax base; and the population may not be able to get information on tax issues including how to handle tax disputes.

There was an issue on tax exemption. I would like to say that this financial year Government has undertaken some measures to increase domestic revenue. Some of the measures have been incorporated into the Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011 among which is to adopt specific transfer pricing regulations that will help to stem erosion of Uganda’s tax base by multinational enterprises.

Another issue is that we are trying to streamline the definition of agro-processing exemptions in the Income Tax Act. This will limit the scope of agro-processing by substituting the definitions with specific agricultural activities such as fruit farming, animal husbandry and so forth. This is so because people have been hiding under that definition to escape paying taxes.

Among the measures to be scrapped include, the Investment Trader Regime under the VAT law. This regime has been abused with a lot of revenue lost. We also want to introduce a tax payment system to increase on tax compliancy and bring many taxpayers into a taxable bracket. This is hoped to ease tax administration and minimize compliancy costs.

We have also initiated a termination of Government incentives for payment of taxes on construction of hotels. Government intervened in the hotel sector by paying off taxes for people who were constructing them. We are now doing away with that position given the fact that it has achieved its objective of boosting the hotel sector in the country. So, this facility has now been phased out.

Through URA, the ministry is also boosting efforts to collect tax revenues that are due but remain uncollected for a long time. We need a budget to carry out those activities, Mr Speaker.

On the capital markets, there was a recommendation that its funding is reduced. But our response is that the Capital Markets Authority is an autonomous institution charged with developing and regulating the capital markets in Uganda, which are a key vehicle for mobilising resources. However, I want to point out that at the moment the capital market is very shallow with only 14 companies listed. So, we need to broaden this. 

Therefore, the authority is mandated to mobilize more economic agents into the capital markets to enhance benefits to the country. If we get more investors, we will then be able to create employment, generate more taxes and be able to effect more economic activities throughout the country.

At the time of presenting the Budget Framework Paper, Parliament actually recommended an increase in the budget for Capital Markets Authority to Shs 3 billion but we were only able to raise Shs1 billion due to resource constraints. It would therefore be surprising that even this money that we managed to raise would be cut. 

The National Lotteries Board is also a statutory body established under the law. The constitution of the Board is a person appointed by the minister, another person from the Treasury office of accounts or his representative and any other public officer appointed by the minister. The Board is supported by three officers. There is an established structure and plan to recruit field officers so that they are able to do this work. 

The functions of the lotteries board, among other things, includes monitoring and regulation of the national lottery as operated by the minister’s appointed agent; to monitor and regulate other forms of gambling, like gaming, pool betting and casinos in the country; also to advise the minister on policy, legal and operational issues. It is therefore very important that this board, which is supposed to regulate issues like gambling, is strengthened. 

On Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust Tribunal, the committee rightly noted that this has been in place for a long time and that Government has been trying to wind up these non-performing assets. Even last week in Cabinet, we discussed a Bill for winding up this Trust. 

Out of the Shs 450 million budgeted, Shs 231 million will be to cater for wages because in the process of winding up – there are very many assets and many debts and many cases in the courts of law which will need to be managed in transition before we completely wind up. 

So, handling of ongoing litigation in courts of law, preparing and executing the process of handing over the residual activities, and they are not few because the list of assets is very long; Cabinet put up a sub-committee to study the different kinds of assets and give good advice on how they can be handled including who will manage those assets when we wind up. Are we going to contract them to somebody? Is it going to be a buyout? Is it going to be a department? All those issues will need to be handled. 

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank my friend, the honourable minister for giving way. Mr Speaker, we shall need procedural guidance and I refer the minister to page 7 of the report. The concern raised by the committee is actually on the first paragraph on NPART. And it says, “The committee noted that during the last financial year, Parliament appropriated funds for the residual winding up of NPART and agreed to reject any further request for more funds.” That is the concern of the committee. 

If the minister is replying, he should reply to this concern that actually money has already been appropriated last year for residual winding up. It is not about what he is talking about. So, is the minister procedurally correct to divert us in explaining the winding up process yet money had already been appropriated for residual winding up? We shall need your guidance, Mr Speaker.

MR BASAJJABALABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. All through the process of the House debating reports presented by committees, I have critically observed that Members of the frontbench come with pre-prepared text and they respond to committee reports based on political statements. The House and members raise very pertinent issues that require precise answers but ministers instead divert the House by making political statements. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. Is this the procedure that the House will continuously receive pre-prepared text and questions asked by members on the Floor are not responded to? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In future we will be asking ministers to lay them on the Table and then respond to what has been raised when they are here. (Applause) And that might have to start now. There are issues that have been raised now, are you going to address them later?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the issues I am replying to have been raised in this committee report besides what has been raised on the Floor. Most of the cardinal issues were raised in this report and that is what I am answering. Besides that I will be able to answer what has been raised on the Floor. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed then.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Tribunal has not been wound up. There is still a cost that will accrue when we embark on its winding up. There is a recommendation about aligning the budget strategy to the National Development Plan –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, why don’t you deal with this issue that has been raised on what the committee noted that money was appropriated for winding up last financial year. That is the only way we are going to be able to move forward. Please clear that one up.  

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, what I said before this House is that it is true money was appropriated for the residual winding up of NPART. And since it was not wound up – the Bill for its winding up has taken some time. It is now before Cabinet. So this money, if it was not used for the winding up, is what is being budgeted now so that it can be used for this activity. [MR KATUNTU: “Clarification.”) If you take into account -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This one I will take into account.

MR KATUNTU:  Mr Speaker, we are having a session to explain monies that were appropriated last time. Money was provided for this particular activity. What we want to know, where is that money? If it was provided for and NPART was not wound up, there was no residual wound up. Did you divert the money? Tell us that the money was diverted then we should know that actually you need more money. 

The report says that the committee “will not provide any further funds for that particular activity.” We just need simple answers and then we proceed.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, in the Government process if money is allocated for an activity and the activity does not take place; that money is not used unless it has been reallocated for other activities. I cannot confirm because I would not be telling the truth. What I know is that any money that is appropriated and not used is returned to the consolidated fund if it has not been reallocated for other activities. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I am going to ask the chair to guide on this because they are the ones who made this statement.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the committee has been so strong on NPART. Last financial year, we inherited a similar recommendation. There have been successive pledges to wind up NPART.  We were not convinced on two grounds; we asked the ministry to define what winding up activities are. Does taking a Bill to cabinet require money? Justify it. We were not convinced on that ground. We chose that we allow money for salaries of staff of the Trust and money for staff of the Tribunal who can do the winding up. This is because if someone is paid what winding up is it?

We also have other issues with the assets; we never got to understand the assets. We felt that it was not wise for us to put a vote on activities purportedly to wind up what we do not understand. 

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, in my other private functions as a lawyer; I remember as far back as 1993, the issue of winding up the NPART was on the Table. I am surprised that up to today, it is still winding up.

I think one of the things that we must come clearly about is to give a timeframe within which NPART must wind. We have a problem even with the assets. The chairman of the committee has told us that when they put the question about the type if assets available, they seemed not be there. It appears that NPART is being kept as a repository for non-performing staffs who have no employment anywhere and we cannot entertain this.

MR KAJARA: I would like to appreciate the concerns of the members because it has a taken a long time to wind this Tribunal. But I told this House that only last week in Cabinet we were a considering the Bill for winding up this Tribunal. 

The committee in its wisdom recommends that within six months the minister should table the winding up Bill before Parliament; the Minister should also report on assets under NPAAT and incomes recovered if any from the sale or hire of these assets.

I agree entirely with this recommendation and we should have a time limit and we get out of it. We should not spend more money.

There was a recommendation about the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID). Our response is that there has been substantial progress on this project; infrastructure development with 50 percent of the banana processing factory already done and 75 percent of the water works completed.

Whereas significant progress has been done on the civil works for the factory and water supply, about Shs 28 billion is still required to complete the remaining tasks of the civil works for the factory, the water supply, additional equipment, quality assurance and biogas. 

When you start a project and you stop halfway or do not complete it, the effect will be that you will have lost the money. Out of the Shs 28 billion, we have allocated Shs 10.2 billion and there is still a requirement of Shs 17.8 billion which is not funded this financial year. As the project approaches its logical conclusion, we will ensure as a ministry that Auditor-General’s issues are strongly addressed during this financial year and actually we have taken a step further to put a monitoring team to ensure that all the activities of this project are properly monitored and money is put to good use. 

There was a recommendation on the sub-county development project. This project has been ongoing and it is funded by Government. It commenced in 2007 and is due to end in the 2012/2013. It was also profiled in the public investment plan. This project is as a result of our constitutional mandate of overseeing economic planning and strategic development initiatives.

We coordinate this project with Ministry of Local Government, Uganda Bureau of Statistics, National Leadership Institute Kyankwanzi, the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, among other agencies. What the project has achieved so far is that we have supported provision of 1,036 motorcycles to sub-county chiefs; we have also provided 1,345 motorcycles to LC III chairmen. We are also developing a community information system in 49 districts. So, as expected, an independent evaluation will be done after completion of this project to ascertain the extent to which the project has met its objectives. 

On the issue of Enterprise Uganda and youth entrepreneurship, the committee observed that Shs 1.8 billion was appropriated in the last financial year and that the impact of training could not be ascertained. I would like to confirm to the House that the money allocated to Enterprise Uganda in the last financial year was used to provide training to 8,401 youth from across the country. In addition, 200, micro, small and medium enterprises were also supported through the provision of business development services. 

On concerns regarding its impact on training, I wish to note that while Government has continued to provide resources for alleviating youth unemployment, Enterprise Uganda has been in existence for the last 16 years addressing the needs of micro, small and medium enterprises and only went into youth entrepreneurship empowerment four years ago and in execution of the above, Enterprise Uganda has depended on different partners including Government and development partners. 

During this period, Enterprise Uganda has carried out a number of programmes. There is a basic programme for the youth which benefited 18,531 women entrepreneurs, 3,800 entrepreneurship training workshops; it has benefited 1,260 people, business linkages to rural communities; 7,670 people; management skills in short cases has benefited 4,900 people and the duo carry employment and civil servants has benefited 2,800 people. 

On lack of a clear training framework, Government recognises that this is an enormous problem. So, we have been working with the Commonwealth Secretariat to develop a micro, small and medium enterprises policy so that it can fill this gap. 

On whether Enterprise Uganda will be the only institution to train the youth, guidelines are being developed and we have made a number of consultations including the Members of Parliament for the youths and we have agreed that it will not only be Enterprise Uganda to carry out this training and that any Government certified institution which has the capacity to train will be involved in the training to execute this youth programme -(Interruption)

MS AMODING: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable minister for giving way. As you can understand, this issue is very crucial. I thank you for clarifying the issue on Enterprise Uganda. I don’t really have a problem with that but I want to draw the attention of the House to this matter that it is not only the Enterprise Uganda funds that we are talking about. There is a broader fund that we have inquired. The Shs 25.4billion, how come this is not being talked about in this House? The Shs 16.5 billion which is all a package which you have told the youth of this country that you are providing in this financial year; what are we going to tell these people?

MR KAJARA: It is the next point that I am coming to. Actually the whole of this package is called employment generation strategy. It is a multi-donation approach which will be applied to stimulate job creation over the short and medium term. It will focus on improving competitiveness of the business environment to enable the private sector play a dominant role for employment generation and it will be reinforced by vocational training. 

Hon. Amoding alluded to the Shs 44 billion that was mentioned in the Budget Speech and which has time and again been re-echoed by members. Of that money, Shs 25 billion has been budgeted for the creation of venture capital funds to spearhead private sector-led employment generation, especially the youth. This Shs 25 billion has two components:  the first component was a grant by the Germany Government through KFW, which is being managed by the DFCU Bank. 

This money was initially lent to microfinance and the understanding was that if it was brought back, it would still be managed by the bank for other Government economic activities. So, when this money was returned to DFCU, Government in its wisdom - the amount is Shs 12.5 billion - has decided that this money goes into this venture capital fund for the youth, still managed by DFCU Bank, because originally the donors have insisted that this money must be managed in that manner. 

In addition to that, we have requested commercial banks to match a contribution and they have agreed to also put Shs 12.5 billion –(Ms Nantaba rose_)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You had risen first on a point of information and now it is order.

MS NANTABA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister appeared in our committee and he reliably informed us that other banks have already been put in the line to have the same money and now he is saying that there has been a dictation that DFCU alone takes on the capital venture fund. Is it in order therefore for the honourable minister to misinform, to mislead and to continue misguiding this house?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was not in that committee; I am not able to rule on that point of order. 

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If Members could really be patient so that we give this information in full because what I was about to say is that other banks have agreed to contribute another Shs 12.5 billion. 

There is Centenary Bank and also Stanbic Bank to match that one of DFCU which makes it Shs 25 billion. Now, of that Shs 44 billion, Shs 3.5 billion will be given to approved institutions to undertake entrepreneur financial training in preparation for applying for the venture fund. These will include, among others, Enterprise Uganda and others which were approved by Government.

There is also in this package, Shs 16.5 billion to build and improve urban workplaces and markets starting with Kampala Capital City Authority -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I am giving you an additional seven minutes to finish and kindly finish in seven minutes. 

MR KAJARA: And Mr Speaker, that is the money that makes what we have termed as employment generation strategy. This capital fund is aimed at employment creation, provision of basic goods and services and generation of tax revenues. The proposed programme is to address shortcomings which were faced in the past such as lack of adequate collateral and under-capitalisation of businesses, among other things. 

The rationale for this fund is that it will have countrywide access and that is why these other banks have been involved. There will be expert handling of this resource and that is why the banks, and we as Government, have insisted that it is handled through banks because we are also cognisant that in the past money was passed, like the YES Fund that was mismanaged in the past. So, there will be transparency in that all applications will be evaluated using generally accepted loan criteria. 

There will be accountability; the banks will provide twice yearly reports to Government and KFW and there will be sustainability in that banks will collect the loan repayments through their usual collection mechanism and the fund will then be revolving. 

The obligation of Government is to support provision of the fund to this partnership with banks and it will also have the responsibility of providing the overall policy framework and guidance on the eligibility criteria for accessing this fund. It will also encourage organisations and individuals to support SMEs’ growth. 

On the other hand, the banks will match the contributions and keep increasing as more banks come on board. They will conduct due diligence on all loan applications. They will also provide a summary of beneficiaries in these reports which will be biannual and as the ministry did promise, we are going to have an opportunity to explain this project at length to Members of Parliament for your input and so that you can also advise on how our constituents can benefit.

There was an issue on micro-finance, which was raised and the committee recommended an increment of Shs 923 million to be allocated to other strategic areas. The additional allocation of Shs 923 million is as a result of donor funding in this financial year. To match this donor funding, Government reduced its funding by Shs 0.2 billion. Therefore, the Shs 923 million which is earmarked to be allocated as recommended by the committee is for specific activities as per the agreement between Government and the donors.

Mr Speaker, there are challenges between organisations like UKUSKU and SACCOs. I wish to inform this House that these challenges have since been resolved. The programme has experienced some challenges because it needed to fully adhere to public procurement and disposal regulations. These procedures have since been fulfilled and the needed items have been delivered to SACCOs. So with the above progress it is not good to cut funding because it will affect the programme in terms in achieving its objectives.

In terms of the micro-finance regulatory framework, the ministry drafted and submitted a draft Cabinet paper on principles for regulation and supervision of SACCOs and other unregulated and unsupervised micro-finance institutions. 

The Cabinet secretariat has submitted comments to the ministry on the draft paper of Cabinet and the ministry is currently responding and we are going, in the shortest possible time, to put in place, a legal framework under which microfinance institutions will operate. 

On the Micro-finance Support Centre, this is a wholly owned Government lending company -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At the pain of interrupting my good friend, the honourable minister of finance, all these issues raised by the committee, right from the sub-county development project to the investment and private sector function, going through the training framework and now talking about the SACCOs, the concern of the committee is to have a clear framework whether legal or training framework. 

Apparently what the minister is responding to is that yes, very soon you are going to table before Parliament and I am wondering which should come first. Are these programmes conceived on hoof? Do we first spend money then we work backwards? And it is a trend that the ministry has been engaging and I was really finding myself in a difficult situation to address the concerns of the committee that yes, those proposals are good. 

We agree with you that they are good. They are excellent and they are high sounding but can we have the capacity to regulate them so that as you move along you are now telling us you shall be tabling them to enable our constituents to see how they can benefit. But we are saying that will be a step ahead. Can you conceive the legal and training frameworks and we have them in place then you can bring your proposals and we support you hon. Minister? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, thank you for giving way. Hon. Ssekikubo is raising a pertinent issue. We all agree that Enterprise Uganda is doing a good job but there are issues which must be addressed. 

One is that Enterprise Uganda was a project and at a certain stage it turned itself into a foundation but this foundation is working with Government without any legal framework in place. So, when it was still a project there was a framework under which it was co-operating and working with the ministry of finance but after ceasing being a project and becoming a foundation, the ministry should not have transited all the projects it was doing at that time. It could have had a framework put in place before putting into consideration these projects.

Secondly, the other issue is that as we wait, we are looking at the employees being paid the salary by Government yet money is given for training and at the same time, the same organisation is charging people it is training. Now you ask yourself, where does that money it charges the trainees go? Because the salaries are being paid by Government and then there are also other funds for training.

So, the honourable minister could be specific and inform this House on what is going to be done on that issue. Thank you.

MR KAJARA: When we appeared before the committees of Parliament, we did explain that there is an understanding between Enterprise Uganda and Government. Government has subscribed to the membership of this organisation. Some of the members of this Foundation are in Government in the representative capacity because in the first instance, it was a Government project, which was supported by UNDP. But because of the work it was doing and for continuity, we thought that we would continue with this organisation and the understanding is clear concerning the benefits and what they do to the communities.

On the issue raised by hon. Ssekikubo, we are actually doing the very thing. We have been moving where there was no legal framework and we are now trying to legalise it so that the SACCOs can work within a defined framework and that is exactly what we are doing. The process is still on and –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, your time is up, I am not going to add any more time. There is a procedural point to wind up.

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank the Speaker. I need to put it on record that I have great respect for my learned brother the Minister of Finance and I am raising this in no way to undermine what he has been saying. 

First of all, I am not a Member of this committee. If I was, I would have had the opportunity to go through this policy statement but I was just perusing it here and I find something very interesting, which I think the minister should clarify to us.

He just said that when you look at Vote 1404, page nine of the report it goes up to page 10; sub-county development projects. You have just stated that this project is ending in 2012. Then I am looking at your policy statement page 66. You go to the same Vote function 1404. Actually you have come up with the same; sub-county development model. What you have changed is the word “project” and now it is “model”. It is going up to 2014. Is the project ending next year or it is a continuation of this same project by only changing the word “project” to “model”?

MS NAGGAYI: Is it in order for me to raise a point of concern that over 100 families are agitated and their livelihoods are hanging in balance; their children do not know if they can attend school, right from Buganda Road flats? The minister was directed by this House and he has not seen it fit to respond to that query. Is it in order for him to continue to disregard?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you amending or proposing because I thought there was a debate going on and we need to be relevant to the subject we are dealing with?

MS NAGGAYI: I raised it because it is a concern that is in this year’s budget and it is in the docket of the ministry of finance. At least he would have said that he will bring that clarification but for him to ignore it, I think is not in order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have given him the opportunity to wind up.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Regarding the issue raised by hon. Katuntu, the information I have is that it will be ending in 2012. I told this House that this project started in 2007/2008 fiscal year and it will end on 1st July 2012/2013 fiscal year.

Since I am winding up, there were some questions, which were raised on the Floor of the House -(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, they are procedures on how you do these things. What point are you raising? You just storm out and you want to speak? We need to be guided. On what point do you rise? Is it a point of order, information or clarification?

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am rising on a point of procedure. The honourable minister has stated that the programme is winding up next financial year and he has stated that it started in 2007. Now does he mean, as he has promised, to bring a legal framework when the project itself is winding up? Is he not taking this Parliament for a ride to say that within one year he is bringing a legal framework yet the project started in 2007 and it is winding up? Do we really take his word?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I think the politicians in Ministry of Finance are being conned by the bureaucrats and it is a big problem. First of all, can we have an explanation? Whereas you use “sub-county development project”, you have changed it to “sub-county development model” and that is not true because when you look at your policy statement, it is the same vote. For the Financial Year 2013/2014, you are projecting a budget of Shs 8.8 billion for the same project. 

Just look at page 66. Maybe I can pass over the policy statement to the Minister. (Laughter) So really we have a big problem with this document and I think Ministry of Finance has done it deliberately. This issue was also raised by a colleague yesterday about playing around with words and yet doing the same thing while asking for different amounts of money. Hon. Minister, there is a very big problem in your ministry.

MR KAJARA: If you look at page 242 of the same document, starting date – Development Policy Research and Monitoring Sub-county Development – the starting date is July 1st 2007 and project end date is 01 July 2013. Page 104: MTF Projections. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, maybe I need to reconcile these two. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, we have adopted a procedure here that after we approve a report of the finance committee today – because we adopted the other 12 already – we shall refer this matter back to the Budget Committee under Rule 147 of our Rules of Procedure so that you have an opportunity to go and iron out some of those details with the committee. By the time we come back to deal with the Finance and Appropriation Bills we will have a clearer picture. 

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, there were a number of issues that were raised on the Floor of the House. One of them is that there is Shs 500 billion fake currency notes on the market. I would like to say that, as Government, we are not aware that there are fake notes of that magnitude. If the Member has more information he should inform us.

On the Public Private Partnerships, the policy is already in place; we have the Bill before Cabinet and within the next two months we should have it before Parliament. But how has Government been implementing PPPs? First of all, there are other avenues such as partnerships, memoranda of understanding, shareholding – where Government holds shares in other companies. So we have not been devoid – because there is company law under which Government has been working – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please wind up!

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, on the Soroti Fruit Factory, I would like to inform this House that money had been budgeted and some activities like picking consultants, feasibility study have been made and US $6.5 million has been identified to execute this project – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. I call upon the chairperson of the committee to close this matter.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank members for the comments they have made on our report. I also thank the members of our committee for the work they did. I have a few comments to make before I move that we adopt the report – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have only three minutes.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Minister raised concern over some of the re-allocations we proposed. I want to assure him that we took time in the retreat; the Ministry of Finance had three ministers in full time attendance, namely hon. Omach, hon. Kasaija and hon. Okao. We discussed these issues; we justified and agreed on the basis of these re-allocations. 

First, we are not suggesting new priorities; that is not our mandate. We are looking at the proposed, to be funded and the unfunded and the committee is weighing on the importance. Our basis is on the following: wastage as defined in the Budget Speech; unjustified increments; budgets that are not detailed – for example an activity is just given a figure and yet when you check for the previous year’s allocation, there is an increment. Here we raise concern and above all we are weighing which activity - do we not fund the census and we fund the sub-county model? Do we not fund the Auditor-General to carry out more audits and we fund NPART? This was the basis on which the committee made its re-allocation and we have a justification for every one of them. If it was not because of time, I would have repeated them. I am not strongly opposed to hon. Kajara; maybe because he was not in our meeting. 

I appeal to the Ministry of Finance to always bring the people with whom we have gone through the journey together because it was not an easy exercise; we slept in a hotel for two days and we met up to midnight. So we believe that these re-allocations should be respected and money be given to the areas. Thereafter, Government can go back and maybe think of supplementary appropriation.

Finally, I want to comment on two points. First, the PPPs; why we are requesting for a law? We need to define two concepts under the Public Private Partnerships. There is where you find Government is inviting people with money from the private sector to invest and then they recoup their money more or less like a mortgage. That is one form of PPP. Then there is where you find Government is strategically intervening to provide money to boost a private project for some broader interest. So we are saying we need a law that defines these two forms; are we going the UK format where a police barracks is built by a private investor and rent goes to that person or it is the Bwebajja or Munyonyo style, where we come in strategically to boost that sector? So we need the law to define these undertakings such that the Solicitor-General and the Auditor-General are not put in problems. 

Then there is the question of Enterprise Uganda; the committee is not in any way undermining its work. What we are saying is that this training must be defined; who does what? There is no doubt that Enterprise Uganda is good and skilled. But if youths in Kamwenge want to grow spinach, that training is not there in Enterprise Uganda. If the female youths want to weave baskets, you cannot find that training in Enterprise Uganda. So we are saying that the training should be defined and then the components for Enterprise Uganda be left to it and then the other tailor-made ones – for example, the technology at the Faculty of Science and Technology at Makerere where youths were innovating cars; that can be a training tailor-made to create employment. (Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, wind up.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I thank you. We said 4.8 or 4.6 because maybe they can get 2.0 billion as Enterprise Uganda. Let them carry out those activities they are good at and then the next financial year, the ministry of finance, in consultation with the ministry of gender and the youths structures, define and agree on a model and then through competitive bidding we source out institutions that can offer this training we need. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, allow me move under rule 177(2) that Parliament adopts this report of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and pass the budget for the Financial Year 2011/2012. I beg to move  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question –

6.24
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am at page 7 of the report. I propose to amend the second recommendation right at the bottom of the page by deleting the entire recommendation and replacing it with the following: “That no funds be appropriated to NPART” –(Interjections)- I have a justification. 

Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer and you know that in Uganda, for purposes of liquidation of all Government companies and assets, we have the Administrator-General and the Registrar of Companies, who are paid specifically for purposes of liquidating Government companies for purposes of winding up – and we budget for them. When we wanted to liquidate UDC or Toro and Mityana Tea Company, we passed them over to the Registrar of Companies. What is very different with NPART? Why must we pay people to liquidate NPART when we are paying the Registrar of Companies to do preciously the same? I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman?

MR TUMWEBAZE: I am constrained because while we disallowed monies or reallocated monies for the winding up activities, which he rightly articulates, that is being done by someone else. I persuade him and Members to look at the staff in this trust. You cannot just wake up and say, “No salary!” Even if the Government is not smart in its procedure, what about the people who are there? Our request would be that let us allow the wages but not the other money and that is exactly what we are proposing. That would be my humble request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, what you are recommending is that only 250, which relates to wages. Is that what you are saying? Let us process this properly so that we do not bring in too many things. Hon. Odoi, you moved this motion but there are members of staff there who are not part of this, and they need to be properly sent off.

MR ODOI: I will concede if a timeframe is given for them to find alternative employment –(Interjections)- this cannot be held in perpetuity.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has said six months. 

MR ODOI: Six months? I will concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now that one is finished. I had already picked hon. Alaso for the next amendment because this one is finished.

6.28 
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 11, with the very last recommendation of the committee on the Soroti Fruit Factory, I would like to move an amendment to the effect that the project implementation be moved to the Ministry of Trade and Industry. The other bit of that amendment is that the committee should investigate the utilisation of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t we deal with one at a time?

MS ALASO: They are both for the factory.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But they are different amendments. The amendment is that they move – in fact, it is not an amendment as such but you are completely making a new proposal. 

MS ALASO: I am sorry I thought it would be an amendment but if its sounds like a new proposal and if it is agreeable, so be it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because that was not proposed by them at all. So, about the issue of moving it to the ministry of trade or something; well, let us have the minister on this. 

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): The function of shifting projects from one sector to another is really an Executive function, and that is why I was at pains to answer hon. Ekanya who suggested that a, b, c, d be moved from here to there. The prerogative of re-organising Government and sectors belongs to His Excellency, the President, and in this case, he has made certain recommendations. 

Why the ministry of finance? Because it is strategic; it crosscuts across all sectors of water, health, education or industry and that is why UDC which is implementing this project is under the ministry of finance. We even have a letter from His Excellency, the President, stating the reasons as to why certain projects must belong in some sectors. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us first resolve this issue. The point that he raises and which I think is important is that, this is specifically an Executive function and what we are doing is recommending to the Executive to do something. Is that what you are suggesting? We do not want to do things in vain. But the justification for why that thing has been located there has been given by the minister, like crosscutting and so on and so forth. Does that make sense to you, hon. Alaso?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I listened with appreciation to the minister’s explanation but I got the impression that we actually recommend to the Executive. I am hoping that they will see sense in the fact that the ministry of finance has hitherto three financial years down the road, not ensured the implementation of this even when the Parliament of Uganda has allocated resources. 

Three years running and we have fruits rotting in Teso as though there was no presidential pledge! Actually, the biggest beneficiary of my proposal might be His Excellency, the President of Uganda, who made the pledge to the people of Teso. So, I really think this recommendation could - (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give to my colleague is that the recommendation is very necessary because UDC, as a corporation, is causing a rift even within the ministers themselves. The Minister of Trade and the Minister of Finance are fighting openly over where UDC must be placed. When both ministers appeared in our committee on trade, we discussed this issue and there was an exchange on where it should be. So, the recommendation of Parliament would save the war between the two ministers.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I listened to my sister hon. Alaso carefully saying that she was proposing this recommendation so that maybe Government can see sense; meaning that maybe where it is now is not quite sensible.

First and foremost, as the minister of finance said, this project is under UDC and UDC is still under Finance. Unless the status quo changes, the project remains under the ministry of finance because it is being operationalised by UDC and I think this recommendation will not help. Unless if the recommendation is saying, “Change UDC”, therefore, the projects go with it. Personally, I think at this stage and with respect to this report and the current recommendation, it will serve that this project still remains under Finance because it is still being operationalised by UDC.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. UDC is set up under an Act of Parliament and under that Act, a supervisory ministry was envisaged and that ministry that was envisaged by the Act is actually Ministry of Trade. That means actually it is not about the prerogative of the President -(Interruption)

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give to my colleague, hon. Katuntu, is that we have looked at the UDC Act of 1952 and the Act does not say where UDC should belong. It left that prerogative to the authority and the minister is usually defined. In any Act of Parliament, they say, “Minister means minister for this” but in the case of the UDC Act 1952, it does not say that that minister is a Minister of Trade and Industry. It went to that ministry by way of allocation of function by the authority then. That is the information I want to give.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We need to save this country. There are ten Chinese projects, which the President ordered to be implemented under UDC: glass making, paint making, boat making, silos, cement factories, among others. That project has stalled for the last four years because Ministry of Finance, even after the directive of the President, refused to hand over UDC to Trade and those projects are not taking off and the Chinese are about to withdraw -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying there was a presidential directive?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask properly. Are you saying there was a presidential directive that UDC be transferred to Trade?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I speak with authority, there was a presidential directive! There are these projects but because Ministry of Finance refused, the projects have not taken off and the PS, hon. Otafiire and the technical people in Trade cannot move forward with this project. They are from Karamoja to western Uganda and, therefore, I want to beg this House that we need to take the decision now to move UDC to Trade.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we cannot take the decision now to move UDC to Trade. We can recommend. That is the only thing we can do.

MR KATUNTU: I was still holding the Floor, Mr Speaker. I think the minister is right. I want to agree with him. Ordinarily, when a law mentions a ministry or a minister, it should define. What the Act actually did, it mentioned the ministry without actually defining it. That is what we call in law a “lacuna” or a gap and that gap is actually causing this sort of confusion. That is why each ministry sort of demands to be the home of UDC. So, the lacuna or the gap was actually caused by Parliament -(Interruption)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Thank you very much hon. Katuntu. Mr Speaker, in as much as so many have spoken about where UDC should be, there are those of us who have been in this country and worked with or under UDC and we know where it has always fallen. It has always fallen under the ministry responsible for industry and if my information is correct, I think the ministry responsible for industry is now together with the ministry of trade.

Above all, I think it is trite information to this House and the country as whole that from 1952, when this Act was passed, that UDC has always been under the ministry responsible for industry and I challenge anybody to correct me on this. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I want to provide information to the House and to hon. Katuntu because I appreciate his concerns. It is true the ministry responsible for UDC was not mentioned in the Act. The current UDC is not actually UDC, it is UDCL. I can inform the House that I happen to have been personally involved in reviving the old UDC to UDCL when I was in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. When that was done and through Cabinet, a view was expressed that UDCL this time would be an arm of Government for investing in enterprises where Government has an interest across sectors of the economy. Instead of Government revising parastatals, instead of the private/public partnership arrangement, it would now be UDCL as an arm of Government participating in these ventures. 

And as one colleague has said, UDCL can be part of the Ministry of Finance as a strategic position –(Interjections)- there is nothing logical about this. It can invest in Soroti factory; it can invest in agriculture; it can invest anywhere. I am presenting clean facts. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: I think, Mr Speaker, from the debate on the Floor, you realise there is one problem: that actually Ministry of Finance has too much on its plate.  Finance should focus on policy; but it has now degenerated into implementation. It is running projects – things that they do not even have the capacity to manage! 

The reason why a project, which should have started four or five years ago, has not taken off is because they lack the capacity. They are almost everywhere and actually doing nothing. Therefore, on this issue, we have to review these million projects going on in the ministry of finance. They should go to their mother ministries to be supervised there and finance remains on policy. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If the suggestion by hon. Nasasira will help to save the Soroti Fruit Factory, then let us proceed with the amendment to recommend UDC, as a whole unit, to be moved to Ministry of Trade and Industry – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information I have is that it is no longer UDC; it is now UDCL. That is, Uganda Development Corporation Limited.
 
MR AKENA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I am honestly lost; the Ministry of Finance are quoting an Act of 1952. Then we got a clarification from hon. Kamuntu about some changes, which took place. I am not aware whether we made any changes to the 1952 Act. So what is this creature called UDCL? Under what Act is it operating so that we are able to advise Government correctly as to where UDCL should be? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, you modified your position to say, it should be UDCL that should be transferred to the ministry responsible for Industry. If we are going to make it that way, then we have got to be very specific about – my other job is that I draft laws. So you are going to say something like, “Ministry responsible for Industry”, instead of saying, “The Ministry of Trade”. That might help more. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, thank you so much for your wise counsel. I, therefore, would like to propose a new recommendation on page 12 that this House recommends that the Uganda Development Corporation be moved to be supervised by the Ministry responsible for Industry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be amended in that effect to reflect what the honourable member has proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I want to make a second proposal on page 11, which you had advised me to wait until we dispose of the first one. Still as a recommendation under the Soroti Fruit Factory, I would like to propose that the committee investigates the utilisation of the initially allocated funds worth Shs 10 billion of the Financial Year 2010/2011 and take appropriate action. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I have no objection to the proposal.

MR BASAJJABALABA: Mr Speaker, there is much discomfort expressed by members about the subvention under Ministry of Finance. It is as a result of the matter raised yesterday by one member. The duplication of these projects – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are at a stage where we are proposing amendments. If you are going to make general remarks, I could give you an opportunity when we are through with these amendments to make those general remarks. 

6.51
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same vein, as the Uganda Development Corporation Limited, I move to page 14 to also recommend on this National Enterprise Corporation where the committee observed that NEC is a commercial arm of the Ministry of Defence. The committee is concerned about the increasing lack of commitment by the ministry in supervising NEC and appointing a board, which is currently not in place. 

I belong to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and our efforts to interface with NEC failed because they claimed they are in Finance. I, therefore, propose a recommendation that NEC be transferred to the Ministry of Defence where it will be properly supervised.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, NEC is officially under Ministry of Defence. It is the Ministry of Defence actually who should appoint the Board. We were told that the Ministry of Finance has a stake in NEC as one of the shareholders, and they have that component of the tractor hire scheme. So, officially they are in Defence. 

Now the recommendation we made is that we would want to see the Ministry of Defence come up more to take charge of the entire operation and maybe if Ministry of Finance is to maintain a presence, it should be to that specific component. So, if we take this recommendation, his concern is as well catered for.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, hon. Ssekikubo?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, what formed my recommendation was: not only is NEC concerned with tractors, it has pharmaceuticals, production, construction and many other ventures. Also being under Finance is one component, but – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not under Finance because he has just clarified on that. It is under Defence except that Finance has shares in it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, but in the course of our interaction with the ministry, NEC was left with Finance and that is why we never interfaced with it. So, the practicality of this all is that it is not under the purview of Ministry of Defence where it should lie.

DR KIYONGA: First, it is not true, Mr Speaker, that we did not discuss NEC in the Committee of Defence; we did it very comprehensively. But in terms of shareholding, the official shareholder is the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Defence only provides oversight. It also appoints the board of directors. When it comes to capitalization, for example, if they need to be given additional money or if they are declaring profits or losses, they have to go to the Ministry of Finance. We have no problem with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had already allowed hon. Kamuntu. I know that your names are almost the same, but that Member is called hon. Prof Kamuntu and you are hon. Katuntu.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, you have observed quite correctly because sometimes people call me Katuntu, and I suffer so many things I have not done –(Interjections)- no, sometimes it is not about blessings as you think.

Anyway, the issue that hon. Ssekikubo has raised also relates to something you have already ruled on. The issue is, how does a Government in a liberalised economy invest in private enterprises to avoid the state monopoly? UDCL was trying to cure that. That instead of the Ministry of Finance being a shareholder, Government should use UDCL, as an arm independent of Government, to invest as a partner in all these enterprises to avoid a situation that is bothering the House now: that Ministry of Finance somehow appears in NEC; such should have been avoided.

Consequently, for UDCL to go back to the ministry would mean that if Government wanted to invest in power, agriculture, education and so on, they would have to use UDCL, which is under the Ministry of Trade and Industry, which would be a conflict among those ministries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have not given information to guide us on the status of UDCL under the Act of Parliament and whether that has changed or not. I am saying this because from what you are saying, it seems there are two different bodies: one being UDC and the other UDCL. What we are talking about in the recommendation is UDC -

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you look at the policy statement and the committee report, you realise that there is no mention of UDCL; only UDC is talked about. So, this other strange animal called UDCL – see page 295. Also take note that this policy statement is from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -(Interruption)

MR AYENA-ODONG: Thank you very much, hon. Abdu Katuntu, for giving way. When a whole minister and a professor of financial matters makes a statement, it cannot be taken for granted. He has stated that there is an animal called UDCL. And if I am right to assume that the letter “L” stands for the word “Limited,” shall I also be allowed to support the fact that there is a limited liability company? If I am right, it means there is a company that has been formed under the Companies Act making it two organizations: one under an Act of Parliament and another one – if that is true, can the Minister of Finance tell us by what authority and under what arrangements they established another company to compete with UDC? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we were done with the matter of UDC. So, we are not going to revisit it except through a substantive motion. Now that hon. Ssekikubo’s issue has been explained, let us have another contributor.

7.00
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take you to page 11. I would like to propose that we delete this recommendation– 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one?

MR WAIRA: The one that appears in the first bolded paragraph and we recommend that the youth fund including, the one for Enterprise Uganda, is shifted from the Ministry of Finance to that of Gender, the ministry that is mandated to manage youths’ affairs. Unless the minister says otherwise, I still stand by that position.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. James Kakooza.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually when we started debating this policy statement, I moved a motion here and the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, who was in the Chair, ruled that when we handle finance, that motion should be brought back to have that money shifted to the appropriate ministry, which is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that houses the department of the youths. That ruling can be verified from the Hansard.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been talking to these people who are giving us money. One of them is DFCU and other banks. They have expressed reservation that they will not participate in this programme if the mandate is shifted from Ministry of Finance, which they deal with. However, Mr Speaker, it is your prerogative, at the expense of losing this money. If we change it –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, this is a recommendation that is being proposed, isn’t it? 

MR NASASIRA: I want to appeal to honourable members. It is true Enterprise Uganda is now going to carry out majorly the training of youths but next year, Enterprise Uganda could be training LCs. I don’t know whether somebody will come here and say Enterprise Uganda now moves from Gender to Ministry of Local Government. 

What is important is to see that these programmes, that Enterprise Uganda is going to do for the youths, are made by the ministry responsible for youths so that Enterprise Uganda trains according to packages of programmes for youths and Ministry of Gender is in charge of that. Rather than saying Enterprise Uganda should be here and there; Enterprise Uganda trains in entrepreneurship. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the matter that has been raised by the honourable member is that an amendment be made for this particular recommendation, that this operation be shifted to the ministry of gender. That is what is on the Floor. (Applause)

MR TUMWEBAZE: The recommendation is not bad, but let us not mix the two issues. We had a discussion on this in the committee. Enterprise Uganda is not synonymous with youths. We need to separate those two things. In this regard, we are saying, “the committee recommends that a clear training framework be developed and agreed upon by all stakeholders.” We can add and say, “with the Ministry of Gender taking the lead.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: “With the minister responsible for youths taking the lead” because this is about youths and that is why it is coming up. Is that correct? What is this subject about? Is it strictly about the youths?

This particular section we are dealing with is youth entrepreneurship. So, it is not a general one. It is specific to youth entrepreneurship. That is why the honourable member is saying that it should now move to Gender because it is for youth entrepreneurship. If Enterprise Uganda is going to train people in other areas, it might be called something else but for this specific issue, it is for the youths. 

The final proposition that I heard from the chair of the committee, which is a kind of modification from what the honourable member had proposed, is that this whole thing should take place but with the ministry in charge of youths taking the lead. 

I am trying to summarise how far we have gone. Mr Chairman, is that where we are? Because if that is where we are, then we can now accept to deal with it broadly. 

MR KATUNTU: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification from whom?

MR KATUNTU: From the chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I think we should debate from an informed position. For us who are not members of the committee and are not youths, we may not know this creature called Enterprise Uganda very well. Can the chairperson clarify to us what Enterprise Uganda is? Is it a private company? Is it a Government company? If it is a private company, you cannot start shifting it from ministry to ministry. Until we know what Enterprise Uganda is, then we can debate to see whether we are talking about –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us finish his point otherwise we are all going to get lost. Let us finish his point, the chairman responds – 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, if it is not a government enterprise, then we are talking about an activity and then that activity can be led by the responsible ministry. It should not cause this hullabaloo but can we know from the chairperson what Enterprise Uganda is?

MR TUMWEBAZE: I don’t think I am an authority in telling you what Enterprise Uganda is, but let me tell you the issues we dealt with at committee level.

We were told by the ministry of finance that Enterprise Uganda is very good and very professional -(Interjections)- I am getting to telling you what they told us. Just wait a moment. Mr Ocici appeared before us and we made the following observation. That however good Enterprise Uganda may be, it cannot exhaustively offer the training needs to all the youths; both in school and outside school and even to fresh graduates. That was the observation of the committee. We never delved into who owns -(Interjections)- let me explain what I have been asked.

Our recommendation here is querying the training framework. That is why I am partly not opposed to bringing the Ministry of Gender on board. I can accept an amendment, which says that the Ministry of Gender takes the lead in designing the training framework and the funds thereto. But as to whether Enterprise Uganda should shift from Ministry of Finance, I do not know whether it should be there or not.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, we have to make two distinctions: Enterprise Uganda is an outgrowth. It came out as a result of a project funded by UNDP called Private Sector Development Programme and Decentralisation. I happened to have been the national coordinator for that programme. Government together with UNDP negotiated –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are not listening and then you are going to start asking for clarification.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Uganda Government, through the Ministry of Finance, negotiated with UNDP a successor programme to Private Sector Development Programme and Enterprise Uganda came as a result. It is part of UNDP network - in fact, when you go to Ghana, there is Enterprise Ghana. Consequently, this Enterprise Uganda, because it was negotiated through the Ministry of Finance, is located in the Ministry of Finance. But if you want to take the youth entrepreneurship programme to be executed by Enterprise Uganda - clearly you can move that programme to any ministry that you want but this one cannot be shifted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there is still an issue, what is Enterprise Uganda? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, it is part of global support for governments, which are liberalising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it government-owned or a private enterprise?

PROF. KAMUNTU: It is a government - negotiated programme where UNDP, Government of Uganda, private institutions participate but the Government is represented by Ministry of Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The component that the chairman and the minister have no problem with is the youth entrepreneurship programme, and I think that is what we need to talk about here. The proposal that has been supported by the chairman is that the youth entrepreneurship programme should be handled by the ministry responsible for the youth. Is that correct? I am not talking about Enterprise Uganda but the youth entrepreneurship programme. 

Let me first make this point. In this, I am looking at the recommendation of the committee. “In this regard, the committee recommends that a clear training framework be developed and agreed upon by all stakeholders, other tertiary institutions like universities, and be allowed to compete to undertake entrepreneurship training and a study on the impact of prior training by Enterprise Uganda be carried out.”

MR KATUNTU: I am really at a loss. I want to go along with this debate. I am schooled in law but I am confused about Enterprise Uganda. What is Enterprise Uganda? Let the minister or the chairperson tell us this thing and we know what we are talking about. How can a whole Government fail to know what Enterprise Uganda is all about?

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two concerns over Enterprise Uganda. Mr Ocici happens to be my former lecturer at MUBS as a lecturer in entrepreneurship. What I know is that, they offer consultancy training in entrepreneurship as a private consultancy. If they are a private consultancy, there is no way Government should be paying their staff salaries.

The honourable minister of finance told us that they will withdraw the money if Enterprise Uganda is moved to the ministry of fender. My concern is, is DFCU giving you money or are you channeling money through DFCU to give Enterprise Uganda the consultancy to do the training? This makes me smell a rat in the ministry of finance. Why is the Ministry of Finance stuck on Enterprise Uganda and they cannot even give details.

How can you as a ministry give a consultancy to a private organisation that has no organisational structure? Honestly, even when I was doing it for UWOPA here, I would call for an organisational structure and the profiles of individuals doing the work to be very comprehensive. Here is a Government giving consultancy to an organisation without details. Really, we need to question this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what is the relationship between Government of Uganda and Enterprise Uganda?

MR KAJARA: Information about Enterprise Uganda was requested and it was presented to the Committee on Trade and Industry. Enterprise Uganda is a Foundation; this Foundation was formed after the winding up of a donor-funded project. When the funding elapsed, they saw the activities of that enterprise were very good. They had an idea that they form a foundation and this Foundation has the following members: Government of Uganda, Bank of Uganda, private banks and lastly the European Union. It is a company registered by guarantee. And that Foundation, among its objectives, is train, do consultancies and it can do that work for many institutions including Government. Mr Speaker, I was asked to explain what Enterprise Uganda is and that is what it is.

There are two issues: this money budgeted, the Shs 3.5 billion by Government, is from Government coffers and we have said that it can be given to Enterprise Uganda to train or to any other institution that is certified by Government to train.
 
The other one is about the money for the fund. This is the Shs 25 billion that belongs to KFW and KFW gave this money as a grant to Government, through the DFCU bank. It was first lent to the SAACOs on the understanding that they would bring it back and still be managed by DFCU. It is on that basis that Government is proceeding. This is KFW money but other banks have been encouraged to contribute to this fund in order to run the youths venture fund.

I have told you that the bank would not be comfortable dealing with any agency other than the Ministry of Finance. I thank you.

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. I am a Member of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry and I listened to the minister give information that is not complete and that is selective. It would be procedurally right for the minister to accept information that was given to the committee and I have that information. 

When tasked, Enterprise Uganda came to the committee and we asked them about their status. Through their Executive Director, Mr Ocici, Enterprise Uganda said that they were a project that has recently transited into a foundation. And we asked them that after the transition to a foundation, what is the relationship between Enterprise Uganda and the Ministry of Finance? They said that they are also worried that there is no Memorandum of Understanding or agreement as yet. Actually, Enterprise Uganda is worried that this is not a formal arrangement and we would have wanted the minister to come and tell this Parliament the truth of what the relationship is between the ministry and Enterprise Uganda.

We managed to see the Memorandum of Understanding of the Foundation and individuals signed onto it. The Bank of Uganda was represented by Mrs Nasasira, the ministry of finance was represented by Mr Keith Muhakanizi, who is the Permanent Secretary and other individuals, one of whom is already outside the country, who was managing when UNDP was still funding. So, it is not the UNDP per se but the former individual who was coordinating the funding when he was still in the UNDP. So, are we really listening to the truth from the ministry of finance on the funds and the Enterprise Uganda saga? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, the subject we are dealing with came to you and is under the investment and private sector vote function. As a way forward, you being the chair, would your recommendation still stand the way it is if on the heading of this paragraph, which is “Enterprise Uganda- youth entrepreneurship”, you delete “Enterprise Uganda” and leave “youth entrepreneurship” only, in which case the rest of the investigations that you want the committee to understudy about Enterprise Uganda on the activities to be carried out would still stand. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I agree with you. First of all, Enterprise Uganda comes in because it is stated within the ministerial policy statement. So, we could change this whole thing: one, Enterprise Uganda’s legitimacy to be a recipient of the money is being questioned. So, we could adopt a recommendation that rightly, this money, the Shs 4.6 billion, which is for youth entrepreneurship training, be put to the ministry of youth and gender and then the Ministry of Gender coordinates a competitive process. If Enterprise Uganda so wishes to compete, it accesses the money. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that acceptable?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that formulation. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NASASIRA: I am happy that we made that amendment first and that is what I said earlier that the activities of the youths should be handled by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - whether it is Enterprise Uganda. But I want to clear the impression that may have been created by my good friend, the MP for Kampala, when she talked about who signed for Enterprise Uganda. 

First, you heard that they were trying to establish a foundation and under that foundation, there is the Bank of Uganda, the ministry of finance and there is the UNDP and so on. The mention of my wife’s name is that my wife was the Director of Development Finance at one time at the Bank of Uganda, and it is in that capacity that my wife signed as a representative of the Bank of Uganda. I don’t want that impression created here. I am sure that my wife left as a director of finance to become the director of currency and she has since retired from the bank. So, I don’t want this House to leave with an impression that Enterprise Uganda is a house business of the Nasasiras –(Laughter)– because my friend Ssekikubo was starting to glee in his usual evil-thinking manner. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have agreed on this particular formulation that we leave out Enterprise Uganda, and the rest of the recommendation of the committee stands as it is. Can we now move to the next possible amendment, if there is any?

7.30
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): I am sorry, I have a problem with my third and fourth eye. When you go to page 21, the committee raises the governance question on the National Planning Authority. The recommendation is to the effect that the Act be reviewed to rectify the governance constraint of the fusion between management and the board. And I want to add that beyond that fusion, we need to raise the governance question of the home of the NPA. 

The NPA was born by the ministry of finance but the ministry has not given it the leverage it requires to perform and as you can see, it is always underfunded. I would, therefore, want to propose that the President’s Office takes over the NPA. 

I am aware of the current hegemony between the OPM and finance about who should be in charge of the NPA. There are so many projects in finance, which should be managed directly by the NPA. Even on the next page, the committee rightly talks about the survey. The survey is dillydallying again; UBOS and the NPA are fighting for the same project. So, until we rectify the governance question of where the NPA should be placed – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kindly restate the amendment you are proposing.

MR MUKITALE: The amendment, therefore, is that the Bill to the effect of placing the NPA to belong to the President’s Office be brought to Parliament - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait. The committee reiterates its recommendation that the NPA Act, 2002 be reviewed to rectify this governance constraint. That is the one you want to amend; to say what? 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, what I wanted to bring out clearly is the question of which is the home - the placement - of the NPA? And I am suggesting it should be further streamlined for recognition under President’s Office but not where it is currently, in finance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, does the NPA Act provide it a home? Which is its home under the NPA Act?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, he is recommending that the NPA be supervised by the Office of the President. Now, last year, that was actually our recommendation and it was adopted by this House that NPA - actually we said it should become a commission. That was recommendation No.1 and two, that it should be supervised under Office of the President, after we had benchmarked some country maybe Namibia. So, we did not find it necessary to repeat it. After all, it had been adopted and Government had ignored it. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the chairman has raised an important point but the proposal of the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy is that we needed to amend the NPA Act. I think that recommendation can stand that Government brings an amendment to the NPA Act because as we speak, the NPA Act provides that there shall be a minister responsible for the National Planning Authority. And the President, in his wisdom, has always appointed the Minister of State for Planning under the ministry of finance so that technically NPA, as the Act provides, is under ministry of finance. So, if you want to shift it to presidency or anywhere else, or even sort out the governance issues, you need to amend the Act. So, we need an amendment to recommend Government to bring a Bill to amend the NPA Act other than shifting it because legally it is under Finance; under Planning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what the committee is recommending. The committee reiterates its recommendation that the NPA Act, 2002 be reviewed to rectify this governance constraint. I think it is covered. Isn’t it? It is covered. 

7.36
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Mr Speaker, I want to add an amendment on page 7, about the National Lotteries Board. In this country, telecom companies are running lottery activities unregulated. We have not only been disturbed by messages of people campaigning here but also messages for lottery activities by telecom companies. They are extorting a lot of money from our people. They attract you to send a message as if you are going to get money and the message is very expensive. It is a hundred times more expensive than the ordinary message and this is not being regulated either by Ministry of Finance or the National Lottery Board.

As we restructure the Lottery Board, I want to insert an amendment that the committee on finance investigates the activities of the mobile telephone companies, regarding their activities in banking, Mobile Money and so on, and their activities in lotteries. And at the same time, add that in the present circumstances, when the Lottery Board is restructuring, the Minister of Finance, in conjunction with the other ministers in communication, should regulate the activities of the telecom companies because our people are getting poorer because of these companies. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, the proposal seems to be suggesting that the committee recommends that the National Lotteries Board be restructured, and mandated to regulate the lottery aspects of business being transacted by mobile phone companies. Would that capture it?

MR TUMWEBAZE: That partly captures his amendment but he is also saying that the committee should go further to look into whether these activities by the telecom companies are illegal or in compliance. I have no problem with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Agreed? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is the final formulation? It is lottery? So then that formulation was not complete. I was still just thinking through it, “The committee recommends that the National Lotteries Board be restructured and mandate ….” 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, we can say, as you guide, that the committee recommends that the National Lotteries Board be restructured and mandated to regulate all lottery activities as the committee looks into some of the – maybe the learned Shadow Attorney-General can help. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Katuntu.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think those are two or three recommendations and we cannot put them in one single recommendation. The first one should be as it is - the restructuring of the Board. Then we have another recommendation that the committee further investigates the activities of the telecommunication companies and organizations, which are engaged in lottery activities; and then the third one should be that one so that they are three recommendations. It is neater that way than having it as one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that captured properly, Mr Chairman? Can you now restate it?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes, the first one is as it is: the committee recommends that the National Lotteries Board be restructured. Two; that the committee investigates the activities of the telecom companies or other organisations that are involved in lotteries. And three, that the National Lotteries Board be mandated to regulate all lottery activity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Correct?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is adopted. Yes, Col Mwesigye.

7.41
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose an amendment on the recommendation on page 14 under National Enterprise Corporation - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put a question to this recommendation that has been agreed to? It has been agreed to by the chairman so I do need to put a question to it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, a lot of effort is being undertaken on a matter where the committee has specifically stated that the committee observes that the activities of the National Lotteries Board are not clear and, therefore, monitoring its performance is a challenge. And knowing well what lotteries are, this is a conduit to rob the unsuspecting public. For us really to engage in and burning the midnight candle on perfecting the robbery, I find it morally wanting on the part of Parliament that we are putting much effort in this. I would have wanted it to be scrapped right away so that the amendment is lost and we move on because –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the chairman has agreed to a proposal and he is the chairman of the committee. He is the one who has examined this thing with his committee members and come with this recommendation, which is now being improved upon by contributions from the members and he has accepted the contributions. I put the question to the amendment as agreed to by the chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose an amendment on the recommendation on page 14 under National Enterprise Corporation. The proposal is that the committee recommends that there be a budget allocation towards promotion of tractor assembling in order to promote mechanisation of agriculture. This is because NEC, the tractor project, was allocated a piece of land in Namanve but it is now lying idle because NEC has not built capacity to utilise or fulfill that objective.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what is the amendment?

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: The amendment is that there be a budget allocation towards promotion of tractor assembling in order to promote mechanisation of agriculture.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you are proposing that we change from tractor use to tractor assembling?

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Yes, because this money is -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is fine.

MR TUMWEBAZE: No objection, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Agreed, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

7.44
MRS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to propose an amendment on Vote 1404, on youth entrepreneurship, pages 11 and 12.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought we had pronounced ourselves on that.

MRS AMODING: It is a different issue that I want to propose and if you find it good enough, we can pass it. We came here as Youth MPs and we were trying to propose a long term solution and also a workable way or institutional framework, through which we can then implement youth entrepreneurship scheme better. We said that if it is possible, we could create a fund to be monitored by a separate board and housed under the ministry of gender and specifically the ministry of youth. 

The role of this fund would be to ensure that the resources, that Government puts together and other funds that other partners would bring in, would be put together in one place so that it can be implemented in a better way but also have a better monitoring framework.

You have heard how 25, I do not know to which ministry and 16.5 in another, 3.5 - it is all scattered! In the interest of addressing this very critical problem of youths unemployment in Uganda -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the actual proposal you are making?

MRS AMODING: The proposal we are making is that a separate or supplementary fund be created and housed under the Ministry of Gender, specifically in the ministry of youth, to continue with the work of youth entrepreneurship as a long term intervention. Also, it can be funded in the next financial year. We had talked to the minister about it and she was agreeable together the permanent secretary that it can be adopted in the next financial year.

I also wanted to inform the House -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have made the point.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I read two things in her proposal. We have just made an amendment that the money that had been allocated to Enterprise Uganda be put under the Ministry of Gender and training institutions eligible, perhaps like Enterprise Uganda, compete for that.

In future, the ministry of gender can continue to justify that in its policy statement and they get money for it. But I think what may be problematic is to create a credit fund under a Government department or agency. Ultimately, that may be the same fund that is already in banks so maybe there we need to separate two things.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since hon. Amoding says that they have agreed with the Minister of Finance and the Permanent Secretary that this activity can be handled next year, in March and April we are going to handle the medium term expenditure. During that time, those proposals, including the vote and fund, can be handled and we start from there.

7.48
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Mr Speaker, I just want to bring to the attention of the House that we, as the youths -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are proposing an amendment only?

MR NAKABALE: Yes, I am proposing an amendment on page 11 where it was said, “The committee further recommends that out of the proposed allocation of Shs 4.8 billion, Shs 2.9 billion be allocated to other priority areas.”

I heard clearly, when we pronounced ourselves, that we are taking the money, that was passed to Enterprise Uganda, to the Ministry of Gender. I would amend to say that we should take Shs 4.8 billion, the whole of it and not only Shs 2.9 billion.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, what was the basis of reducing the money and leaving - We looked at what Enterprise Uganda had received last financial year. We said, if it is just training and we were actually - I thought you wanted me to give you a response?

MR NAKABALE: We have just advised that we call on board other stakeholders. So, if we reduce, what funds shall we use if other universities come on board?

MR TUMWEBAZE: I was beginning to explain just that. Our concern was that we are giving Shs 4.8 billion to Enterprise Uganda to train and some of the concerns we had are the concerns that the House has shared. We agree that that initiative of first of all putting in place a training framework and allowing everybody to compete be taken under the Ministry of Gender. What is required here is seed money for initiating the process. It has nothing to do with the youth capital fund.

In our opinion, from Shs 4.8 billion when you remove Shs 2.9 billion, which we reallocated to other pressing activities under the same report, we felt that the remaining Shs 1.9 billion is really enough to either help Enterprise Uganda or help any other process to kick start.

If the Ministry of Gender wants to scale it up, depending on what activities they will have justified in their new framework, then that can come up in the successive financial years.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Agreed?

MR NAKABALE: You see, we are talking about the youths and we are looking at it as a matter of misallocation and misuse of resources. When we talk of Shs 4.8 billion less by Shs 2.9 billion, it comes to Shs 1.9 billion. Can you imagine, we are talking about transforming the mindset of the youths, keeping in mind the production and productivity we want to see our country reach? We are forgetting the number of the youths and forgetting that right away from village to district level; we have youth councils that can help to do effective monitoring and implementation of the resources. 

We are calling on board other stakeholders that can do training. For example, we recommended in our meeting with the Ministry of Finance that we would also wish to see Uganda Industrial Research Institute, MTAC, MUBS with their Entrepreneurship Department and Makerere coming on board and others such that the country -(Interruption)

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, I know that this Shs 2.9 billion was deducted taking into account that this money, the Shs 4.8 billion, was going to remain in the ministry of finance. But now that the money is being transferred to the ministry of gender, it is important that the whole Shs 4.8 billion goes to the ministry of gender.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am a product of the youths and that is why I am here. I thank the President very much for this initiative. However, I have a legal problem. We passed the Vote-on-Account and some of this money has already been spent or appropriated, if you look at the procurement plan of some of these institutions. So, I do not know how we can move legally. I have a problem unless the minister advises us on what he is proposing in terms of moving all the Shs 4.8 billion because we have already taken part of the money and it has already been spent. So legally, how do we move?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to appreciate the concerns of the youths and also the concerns of the committee, when they recommended slashing this money. The chairman has now told us that when they slashed this money, they thought it was going to Enterprise Uganda and they had seen their former budgets. I did mention that we have allowed other training institutions to partake in the training programme so that it is not only Enterprise Uganda.

So, my recommendations are that if we are to move this money, we should move the whole remaining balance to the ministry that is going to benefit. (Applause)

MR TUMWEBAZE: I should not be seen to be anti-youth; after all, I am a few years above the bracket. I will concede but caution as follows and I beg Members to take note of the caution. Why did we say, slash the money? It was not because of rushing to reallocate it, but it was because of not seeing the clear item under training. 

The caution I would request the hon. Members to take note of is that, not everything that they say is for the youths is actually for the youths. So, I can concede that the money goes to Ministry of Gender but the training programme that is going to be designed should indeed be worth the money we are putting there. Because it can go there and they say, “Buy vehicles for the department of youths.” I concede to the proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the amendment is that the committee further recommends that there is no splitting of this money, we now follow from the upper recommendation and say - in fact, you now do not have to have this recommendation. Just delete this one so the upper one stands with the full amount. Okay?

7.57
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am on page 13 and I wanted to make a brief – the committee on microfinance, rural financial services. The committee proposed that an increment of Shs 0.923 billion be reallocated and the ministry explores strategies to resolve the above identified challenges.

I wanted the chairman to retract the reallocation because this will impact negatively on His Excellency’s strong promise to develop and support SACCOs in this country. So, I wanted to suggest that the committee recommends that the ministry explores strategies to resolve the above identified challenges, and ensures value for money and we leave the refunds for the development of SACCOs.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, we had logic in what we did. Last financial year, the same project had an allocation of Shs 10.25 billion and now it is Shs 11.182 billion. We did not find anything justifying the increment unless it can be given to me now. We never found any new increased activities and the spirit was that, where the increment is not justified, disallow it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, would you like to -

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I have information that is touching the same subject from another angle and I think it will help the discussion because as other challenges in the Trade, Industry and Co-operative Ministry were identified, the issue of SACCOs came in. 

The SACCOs are co-operatives and the mandate to manage, supervise and regulate SACCOs under co-operatives is under the Ministry of Trade and Co-operatives. However, Ministry of Finance is still holding onto the budget of SACCOs and there is a whole problem where the committee, on the last recommendation, states that they recommend that the ministry expedite the regulatory framework and that is where the issue is, a comprehensive Microfinance Bill for the microfinance industry. They are appending, “including the SACCOs.”

SACCOs are co-operatives, which fall under the ministry of Trade and Co-operatives so Finance is extending its tentacles to say, “...for the Ministry of Finance and Industry ‘including the SACCOs’”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we were dealing with the first recommendation.

MS NAGGAYI: It will affect it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will not because the proposal by the honourable member is that the money be left as it is without removing the Shs 0.9 billion. The chairman is saying they did not see any justification for the increment and that it would rather stay at Shs 10.25 billion. That is what the debate was on. So, can we resolve that issue then we move to the issue raised by hon. Sempala?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Well, the reason why we are asking Government to bring a comprehensive Microfinance Bill that will regulate issues of financial deposit and taking and saving is because, we realise that the current Co-operative Act is inadequate in regard to regulation of financial institutions under this tier.

So now when the Bill comes, I think Government will decide but automatically when it involves financial regulation, the Ministry of Finance has to take lead. If there are co-operatives, which are not financial institutions, because those ones may also be there, they will automatically remain under the Ministry of Trade because that is where they are licensed. I think that distinction can only be made when this Tier 4 Bill has been brought.

MR EKANYA: I would really urge my colleague to accept the committee recommendations because if you read the Ministry of Finance policy statement from pages 304 to about 313 and the minister conceded here that last financial year, SACCOs performed at a level of 50 percent because they had procurement issues - so, even if you give them all this money, they cannot perform to excess because they have timeframes, human resource issues and we have other pressing needs as we told you. You want the Auditor-General to do an audit of money that people are stealing all over the country and they are only performing at 60 percent? 

We even toured SACCOs and there is a problem and the Auditor-General could not audit the SACCOs because they did not have money. I want to plead with you that this Shs 900 million should go to the Auditor-General to audit the billions that these institutions have received. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the mover?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Even the Shs 10 billion is really a lot of money. I was only proposing this because we do not want to kill the very important idea and efforts already made to create or develop SACCOs in this country. For some of us who come from the rural areas, SACCOs are one of the areas that we should emphasise. Procurement and audit issues were not a problem of the SACCOs and so to me, I really insist - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the issue is that last financial year, they got Shs 10,250,000,000 and they only used half of it. Now they are proposing an increment of Shs 900 million. Is there a justification for it? The committee is saying that let them first perform 100 percent on the Shs 10.25 billion before you consider any increment. Is that not a very fair assessment of the situation? 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Okay, let me concede.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you.

MR SSEMPIJJA: But I still request that the ministry responsible for monitoring and even overseeing these other issues of procurement with time will address these issues so that we do not really suffocate -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what they are saying: the ministry explores strategies to resolve the above identified challenges contained in the recommendations.

MR SSEMPIJJA: I thank you very much.

8.04
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising the issue of SACCOs as regards the mandate. You know, the Ministry of Trade and Co-operatives has just been reinstated and it is in the process of reviving capacity building and doing everything in its charge to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you proposing to amend in this?

MS NAGGAYI: I am proposing that the ministry of finance expedites the regulatory framework, the Comprehensive Micro-Finance Bill for the micro-finance industry. SACCOs –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have already proposed it. Let me listen to the chairman on this.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I agree after all, any SACCO that would wish to be a micro-finance will have to comply with that law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. That is concluded, not so? It is accepted and that means it is agreed to already.

MS NAGGAYI: Okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your proposal has been agreed to.

8.08
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am proposing an amendment on page 10 to do with PIBID. The committee recommends that out of the proposed budget, Shs 5.2 billion be re-allocated to other priority areas. However, when this project was started, it was in the view that irrespective of creating infrastructure and like what the Minister of Finance said, it would fight banana wilt. This project has gone far in terms of fighting this banana wilt. I wonder what this project will do with its infrastructure in place when it begins to operate on banana production in the area.

When we went for the president’s tour, I remember that I asked him that question of the banana wilt that is threatening the whole of western Uganda, and he said that this project in Bushenyi is doing well in terms of fighting it. However, when you go there, the role model plantation of this project is not doing well. 

I believe that while we are saying that the Ministry of Finance, in the upper recommendation, should do oversight in terms of the infrastructure and accountability, this project, I think, is in the wrong hands and that is why they have even failed to promote production of banana in the area. This project should have maybe gone to the Ministry of Agriculture to ensure that the project is running and production is ongoing.

In addition to that, the factory had started producing Tooke flour but I really do not know where it is in terms of marketing it, and the different products that can be put on board. I think the ministry of finance is overstretching itself –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, propose the amendment so that we can move.

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: The amendment is that the Shs 5.2 billion goes to fighting bacterial banana wilt in order to support the factory in the ministry of agriculture –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Shs 5.2 billion, should be re-allocated?

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: Yes. We need to clearly point it out that this factory will operate when the bananas are there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you are proposing that the balance of Shs 5.2 billion is re-allocated to –

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: The Ministry of Agriculture to fight banana bacterial wilt. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: We agree with hon. Nyakikongoro but disagree on the other part. We went through the whole discussion on PIBID and we were told and rightly agreed that when research innovations start, they are monitored by the National Council of Science and Technology; they are incubated, reach a point and they are weaned off. When they are weaned off, with whatever product they have innovated, they transit into the market so that there is a clear sustainability plan. So, that is what we were asking from PIBID – you want money, you want money next year and also the following year. 

We have seen the Tooke flour. What next are you going to do? Are you engaging in further innovation? The wilt thing she is talking about was not mentioned anywhere in their presentation and so how do we pass money in anticipation that they will bring up innovations for the wilt that they never justified, and that is the first point. 

The second point is that, I had expected her to move an amendment which I was gladly very willing to accept; that perhaps the factory and its work links to NARO or other research institutions for sustainability. So, we cannot re-allocate money, which anyway, we have already re-allocated to other priorities in the ministry and its agencies presented. We partly agree with her that the factory is linked to other research networks. Maybe to develop what she is talking about but we should not reallocate money to something that was justified after all the same amount has already been justified to other areas.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I did mention to the House that the whole of this project will need Shs 28 billion, as we speak today and Government has just budgeted Shs 10.2 billion leaving a deficit funding of Shs 17.8 billion. This money I did say that PIBID has so far done 50 percent construction of the processing plant. It has also done 75 percent of the water works. If we cut this money that means the money we have invested will be put to waste. That is why I told the committee that it is not wise even to reduce the Shs 10.2 billion because even with the 10.2 billion we still have a deficit of Shs 17 billion.

I did mention how much money is required for the activities: civil works is Shs 12.6 billion; water works Shs 4.9 billion, equipment for the factory Shs 5.1 billion, quality assurance Shs 3.8 billion and bio-gas, Shs 1.0 billion. That means that we needed even all the Shs 10.2 billion in whole but even when we get that one, we still remain with a deficit. So, my humble prayer to the House is that we drop the recommendation of the committee, cutting the funding so that we use it to promote and advance this project lest we lose even the investment we have so far put in. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the Shs 28 billion the minister talks about was never presented to us and neither is it in the ministerial policy statement because that is the total amount required. It would have been stated and then clearly highlighted that there is a funding gap. That was never stated. 

The importance highlighted by the minister is appreciated but there are concerns the committee raises. If there is no sustainability plan, how are you also going to sustain that infrastructure you are investing in? What is wrong with the Ministry of Finance? Honestly speaking, hon. Matia Kasaija accepted our logic in the retreat. So, the question is why not work out this sustainability mechanisms. The Ministry of Finance has the prerogative of bringing supplementaries at any time. If the sustainability plan is worked out, bring a supplementary and continue and we support it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you harmonise with the hon. Nyakikongoro, Mr Chairman?

MRS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In fact, I was trying to draw towards what the chairman has just said that, the executive director mentioned that she reports directly to the President and the President well knowingly said that they are conducting research on how to fight banana bacterial wilt.

It is on this matter that maybe, they should extend this service to NARO or to Kawanda or to any other agricultural institution that can help them in fighting this banana wilt. Therefore, this money I am talking about maybe should be extended to these other agricultural institutions, which can help us in fighting the banana bacterial wilt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So her proposal is that the Shs 5.2 billion, the reallocated proposal, should be specified where it should go. Is that what you are saying? It should be specifically to fight banana wilt or something like that. Let us understand these things hon. Members because otherwise, if you bring in too many things, we won’t conclude it.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, she is proposing that that goes to other agencies beyond the committee’s mandate. We do not know the needs of NARO; we do not know the needs of Kawanda. They could have as well got appropriation in their sector committees and we have already reallocated the Shs 5.2 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, in the circumstances of where the next step is, we are referring this matter to the Budget Committee. Can we then refer the Shs 5.2 billion to the Budget Committee so that it resolves it from there?

8.18
MRS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much. I rise up to propose an amendment on page 10 on sub county development project. It is a different thing.

The committee recommended that the implementation of the sub-county development project be stayed until a clear framework is in place, and that that amount of money be projected to be reallocated to other priorities. Working without a legal framework, without policies and without guidelines is a situation where we realise that the Government has a big head and then down to the sub-counties, it has stunted legs. Why do I say this? Such money is always channeled to the district -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what is the proposal?

MRS JOY ONGOM: My proposal is that in the subsequent budget, in addition to this, no allocations or budgetary provisions be made to projects or activities whose legal framework, policies and guidelines are not in place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that one acceptable? I put the question that the proposed amendment, which is accepted by the chair, be agreed to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the committee as amended be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, Mr Chairman, congratulations hon. Minister!

Hon. members, we have pending business. Today is the 2 September 2011. We had extended this process up to the 8th this month, which is Thursday next week.
 
You realise that the pending business is the financial Bills: the Finance (Amendment) Bill, the Stamps (Amendment) Bill, the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, the Supplementary Appropriation Bill and there will also be the Appropriation Bill itself for this year, which are still pending. 

That is business that is still pending and we agreed that we will proceed under Rule 147(3)(c), “To enlighten the functions of the Budget Committee to carry out such other functions related to the national budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament or any law.”
 
I am using this prerogative, therefore, to refer all the reports that have been passed by this Parliament to the Budget Committee, who should sit expeditiously to harmonise the figures and deal with the issues that have been raised in terms of reallocations, and come out with some comprehensive wrap up of what Parliament should take decisions on when we come to the financial Bills. So, we are giving a timeframe of - of course, there are those things that will not have to wait for the Budget Committee decisions.
 
The only thing that will have to substantially wait for what will come out from the Budget Committee is the Appropriation Bill. But there are issues, for example, of the Finance (Amendment) Bill, the Stamps (Amendment) Bill and the other Bills that may not require a result of the discussion that will come from the Budget Committee.

I am, therefore, proposing that this House will proceed on Monday – Chief Whip, you have something to say?

8.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, Government appreciates the spirit and the speed with which you deal with these reports, because we were really behind schedule. We also appreciate the extension that you have provided up to 8th. 

Given this new spirit, it is our view that as the Budget Committee meets, and even the other chairpersons of the other committees, there is an opportunity availed to the sector ministers to meet with this committee as harmonisation takes place. And Government would like to have a day with the Budget Committee to harmonise so that we all get on the same van. We feel ministers still have an input to add.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The only way we can resolve these matters, without a lot of time being spent, is when there is harmony in the process of reaching the decision. So, the proposal by the Chief Whip that ministers should be allowed to interact with the Budget Committee is a very proper matter. Please, interact so that you can do the finality of what will come out in the final document. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having had an opportunity to interact up to that stage, we who are not Members of the Budget committee would request that Government does not use that opportunity to again raise issues, which have already been hammered out. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chief Whip was very clear. He said that the spirit of harmony, which we have demonstrated should guide us – and hon. Member you should not engage in anticipation. 

Hon. Members, I think it is agreeable, therefore, that we adjourn this Parliament to Monday 10.00 O’clock. 

(House rose at 8.28 and was adjourned until Monday, 5 September 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)

