

Tuesday, 5 September 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)


(The Council was called to order.)

MOTION

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE NRC SECTORAL COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL SERVICES

MR BWANIKA BBALE (Katikamu County, Luwero):  Mr Chairman, I beg to present for the Council’s consideration and approval the Report of the Standing Sectoral of the Resistance Council on Social Services, covering the debates on the Policy Statements and the Committee observation and recommendations on the Ministry’s estimates of both recurrent and development expenditure for the year 1995/96.

The Sectoral Committee on Social Services discussed the policy proposals and budgetary estimates for the year 1995/96 of the following votes.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports.
Vote 014 - Ministry of Health.
Vote 018 - Ministry of Information.
Vote 020 - Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare.
Vote 023 - Mulago Hospital Complex.
Vote 024 - Makerere University.
Vote 030 - Ministry of Gender and Community Development.
Vote 040 - Teaching Service Commission.
Vote 042 - Mbarara University; and
Vote 044 - The Institute of Teacher Education.

For the sake of saving time, I will just go through the general observations and recommendations; I cannot set the objectives of the Ministries; because these are covered in the Policy Statements which Members have had opportunity to look at.  So, I will request you, Mr Chairman, to permit me to go straight to the general observation and recommendations of these ministries.  

The Committee had all these general observations on all the Ministries connected to the Social Service sector.  The Committee made the following observation that:

Social service sector has not been given adequate funds in this year’s budget to meet their obligations, yet the human factor is crucial in all development processes.

The second observation is that, the Ministry of Finance has a habit of arbitrarily cutting on funds which have been passed by the House without referring to the relevant Ministries and Sectoral Committees and the Committee observed that there is a need for the Minister of Finance to explain the criteria and formula used in cutting funds already approved by Parliament. (Applause)  The fourth observation is that the Committee observed that the Minister or Finance and Economic Planning desk officers should visit projects under other Ministries assigned to them in order to have a better picture of the problem pertaining in the relevant Ministries. (Applause)

The practice of suspending items within already approved votes should be abolished because it paralyses the smooth operations of the Ministries and departments concerned. (Applause)  I would like to proceed and give the report on Votes 014, the Ministry of Health.  As I said earlier on, I am not going through the objective of the Ministry; I would like to proceed straight to the general observations.  The general observation by the Committee was the provisions of the training, such that the Committee noted some achievements registered by the Ministry in the past year in the following areas:

1.	Provision of training in Health Management to all the decentralised districts.

2.	Control of diarrhoeal diseases and epidemic management and;

3.	Support District Health teams especially in the areas of developing of district health plans and capacity building and;

4.	Improvement in drug distribution.

The Committee came out with the following recommendations.  Areas which call for special attention, the Committee identified the following areas which call for attention of the House.

(i) It was noted with concern that the Budgetary provision for the Uganda Aids Commission is made by the Ministry of Health yet Uganda Aids Commission is charged with the office of the President.  This results in lack of proper coordination.  The Committee therefore recommends that Uganda Aids Commission Management and supervision be put in the line Ministry of Health. This will address the problem and bring about administrative efficiency. (Applause)

(ii) The Committee noted that the Programme 01, Item 7010 of the Ministry which caters for treating patients outside Uganda was under funded.  The Committee therefore recommended as follows:  That additional money of UShs 100 million be approved to argument what was originally allocated under this Item.

(iii) That the Ministry of Health should make it a priority to reduce on the need of overseas treatment and in order to effect this, the Committee recommended purchase of diagnostic and intensive care equipment.

(iv) The Committee noted with much concern that one million US dollars is required to destroy expired drugs imported in this country.  So, the Committee noted the poor condition of work for all cadres of health workers in Public Service especially poor remuneration, poor accommodation and lack of transport which has resulted into law morale and poor performance, forcing a big number of consultants and doctors to look for greener pastures elsewhere.  Since health is essential, the Committee recommended that remuneration be revised upwards.  

(v) On the international fora, the Committee noted that Uganda is to host the International Conference on Aids on Sexually Transmitted Diseases in Africa in December 1995.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that substantial resources to supplement the donor contribution be made available to meet this particular commitment.

(vi) Funds should also be made available to promote medical research programmes.  The Committee expressed disappointment with the Inspectorate Department in the Ministry of failure to perform.  The Committee for example, such as the mushrooming private clinics and drug stores, a good number of which do not meet the established Health standards.  The Committee also mentioned the poor sanitation and lack of latrines and recommended that effective supervision by Health Inspectors be addressed seriously by the Ministry.  Community based health services should be strengthened and maintained by the Ministry.

(vii) On cost sharing and user’s charges, the Committee noted that money collected is not properly accounted for and therefore recommended that the Ministry of Health works out policy guidelines for proper accountability and make them known to the public.

(viii) The Committee noted with satisfaction Cabinet decision to take back the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Research Organisation at Tororo to be under the Ministry of Health and recommended that a follow-up on the decision be made and Cabinet decision be effected.

(ix) On the domestic arrears under Programme 01, Vote 014, Item 8030, the Committee noted that the Ministry has accumulated arrears amount to UShs 1.7 billion to the National Medical Stores; yet UShs 412 million was allocated to this financial year.  The Committee therefore recommended that the Ministry should be allocated more funds to this Item in order to facilitate the availability of drugs for population.

(x) The Committee noted that 90 percent of the Ministries’ development budget is donor funded and only 10 percent from Uganda.  The Committee therefore recommended that the Government should allocate more funds especially on capital development for infrastructure maintenance.

I would like now to proceed and report on the Vote 203- Mulago Hospital Complex.  Programme 01, Item 5010, utilities.  The Committee noted that UShs 1.4 billion is required but only 600- million was allocated in the estimates.  It was recommended therefore that consideration be made on this Item.  Under programme 02 of Mulago Hospital Drugs and Sundries, the Committee noted that UShs 7.3 billion is required, yet only UShs 2.67 billion was allocated; yet availability of drugs is essential for health management.  The Committee recommended that all the funds requested for be made available and they said if you want a strong nation, you need healthy people.

Item 6100 Programme 02 - Mulago Hospital.  It was noted that re\search proposals to UShs 124 million have been presented but according to the estimates, this year only Shs, 15 million was catered for, but according to the estimates this year, only 15 million was allocated.  The committee recommended for consideration of the importance of research and recommended for additional funds on this Item.

On Item 5020 maintenance of building equipment.  It was noted that instead of UShs 403 million required, only UShs 40.5 million has been allocated.  The Committee therefore recommended that UShs 100 million be available for the purpose.

On the Item 1110 training, the Committee noted that the allowance do Part Time Lecturers in the Paramedical school have increased from UShs 500 per hour to UShs 10,000 per hour, yet UShs 17 million has been allocated basing on the old rate.  It was therefore recommended by the Committee that 120- million be made available for this Item.

The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Health should present a Bill on Nurses, Midwives and Paramedicals for debate in the House as soon as possible.

Conclusion, the Committee therefore recommends that the House approves the funds to the Ministry as follows; 9,938,916,000- be approved by this House.

Permit me now to proceed to Vote 030 - Ministry of Gender and Community Development.  As I said earlier on, I am not going to tackle the introduction; I am going to go straight to the general observation which appear on page 2 on the document.

Achievements

The Committee noted some achievements registered by the Ministry in the past Financial Year in the following areas:

1.  National Youth Policy.  The Committee noted the positive steps being taken by the Ministry to develop the National Youth Policy and commended UNICEF for funding the programme.

2.  Youth Skill Training Centre.  The Committee also was happy by the pronouncements made by His Excellency the President during the budget speech to open up Regional Skills Training Centre in the country.

3.  Paralegal Projects.  The Committee was informed of the establishment of paralegal pilot projects based in Kamuli district to offer community based legal service to the public.

4.  National Policy on Vulnerable Children.  The Committee appreciated the initiative being made by the Ministry to formulate a Policy on Vulnerable Children.

5.  Public Libraries Board.  The Committee noted the positive steps being taken to re-stock the Public Libraries and the extension of rural library services up-country.

6.  Beijing Conference.  The Committee noted that a delegation of 50 people shall represent Uganda in the forth World Conference on Women in Beijing - China this month.

Areas which call attention.  The Committee identified the following problem areas which need attention of the House:  

(i) Under funding.  It was noted with deep concern that while the Ministry of Gender and Community Development has been expanded with two new Directorates and two Ministers of State appointed to cope with increasing Ministry’s activities, the Ministry’s financial allocation is not in consonance with the above expansion mentioned above.

(ii) Lack of transport.  The Committee noted that a few Ministers of State - the two-core Ministry structures namely; The National Youth Council and the National Women Council do not have a single vehicle; yet transport is a necessity for successful implementation of the Ministry programme.

(iii) National Women Council and National Secretariat.  The Committee was shocked to learn that almost two years since Parliament passed the Women and Youth Council Statutes, very little has been done to establish the Secretariat to coordinate their programmes and activities.

(iv) Approved Children and Babies Homes.  Last year, the Committee visited the approved Children and Babies Homes and noted with concern the sorry state of affairs that exist in these institutions due to lack of adequate funding.

(v) Policy Matters.  The Ministry does not have any policy in place to cater for the aged, street children and disabled.  The Committee noted that Community Centres which exist in almost all sub-counties are not being utilised to the maximum.

Recommendations.  It is clear that as a result of the on-going restructuring and rationalisation of the Government departments, the Ministry of Gender and Community Development is charged with greater responsibilities demanding greater financial support.  It was therefore agreed that a National Womens’ Council and a National Youth Council as Statutory bodies should have their budgetary provision clearly reflected in the Ministry’s budget.

(ii) It was recommended that the National Youth Policy Development be included on the list of priorities of the Ministry of Gender and Community Development and;

(iii) The Committee recommended that vehicles should be availed to the Ministers of State and core structures in the Ministry namely; the National Youth Council and National Womens’ Council for successful implementation of the Ministry programmes.

(vi) The Committee recommended that supplementary provision on Item 7010 be considered to improve on the childrens’ welfare in those homes and custodian.

The Committee further recommended that the children and the National Council of Children Bill be expeditiously debated and passed by the House.  The Committee also recommended that the Ministry of Gender and Community Development should work out plans to initiate a policy to cater for the aged, the street children and the disabled.  The Committee recommended that the existing Community Centres at sub-counties should be rehabilitated and utilised for the purposes of adult functional literacy, skills training and recreation, and where they do not achieve, efforts should be made to establish them.  The Committee further recommended that women and youth training centres announced by His Excellency the President in the budget speech be included on the list of the priority areas to be under-taken this financial year.  It was recommended that a recurrent budget be approved with the following amendments:-

1.  Supplementary provision to be considered for Item 1110 which concerns training and; 

2.  That additional funds to cater for the outstanding Bills as regards domestic arrears.  

3.  Additional funds on Item on training abroad as the Committee noted that the Beijing Conference has eaten away all the funds which were budgeted for.

4.  Re-instating the Item 4010.  Operation of vehicles by 1,000- from Item 2110.

Programme 030, Item 6040 be restricted to funding the National Youth Council which is a Statutory Structure.  Item 6040 be opened up by 1,000- from Item on office expenses.

At this juncture, permit me to proceed to report on Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports.  I would like straight to go to the general observation on the Ministry of Education and Sports.  The Sectoral Committee on Social Services appreciates the achievement attained in the following areas:

Education Policy Review.  The Committee noted with appreciation that Committees which were set to work out the modalities of how to implement the White paper have completed their report and these include:

(i) Curriculum Review Task Force.

(ii) Commission on loan facilities in Tertiary Institutions;

(iii) Committee on Drafting New Regulations on Education;

(vi) Committee on Universal Primary Education;

(v) Committee on Drafting Legislation, Establishment and Control of Universities - public and private.   

The Committee noted that writing of a new syllabus is in progress while the necessary logistics are being pursued.

Gonahasa Report

On the Gonahasa Report, the Ministry set up a National Review Task Force on school charges and the report has been produced and some local Ministers have produced useful guidelines towards improving education quality and rationalisation authorising school charges.

Management Committee

On Education Management Committee, rules have been revised to bring them in line with Education Board of Governors Regulation 1991 and recommendations of the Government White paper.

Staffing

Establishment of staffing for teachers in primary schools ideally provide for one head teacher per school class 1 teacher for every class of 40 in that school regardless of availability of physical classrooms. The ideal pupil/teacher ratio of 40 pupils to one teacher in physical classrooms is a long term target.  In the meantime, under enrolled classes being conducted under tree sheds of some similar circumstance in areas shall not be interrupted.

Utilisation of 50 percent of government contribution to grant aided primary schools.  The Committee noted with dissatisfaction the proportional distribution of expenditure of 50 per cent government contribution to primary education, which according to the Ministry’s policy guidelines, 40 percent or 50 percent government contribution is retained at the district to support district plan expenditure on education; 10 percent is retained by the District Education Department to meet costs of supervision and Inspection; and 50 percent is remitted directly to the individual schools for expenditure on the actual needs of the school as identified by the Management Committee.
Secondary Education

The Committee noted that enrolment in the existing 64 Primary Teacher’s Colleges and 10 National Teachers Colleges is likely to go up by 20 percent and 28 percent respectively bringing the total in the Primary Teachers Colleges to approximately 19,500 and NTCs to about students in 1995/96.  The Committee further noted that female enrolment went up by 30 percent in Primary Teachers Colleges and 24 percent in the National Teachers in 1994/95; and the actual teacher out put from Primary Teachers Colleges rose from 7,069 during 1993/94 to 9,075 in 1994/95.  The output for 1995/96 is expected to be 10,079 primary school teachers.  The Committee observed that the upward trend of the teacher output from Primary Teachers Colleges is a healthy development bearing in mind the nation’s target of universal primary education.

Inspectorate

The Committee noted that during the year 1994/95 substantial amounts of chemicals and science equipment were distributed to a number of secondary schools; the Committee further noted the Ministry’s plans to systematically cover the rest of the country.

Technical Education.

The Committee noted the emphasis being put on vocationalisation of education as a means of industrialisation.  The Committee also noted that rehabilitation and reconstruction of Masaka Technical Institute worth 2.396 million Dutch Marks has been completed and that the Institute will start offering Diploma Programme as a Technical College during the year 1995/96.  The Committee further noted with appreciation the efforts being made to put Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo back on the road; the Committee registered its appreciation to Uganda Development Bank for granting a loan of US $ 4.19 million which has enabled UPK (Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo) to undergo construction and equip the school of education which trains teachers of technical education.

Higher Education.

The Committee welcomed the Cabinet decision to re-institute the common scholarship fellowship under which foreign from the Commonwealth would study in Ugandan universities beginning with the year 1995/96.  However, the Committee noted with deep concern that 700- million which the Minister has budgeted to cater for the establishment of the proposed University of Agriculture in Northern Uganda and private Universities in this country, only 150- million had been allocated which is grossly inadequate.  The Committee also noted with serious concern that the Ministry is indebted to universities abroad as the following break down shows: 

U.K, it is US$ 665, 884, U.S.A. US$ 332,630, Inter University Council US$ 484,625, is US$ 1,847,139 US dollars and that, despite Cabinet approval of payment of this outstanding debt, no provision has been made for it in the budget estimates.

Career Guidance and Counselling

The Committee noted with concern the lack of manpower in this department for instance, currently, the Ministry headquarters has only one qualified Career Guidance and Counselling Officer.


The Teaching Service Commission

This is a body, which is mandated to recruit, promote and regionalise the appointment in the Teaching Service.  In the 1994/95 financial year, the commission successfully interviewed and recruited teachers totalling to 2,736.  It is the aim of the Commission to improve methods of work of a district Teaching Service Committee in the financial year under review.

National Curriculum Development Centre

The centre is poised for a lot of activities to research, evaluate and review existing curricula syllabi textbooks and Teachers’ guides to meet new demands at all levels and emerging challenges of vocationalisation of education.  The Committee noted with satisfaction that the National Curriculum Development Centre accomplished the writing of school syllabi for co-subjects that is English, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies for primary schools.

Uganda National Examinations Board

Work on the on-going examinations reform continues.  UNEB acquired land at Kyambogo Hill as a site for construction of its own home and headquarters.  The Board started preparing the Code of fair practices in examinations a document by which UNEB commits itself to safeguard the rights of a candidate.  Achievements which have been made and printing of the back log of UNEB certificates which was a sensitive issue was completed.

Sports

The Committee noted efforts are being made by the Ministry in talent identification and training.  It was noted that the school sports development programme recently launched has started bearing fruits most notably in athletics and football.  Three Ugandan athletes have hit world map in various athletics disciplines and are under going training in various countries abroad and a number of footballers initially from St. Henry’s College Kitovu were admitted to the University of Albama U.S.A. to develop their football talents in addition to pursuing academic studies.  It was further noted that the Ministry has set a revolving fund of 200- million for importation of basic sports equipment for sale to schools and institutions - through the National Council of Sports.  The Committee commended the Peoples Republic of China and officials of the Ministry for the good work done at the giant Nelson Mandela Stadium at Nambole which is scheduled for completion in February 1997.  The Committee noted that the Uganda Revenue Authority was taking a big percentage of money from gate collection from Nakivubo Stadium leaving very little money for participating Clubs to share; hence hindering the promotion of sports in this country.

Makerere University

The Committee noted that 1994/95 was relatively free of students and staff unrest which were destabilising feature in the previous years.  The Committee noted that Makerere University revenue from its own income generating activities amounted to 1.76- billion during 1994/95 financial year which was commendable.  It further noted with satisfaction that government was able to clear many of the domestic debts the University owed food suppliers the previous years.  

The Committee further noted significant increases in enrolment for Degrees, Diplomas, External Programmes and evening classes; which rose from 2,294 students in 1992/93 to 3,252 students in 1994/95.  The Committee looked forward for increased admission in the subsequent years and corresponding financing by government.  It was noted that plans are underway to establish Makerere University Consultancy Bureau which could bring in substantial income in the University.

Mbarara University of Science and Technology.

The Committee noted that Mbarara University held its first graduation ceremony on the 14th January 1995 with 29 doctors.  It also noted that the construction of major building, that is Pathology, Microbiology and Mortuary Block.  Intern Doctors Hostel was completed in the previous financial year in addition to phase I, rehabilitation of the hospital, it further noted the increase of academic staff from 45 to 60.  It was reported that the University will start a course leading to the award of Bachelor of Science with Education in 1995/96.

Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo

The Committee was happy to learn the institute raised 142- million from its own income generating activities.  It also noted that out of 3.7 billion required in 1995/96 budget proposal, only 1.25 billion was approved by the Ministry of Finance.

Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo

The Committee commended African Development Bank for funding the rehabilitation and reconstruction of UPK, that is Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo.  It further noted that the rehabilitation programme has made it possible for UPK to accommodate an additional 270 resident students.  It also noted that UPK anticipates to raise 200- million out of its internal income generating activities.

National College of Business Studies Nakawa

The Committee noted that a new programme leading to the award of Diploma in secretarial studies was successfully introduced in addition to training in computer techniques.  When the Committee visited the College, it observed with concern the state of decay and neglect in almost all departments.  It was further observed that the students population our numbers accommodation facilities of the College which was meant to accommodate only 500 students but is now accommodating more than 2,000 students.

Recommendation

The Committee identified the following areas for attention.  Secondary education and teacher training institutions.  The Committee was aware of the government policy to raise the standard and teacher training institutions in the country through the rehabilitation and completion of existing structures, recommended that supplementary financial provision be requested for and approved for to cater for this particular programme.  The Committee learnt that students are dropping science subjects as a result, there is over-production of Arts Students.  It was further recommended that the Career Guidance and Counselling department be strengthened and that it should not only be confined to secondary schools only.  

The Committee further recommended that technical science and vocational education should be emphasised and given priority.  On 50 percent contribution to schools the Committee recommended that the Ministry of Education should closely coordinate with the Ministry of Local Government so as to make maximum of use of the money and to avoid misallocation or diversion of these funds.  It was further recommended that only 5 percent of the 50 percent government contribution should be retained by a District Education Officer’s Office and the rest goes direct to the school management Committee.  The Committee recommended that Government should continue to assist education institutions build on self-help basis in order to increase needed school facilities.  The Committee is aware of government target of attaining universal and compulsory education by the year 2000 recommended that teacher training must be a priority to ensure continuous supply of trained and qualified teachers at all levels.  It was also noted with appreciation that government’s effort so far made to increase the teachers’ salaries.  

However, it was observed that their salaries are still very low and should be revised upwards.  The Committee noted that Uganda Government is indebted to Universities abroad totalling to US$ 1.847,139.  It was further noted that no provision has been made to cater for these debts in the year 1995/96 estimates.  It was therefore recommended that supplementary financial provisions be approved to cater for this debt.  The achievement made towards sports was noted.  

The Committee further noted the revolving fund created by government towards procurement of sports equipment.  However, it was learnt that most rural schools cannot afford to purchase the equipment and therefore, recommended that the Ministry should treat sports equipment like chemicals and books; so that they are distributed to schools in order to support and identify talents during the early stages.  The Committee noted that efforts are being made to establish an agricultural university in the North.  It recommended that the process be speeded up and be on the priority list of the Ministry’s programmes. (Applause)  

It also recommended that among the 10 Teachers Training Colleges to be established as per the Ministry’s programme, one should go to Karamoja region which today has none. (Applause)  

The Committee recommends that National Council of Sports should remain under the Ministry of Education and Sports in the restructuring programme.  This will help to identify younger talents during the early stages and develop talents while at the same time pursuing their academic career.  The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Education work out a clear policy guideline regarding Parents, Teachers’ Association which in some schools, assumed more powers than the Management Committee and Board of Governors.  

The Committee recommends supplementary provision for Items 10,40 on programme 01 on salaries.  The achievement made by Makerere University which collected 1.7 billion and Nakawa College of Business Studies which collected 200 million from their money generating activities are commendable.  In order to supplement such efforts, it was recommended that a reasonable registration fee be formally introduced in tertiary institutions.

Vote 042 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology.

The Committee noted with concern that Mbarara University, a teaching hospital has no X-ray machine.  It was recommended that 500- million be availed to the University in this financial year for the purchase of X-ray machine and its accessories.  The Committee further noted that Item 6120 participation on other Programmes which cater for Internship, health centres and institute of Tropical Forest Conservation was allocated; it was allocated only 9,840,000- against 41,160,000- which was requested for.  Therefore, additional funding was recommended for this Item.  The Committee went further and recommended the re-opening of Item 1016 with 166,000- from Item 1100 of the same programme.  The Committee learnt that Mbarara University has no foreign funding like other sister universities in the country and, therefore, recommended that government should initiate contact to solicit foreign funding for the institution.  The Committee also recommended the inclusion of the expatriates on the University Pay Roll.

Vote 044 - Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo.

The Committee recommended the re-opening of the following Items;- 3020, 3040, 3050 and 6040 of the Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo which were omitted in the budget estimates; the Committee further noted that funds allocated for infrastructure maintenance at ITEK in this financial year’s budget is inadequate and therefore recommended additional funding for this Item.

Vote 040 - Teaching Service Commission.

The Committee noted that retained arrears have not been paid since 1993.  It is therefore recommended that a supplementary provision be approved to cater for their standing Bills as regards retained fee in arrears.  

Mr Chairman, permit me now to report on the Ministry of Information.  

The Ministry of Information is mandated to inform, educate and entertain and mobilise the populace of Uganda.

General Observation.

The Committee noted with satisfaction the progress made on the recommendation passed in the financial year 1994/95 of which 90 percent have been implemented.  These include:

1.  The improvement of studio conditions, both for TV and Radio;

2.  Improvement on Radio and Television reception in several parts of the country;

3.  Acquisition of new technology to adopt new situations;

4.  Enacting of Mass Media Law;

5.  Combating corruption in commercial section of a Ministry which has improved on the daily revenue collection which now ranges at 1.5 million; and

6.  The introduction of Labwor language on air to serve the people of Labwor in Kotido district.

These are the areas which call for the attention of the House:

-The Committee noted that UTV still faces the problem of inadequate funds.  For example, it has a few cameras and only one vehicle.

-It noted the monotonous presentation of new Items

-It also noted the poor editing of the news especially the Vice President’s and Prime Minister’s news Items

-The Committee noted the observed with concern the use of un-suitable languages used on some private radio stations.

-It observed that 1993 Television licensing Act has been invoked and the Committee was convinced that 10,000- be collected annually as TV viewers charges.
 
-It was noted that due to lack of equipment and Van, live television coverage and broadcasting is confined to areas around the capital.

-Due to lack of outside broadcasting Unit Van, the transmission of live radio broadcast has been seriously hampered.

-It was further noted that due to lack of adequate radio boosters in the country, poor reception has been noted in most remote areas.

-It was also observed that UTV is irregular in covering NRC Sittings.

Recommendations  

1. The Minister of Information should be more vigilant in monitoring the increasing pornographic TV pictures and languages used on some private radio stations.

2.  The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning should avail additional funds to cater for the purchase of specialised equipment and the outside broadcasting unit Vans.

3.  It was recommended that the Ministry of Information should improve on the coverage given to NRC Sittings in order to keep the population abreast with the development in the House.

4.  The Committee recommended that Electric Media Bill be expeditiously presented to this House for debate.  

5.  The Committee recommended the approval of the Ministry of Information Budget Estimates for 1995/96 with the following Amendments.

Item 1110 or Programme 01 which was omitted to be re-opened by UShs 1,000 from Item 3030 on the same programme.  That Item 4010 Programme 02 which was omitted be re-opened by 1,000/- from item 3030 of the same Programme.  

Mr Chairman, permit me to proceed and put on the last Ministry.  This is now Vote 020 - the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare.  As I said earlier, I will proceed and report on the general observation which appear on page 3.  The Committee made the following observations:

1.  Labour Policy.  It was noted that the Employment Policy which focuses on the improving the quality of labour creates more employment opportunities provides safe working environment, promoting vocational training, and improving the benefits of workers on retirement is in advanced stage drafting.

2. Promotion of Industrial Labour harmonies and Social Justice.  It was observed with satisfaction that Government has put in place the institutional machinery through which districts between workers and employers can resolve amicably or through the industrial court.  The Committee, however, noted the following constraints:

(ii) Inadequate funding.  The Industrial Court has no permanent room where cases can be heard.

(iii) The computers donated by ILO to the Industrial Court last year should not be installed because of lack of funds for burglar proofing.  The court therefore continued to incur heavy costs for production of court awards and other documents.  The President of the Industrial Courts has no transport facilities.  This frustrates the Court’s operation.

3.  Skills Training.  The Committee noted that Lugogo Vocational Training Institute awards craftsman certificate to the first in-take of 95 candidates in various trades in the last financial year.  It however noted with dissatisfaction that YMCA Centre in Jinja was completely dormant and most of its buildings are in poor state of repair.  The Committee further noted that the Centre suffers from ownership wrangles between the government and the YMCA.  It was noted that Masulita Vocational Training Centre, a rural based skill development centre is facing financial problems after the termination of the UNDP project.  It was for example, observed that Treasury has not been catering for the centre in the last three years.

4. Directorate of Industrial Training. The Committee noted that the Director purchased a plot of land at Mutungu, Kampala to erect an executive house.  It was noted that the Directorate of Industrial Training acquired five plots at UMA Show Ground where it plans to build a showroom for advertising its activities.  

Labour Inspection.  The Committee noted that Inspectorate Department has been strengthened to safe guard workers in their work place and to ensure that there is no violation of labour laws.

5. The Social Welfare Sector.  The following observations were made in this particular area.  The Committee noted that the department of probation and Social Welfare was transfered from the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare to the Ministry of Gender.  Howeve,r the most important part of their assignment which is concerned with the aged, and the disadvantaged adults, was not correspondingly transferred and yet no staff was left in the Ministry of Labour to handle this area.  Famine disaster in the North and North Easter Uganda in the financial year 1994/95 government released 5 billion to purchase food for seven districts; this is Moroto, Kotido, Kumi, Soroti, Kitgum and Apac. The Committee also observed inadequate funding.

6. Administration and Planning.  The Committee noted the following constraints:

1.  Lack of transport and logistics.  The Permanent and Senior 

2.  Officers lack transport to help them in implementing their programmes.

3.  Absence of office equipments such as computers.

4.  Non-availability of funds for Inland and Overseas travels.

Recommendations

The Committee made the following recommendations:

1. That the formulation of employment policy should be speeded up as a matter of top priority and that the Ministries of Labour and Social Welfare, Finance and Economic Planning and Public Service should cooperate and come up with a lasting solution for the workers of the former East African Community, Uganda Transport Corporation and Uganda peoples Transport and terms regarding their terminal benefits.

2.  That the Industrial Court should be availed permanent room from where to conduct their court hearing instead of depending on ad hoc arrangements.

3.  It was further recommended that the President of the Industrial Court should be availed with transport to facilitate her movement.

4.  The transfer of the section dealing with the aged and disadvantaged adults in the Ministry of Gender and Community Development should be implemented; because the department which was handling that sector was transferred to the Ministry of Gender.

5.  It was recommended that a Management Structure be worked out between government and YMCA Jinja with a view to putting this centre at maximum use.

6.  The Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning should re-instate the funding of Masulita Vocational Training Centre which was completed three years ago.

7.  While the Committee appreciates the efforts made by this Inspectorate department in the Ministry, it recommends that its activities be shifted from the narrow aim of inspection and discovering violation of laws and regulations to promotion of safe and healthy working environment.

8.  On Social Welfare Sector, the Committee appreciated the Government effort in attending to the famine disaster and other resettlement schemes and recommended that the department of Disaster Management should be strengthened and be more transparent in its operations.  It was further recommended that disaster management policy be quickly worked out to guide the operations of the department.

9.  It was recommended that the Ministry of labour be availed with three vehicles for the Minister, the Permanent Secretary and one for the pool to be used for field staff.

10.  The Committee recommended the approval of recurrent budget of the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare totalling to 1,856,578,000- and development budget totalling to 163 million with the following amendments:

(i) That additional funds be provided for Programme 01, Item 1060 and 1080 travelling inland and abroad.  That additional funds be provided for Programme 01, Item 8030 - Domestic Arrears and that supplementary budget provision be approved for programme 05, Item 1060 Inspectorate and that more funds be available to Programme 07, Item 1110 - Vocational Training Centre.  Mr Chairman, that is the report from my Sectoral Committee.  I therefore, beg to move, Mr Chairman. (Applause)  

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to put a small query regarding Ministry of Health concerning rationalisation of allocations.  I will appreciate that the biggest hospital is situated in Kampala.  The Medical School is also situated in Kampala.  It would look more reasonable if the Ministry of Health was located at Wandegeya near this main hospital in the Medical School.  But it looks very expensive for all these NGOs that have got to fly to Entebbe every day.  Recently, I was in the Ministry and I made some inquiries and I was told that about 1.5 billion shillings is spent on Movement every month just because this Ministry is in Entebbe.  I understand that in an effort to rationalise the situation, the Ministry had acquired the plot in Kampala for constructing their headquarters.  But no sooner had these people acquired and decided to construct their offices than the Ministry of Public Service came in and claimed the same plot.  

Now, you find that this is a problem that makes the working of Government very up-hazard.  These are two Ministries and all of them belong to the same Government.  They are fighting over a plot.  Indeed if you look at this case seriously, if you see the location of buildings have been properly done, it should have been the Ministry of Health that should have occupied the present premises of the Ministry of Public Service because, as I see, the main hospital is near and even the medical school is near and all facilities that have got to do with the Ministry of Health are in Kampala.  Whereas the Ministry itself is in Entebbe.  Now, I had expected this Report to highlight this problem because I took trouble to go to the Ministry to find out the details, but since I have hinted on it, I hope it will be looked into.  

I also want to talk briefly on Item 4, page 4, of the Report and put it in form - I got it, it is so mixed up.  I am getting the Mbarara University about five times.  Most of the things the hon. Member was reading, I do not have them in my Report.  This problem of a manpower drain - I remember very well that sometime back we approved new salary structures for our judges and the judicial department.  

While I appreciate and attach a lot of respect to the judicial department most of the opinion that the Ministry of Health and the Doctors and Nurses are so important to the well being of this Nation.  But this is a mistake that should have been looked at long ago in terms of salaries.  But when you go round, you find Doctors are really suffering.  Many of them are going on foot.  Many of the good Doctors that would have been here are already working outside.  Now, these are people we need for the well being of this country.

I want to make an appeal that the Ministry of Public Service takes up this problem in the Ministry of Health as a matter of agency.  The salary for these people should actually be revised.  Mr Chairman, with those few remarks, I thank you very much.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the Chairman of this Sectoral Committee for the job well done.  However, I would like to make one or two comments.  The first one is on Ministry of Health.  This is to do with the Uganda Aids Commission.  You remember sometime when we were discussing Uganda Aids Commission and setting up this Body in this House, I made similar comments.  The setting up of the Uganda Aids Commission was actually a duplication of the Aids Control programme; a very well established programm within the Ministry of Health.  What do we see one or two years later?  What we are seeing is what Chairman of the Committee is reporting here.  This Body is not well funded.  It is redundant now and unless a donor comes up and funds this organisation, obviously, it will become extinct.

This is not only with Uganda Aids Commission.  There are other Bodies we have set up in this august House for example, NEMA.  Because of the instance of the donors, we set up these Bodies, after the donors pulled out, these Bodies collapsed.  So, we really need or rather this House should look very, very, very carefully at some of these institutions that we are setting up.  

The second one is about cost sharing.  Cost sharing is something that has been a real enigma.  At one time, the Ministry of Health abolished cost sharing.  Another time, this House came up with a statement, a resolution, that cost sharing should be abolished and recessed.  The President also gave a directive that cost sharing should be abolished.  But what do we find?  We find various Health Centres, hospitals in various parts of the country not uniformly throughout the country carrying out cost sharing.  Now, what do we follow?  The signal we are giving the population is lack of coordination within government departments.  I think decentralisation now, at least, what I have observed in Masindi is that with decentralisation we are beginning to see some money at the districts.  In fact, as I talk now, Masindi Hospital, the monthly Vote from what we have in these provisions is about UShs 15 million, something that never used to be seen in the past.  In the past we used to get 1 million shillings or even less.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, since he did not know that the Minister of Health then, hon. Zack kaheru, he lost his job as a Minister because he was pushing too much this idea of cost sharing.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, we are beginning to get some fruits from the decentralisation.  Money, which never used to appear at the districts, is really beginning to appear.  As I have already quoted, last month alone Masindi Hospital got UShs10 million.  In the first, you would never see this money.  At most you would see only UShs 1 million.  So, with this money now appearing at District Hospitals, I would propose that the policy of cost sharing be abolished completely.  

Finally, one comment on the Ministry of Education and Sports.  I note that the Report has pointed out that there some provision for Sports Equipments.  This is a very serious matter.  In some of our schools, we have not seen any provision of Sports skipped.  The children or pupils are very anxious to get these.  Last year alone the whole of Masindi District, we had only 12 balls supplied to the whole district.  We had been promised by the District Education Officer that as a District we were entitled to get about 200 balls.  We had only 12.

There are other sports arenas and areas, volleyball and the rest.  Sports is not just football only.  There are very may other areas.  So, I would like to appeal to the Minister for Education not to take sports to mean football.  There are other many areas, other pupils who have got other talents in some areas.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR RWABIITA:  Mr Chairman, I rise to make observation on Ministry of Information, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Gender.  On Ministry of Information, I wish the Minister could tell the problem with Radio Uganda because up-country people cannot have any music or listen to news until it is 7.15 a.m. and that when the waves come.  Which means if one wants to listen to news in the morning, he will never get the news until it is 10.00 a.m.  I do not know whether it is a technical problem or it is because our instruments here are very weak.  But it is very unfortunate because some times up-country people sent their announcements and they cannot hear them in the morning after paying.  So, Mr Minister, can you explain?  On YV - it is up to Mbarara because they have got a but the rest of Western Uganda - Kabale, Kasese, Fort Portal, all those areas even if you are to be on houseboy video tape.  So, we request the Ministry to improve on the reception of Uganda Television because many people want to use their TVs.  

On Education, we have been concerned about performance in the up-country schools.  Now, the biggest cause is that the teachers need to be trained.  You get areas where teachers left colleges 30 years ago and has never gone to class.  So, we need inter-service training.  In our case, in the North of Mbarara, between Mbarara and Butiti, we have one TTC. Ibanda.  But that place is unusual as during the holidays.  We would request the Ministry of Education, if they could avail some more funds, some of these teachers could up-grade every holidays and after three or four years, you find that we get more qualified teachers and who can again improve standard of education in our country.  

Now, on the 50 percent left for primary schools this money must be allocated properly.  Because sometimes it is left at the headquarters of the district or the Education Committee at the district tries to do the purchases.  I want to discourage that practice because the schools know better their needs.  But sometimes you find the Education Committee at the district just buys what they think it is for a, b, c, d.  So, I would insist as it is reported by the Committee that most of the money goes to the schools concerned so that the PTA, Management Committee can decide on their priorities.  In any case, when the District Education Committee buys items, sometimes they buy them very expensively while the PTA can get cheap books and the rest of the things.

Now, on the Ministry of Gender, my advice is that for the last 20 years or so, these structures have been left to no person.  They have no owner.  If you want these buildings to be utilised properly, give them to RCIIIs, the councils because they have got the money.  They can repair them so that the Youth can use them and if need be, they can even rent them for weddings and make some money.  But if you leave them to the Ministry of Gender, even if you repair them after some years they go bad again.  So, I would request that they are given to RC.III Councils who should take charge and definitely being the Accounting Officers now at the sub-counties they should be able to use them more maximally than what they are now.  I must comment on Councils for Women and Youth.  The Women and Youth are asking a very big.  What was the purpose of creating these Councils?  ‘If they cannot be facilitated to perform?’  

Throughout this country these Councils have been idol for most of the years.  I hope the Minister of Gender now will put a policy and programme so that these women and Youths can work because they cannot work unless there is a bit of funding policy and direction.  The Ministry must put the policy and follow up the performance of these Councils.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO:  Under Item 8 - Ministry of Health which talks about the transfer of the Uganda Research Organisation - Ministry of Health.  UTRO have never been under Ministry of Health.  It was an East African Community Organisation which deals with research.  The Cabinet Memo that has been talked about here also seems to be asking what does the centre do?  I think the House also should be informed that this centre is there to handle mainly the research on an organism called ‘trypanosome.’  This is an organism that causes a number of diseases but mainly the diseases are in cattle especially.  It also causes sleeping sickness in the human being.  But the disease called ‘Nagana’, mainly affects livestock.  The centre was established to try and handle this disease and study it in order to understand its nature.  The Ministry of Animal Resources before, now the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, has for long established research on the ‘trypanosome’ handling both the human and the animal altripanosom in the studies.  The Ministry controls the vector that spreads the trypanosome.  This is the tsetsefly.  If the Ministry controls the tsetsefly, it would eliminate the disease in human beings also the disease in animals.  Under NARO in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and fisheries, a new department called LIRI has been established at Tororo and has been equipped with modern equipment to further study the trypanosome and therefore, act on it effectively.  It would, therefore, be a waste of money and waste of resources for us in Uganda now to try and change this particular organisation from the Ministry of Agriculture and then revert it to the Ministry of Health which actually has not been taking part in the researches that are involved in the particular effective organisms  

There is an organisation called COCTU which is a coordinating organ.  This is also under the Ministry of Agriculture.  It produces drugs for treating sleeping sickness for patients from all over the world which eventually passes onto the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Health carries out the treatment.  This centre does not only work for Uganda.  It operates for a number of countries.  In fact, recently, we had a meeting in Jinja in which Kenya, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Sudan, Malawi and other areas came down to discuss how effectively the trypanosome can be handled.  The centre that was being focused on was the Tororo Centre which has been rehabilitated by the Ministry of Agriculture.  So, I really find this that the Ministry of Health should take this centre and begin afresh when already the Ministry of Agriculture, the Veterinary Department Entomology and especially under the newly created NARO, the National Agricultural Research Organisation is already fully involved in this centre and is handling studies regarding both animal trypanosome and the human trypanosome.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I did indicate that this Institute under NARO was actually of Parliament.  We did decide on the location and the type of research that should be taken in this very House.  So, I did not find it rather strange that Cabinet could decide to act against what we decided in this House without reference to this House.  Anything which must be discussed in this House cannot just be transferred by Cabinet.  I think there is lack of coordination within the departments.

THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION (Mr Paul Etiang):  Mr Chairman, I am grateful to the information given by the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Agriculture and also the last speaker.  Very recently, I have just come back from Ethiopia where I attended a conference that was questioning Africa in its utilisation of resources.  That we duplicate a lot of things and we begin within Ministries and Departments to fight over small issues.  This is one of the cases.  I do not see why the Ministry of Health really should be concerned about this centre when we are doing all the work and the research is being passed onto to them in order to adopt accordingly.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I think the speaker who is on the Floor is part of the Cabinet and the Minister in Government.  I just do not know whom he is complaining to.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR INFORMATION:  Mr Chairman, hon. Kanyomozi knows exactly where I belong.  The information I am giving here are professional facts, which I thought we would all be educated about.  If I may continue, I was saying that, it is rational for us to continue organizing this particular Institute for the best of the country and for the best of all Ugandans not that there is a tag of war at all between the Ministries, but this is the information to guide the entire House.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I did not like to disturb the presentation which was so good by the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee but I only want to draw your attention or the attention of the House through you, that the Committee has made fair reaching recommendations which have some budgetary implications.  Unfortunately in consultation with the Chairman, I have also been to understand that they did not contact the Ministry of Finance and they have never communicated in any form these implications.  So, it will be very difficult at this stage for us to decide that those provisions are increased by the amount, which he is suggesting.  So, I only wanted to draw the attention of the hon. Members and the Chairman to accept that the Ministry of Finance is taking note of the recommendations and as they know the budget is not the responsibility of Ministry of Finance, it is a government’s responsibility.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

Perhaps another thing is that regarding AIDS Commission, actually it was this House which discussed the Statutory which made that the AIDS Commission be under the Office of the President.  At that particular time,  AIDS was seen as a crucial matter that it required mobilisation funding, it required coordinations, it required a powerful office to coordinate these issues.  So, it is not the making of the Government that they just put AIDS Commission in the Office of the President.  Actually it is the responsibility of Ministry of Health, it is their routine work.

Regarding cost sharing, hon. Members should know clearly that the Government -(Inaudible)- has not made it as its policy for cost sharing.  But when attempt was made here and we could not get through, then in some district, counties and sub-counties where people felt concerned that the policies could work in their areas, they started initiating cost sharing at their level.  These are known by the local councils.  The only problem is that when you go to these areas you find that the people are putting up hands to ask what about cost-sharing, when the very person - Chairman RCIII or the councils who passed it in their local council through their empowerment are around and have not explained to the people.

MR RWAKAKOKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think from my recollection, cost sharing has always been there because Mulago Hospital, District Hospitals, have always had private wings.  They have always had Grade A and Grade B.  Now, however, I think that at some stage, the Government Policy slipped off that arrangement because there were no services in those areas.  Now, it may be useful to the Government actually study what used to happen in the past in those areas and see how the continuation can be made without hurting those areas which were free.  In other words, the general medical areas other than Grade A., private were always free because that is where the poor or ordinary people of Uganda usually got treatment.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I note the point but I am only talking about those hospitals which have I am talking cost-sharing as a general policy even in rural areas.  This is the point I was trying to talk about.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify the issue.  If he says that it is being done at a local level, can one refuse to pay that amount and still qualify for the services being rendered?  If not, then it is a tax.  In fact, a tax needs to pass through this House in order to qualify and have the power of being collected.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I thank you very much.  I have the pleasure to inform the last speaker that if you read the RC Statute, you will know that the RC is a Chief and he can also make levies, and this goes up.  But if there is a dispensary which is now managed by RCIII, in the community say, we must contribute for up-holding this, that becomes a law by the 
  
MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I am very grateful to the information.  I can only add in these areas where the Councils have passed cost sharing, the Management have passed it in some cases like emergency in foreign exchange.  There are some issues which can be taken by the local authorities in these areas.  If I could proceed on guarding the discrepancies regarding salaries, I hope the Ministry of Finance shall labour here to explain in his budget.  There have been these differences because of professionals especially in the Ministry of Justice for the Judges and others.  Now, the Ministry of Public Service has also started carrying out what we call ‘job evaluation’ and after that, there is what we call ‘rationalisation’ of these salaries.  This is going to be overcome so that each will get the salary commensurate to his or her job description.  But of now, there have been some cases where we had to put in a to ensure that we d not encourage the hemorrhage of the technical staff like in the Ministry of Justice especially in the Judiciary.  With those, I hope the Members will have noted with recommendations that we can only take note of them at this material time.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION (Mr Francis Babu):  Mr Chairman, thank you.  Mr Chairman, I just want to try and give some information to some of the points raised.  One of them was raised by hon. Dr Byaruhanga on equipment.  If you go on our Policy Statement on page 15, it is very clear.  It gives you the development of sports in the country.  It even gives you thorough information that the amount of money we are talking about is a revolving fund because of not having enough money in the Ministry, a revolving was put up.  This revolving fund is supposed to bring in sports equipment at a very cheap price so that the schools can buy them without overheads and profit, which are put on by middlemen.  So, really this profit equipment we have in the sports council are bought at a very cheap price.  For example, the balls are bought at UShs 10,000= instead of UShs 25,000=.  I would like to thank the hon. Members that during the last campaigns, they helped us to buy these balls and took them all over the country.  To an extent that every -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I only wanted a clarification, Mr Chairman, as to the procedure.  Last week but one, we received a circular from the Clerk to the Council telling us that there are certain Ministries which were going to be discussed in detail, and Ministry of Education is one of them.  I just wanted clarification whether this is true or not.  At the moment I was trying to say that if you looked at page 15 and 16 we have showed you that we are going to develop sports.  We started with sports management; we are developing different disciplines in sports and the Chairman for example, of the Sports Council, is a special programmes.  This is on the Policy Statement and those who do not have them, we have specials TTCs that have been chosen and they are in different regions and the job is going to up-grade these teachers.  We have them in places like Abilonino, Gulu, Ruhanga and many other places where these teachers are going to be up-graded.

Recently, we had a competence test for unqualified teacher who never really did their O’Level and this test was to qualify them to go back to the TTCs to become Grade 3 teachers.  In other words, in the next two years, we will have only qualified teachers in primary schools.  We also have other programmes called TDMs - this is going to integrity teachers and various people are sponsoring it, and this is going to upgrade all the teachers in the country.  So, the teacher who was given the opportunity for the last thirty years, this is the time.  I hope he will be able to go and sit for our competence test which he must pass before he goes for upgrading in certain cases.

Lastly, I thought it would be unfair, that comment made by hon. Tiberondwa who is a Presidential hopeful to know what the other President thinks when he is choosing his Ministers.  But I hope that when he becomes a President, he will not use flimsy excuses to appoint his Minister.  Thank you.

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, thank you.  I rise on the invitation of hon. Rwabiita to comment on the problem of Audio Visual signals throughout the country particularly in Ibanda.  Before a commentary on that, I would like to confirm to the House that the hon. Member has once before written to me the names of subjects and I gave him a technical reply on subjects.  Also before presenting today’s report to the House, I had the occasion of coming before the Social Affairs Committee issue or dignity of radio and TV in the country was raised by a number of problems

Ibanda, like most parts of Uganda, is covered by radio through the short and medium waves.  We have a transmitter covering the whole country based in Bugolobi and these transmitter signals unlike the FM ones, are bounced of the iron sphere somewhere several kilometres or maybe miles.  That is where the problem is; that given the last ten years, there have been a lot of atmospheric problems particularly in the biosphere layer and that is what has affected very much the transmission by short wave or medium wave.  Specifically the transmission when the layer, as you have been taking an explanation from me at great length and being a layman, I can perhaps try to explain to my fellow Members who are also some of them are laymen.  When the layer on which these signals bounce goes higher and that is by the atmospheric activities.  The signal to be bounced to falls further than the territory to which it is targeted.  In other words, if ours from Bugolobi is targeted for Ibanda, and the layer at a particular commonly in the morning, goes higher, the angle of bouncing is further than Ibanda which is somewhere in Zaire.  I take this opportunity to explain this in my layman’s language because it is a common complaint throughout the Radio Uganda from 6.30 to about 8.00 a.m. in Mweya Lodge.  So, I would like to advise my Colleagues who come from that area that on short wave, if you can try on 15.20, on the medium wave, please try 6195.  If I am to repeat the numbers on short wave early in the morning, they are - 4795 and 5050.  The problem of transmission in the country was the subject of my statement to this House last month.  But I have a statement which I issued in which the problem is intended to be permanently solved.  I have explained this to the Committee.  It is in writing.

With regard to TV, TV coverage in the country admittedly is very much limited.  Moreless on a straight as one goes from Kabale to Mbale.  Thus, Kabale, Mbarara, Masaka, Kampala, Jinja and Mbale.  Roughly 30 kilometres on either side of that line should be able to receive UTV clearly.  Now, that is what we have in the Ministry in the last so many years.  Again in the statement that I issued last month, I did explain and it is in writing, what the Government is doing to expand Audio Visual Reception.  That is TV and radio reception throughout the country and depending on whether we get the money or not, and I hope we do, when we get that money on the present programme that my Ministry has, the rest of the country should be able to be accused by this Audio Visual signals.  That is to say T.V and Radio.  Before that, there is nothing actually we can do about the iron-sphere and other promises that are there.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Hon. Rwabiita raised two questions.  The first one concerned the of the real community centre.  There is a team, which is going round the country ascertaining the state and status of these centres.  So far, they have given me a report that we have got 623 community centres all over the country.  Most of them are not being used either by the local authorities or by the Central Government for various reasons since the early 70s.  We are in the process of seeking the collective advice of Cabinet as to the status of these centres.  The proposal brought by hon. Rwabiita is a plausible one.  Now, that we are decentralising service, the Community Development Officers are now going to be employed by the Local Government, the District Governments and the Gombolola Governments.  Why do we not also decentralise these structures so that they are better looked after by the Local Governments.  That will not mean that we shall not have a Central Government access stop these institutions.  Indeed they will be put to better use in my view and a decision will be made known on this matter in the very near future.  

However, you know and I want to commend here, the Kampala City Resistance Council for taking up Naguru Community Cerntre.  It is being used for literacy classes for social functions, for cultural functions, for women, youth and the disabled.  This is the used to which these Centres should really be put.  However, the rural training centres which are regional similar to the District Farm Institute, for the time being this will be taken care of by the Centre.  These RTCs, some of them are attached to the District Farm Institutes but the rest are detached.  They fall in the same category with Institutions of this nature set up by the Ministry responsible for cooperatives.  I think it is time now that we are decentralising to have even these Centres formerly handed over to the Local Governments.  The Centre will continue being responsible for policy and training and maintaining standards.  

The second issued raised by hon. Rwabiita concerns facilitation to the Women and Youth Councils.  Again my Ministry shares his concern.  What have we done since these Councils were put in place?  This month we are coming out with a booklet titled: Guidelines to Women Councils and another one is Guidelines to Youth Councils so that the Officer bearers will be guided by the information therein on what they are supposed to do in the Councils.  Because the statutes we realise did not go far like the RC statute in pointing out the role of each office bearer; the role of the Chairman, Secretary for Information.  

Secondly, within this year’s budget, there is provision for funding Women Councils and their National Secretariat.  We shall be looking at Vote 030 under Item 6040.  But there is a big omission on the same Item for the Youth Councils.  All the same, given the recommendation and support enshrined in the report o the Sectoral Committee, we shall and have started negotiating with Ministry of Finance for supplementary funds to cater for the Youth Secretariat and some funding for the Councils.  But these Councils are many.  Think about it!  We have got about 800 Gombololas including Town Councils.  If you are to fund those, all the same funds are going to be provided for the National Secretariat whose staffing is in process; interview and appointments have already been done to man these secretariats.  

We are also going to establish Youth and Women Secretariat at District Level and staff them with at least three people so that they may coordinate information and organisation of the Youth towards skills and the rest of the training.  Also, the Centre Secretariat is going to be the two.  They are going to be provided with motor vehicles this Financial Year.  The District - each one a motorcycle and the Gombololas each one two bicycles.  This is what the budget can provide for this Financial Year.  Next Financial Year we shall plan for greater ones.  

In addition, the guidelines we have given the Youth Councils also indicate that the Women and Youth who these Councils should contribute at village level some nominal figure.  Say, UShs 1,000 in order to capitalise their projects and activities.  If a village has got 100 youths and each one were to contribute UShs1, 000, which is one third of a chicken.  Those are ten eggs really.  That would be UShs 100,000 to capitalise the village councils.  If each village council were to contribute Ushs 10,000 to the Parish Council, and in each Parish we have got about ten villages, that is another UShs 100,000 at the Parish level.  Since the Gombolola or division is itself a Government, we have also given advice to these local governments from their 50 percent retention of revenues collected and from the grounds that they will be obtaining from the district government to also contribute to give a grant to the Gombolola Youth Council and so on for the county and the district.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 September1995 at 2.30 p.m.)
  
