Monday, 5 September 2011

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon, hon. Members. Welcome to this sitting. We had referred some business to the Budget Committee and maybe before I make any further communication on this, I need to understand how far the Budget Committee has gone with the business before them and what we need to do to move forward, and then I will give my communication after that - Chairman, Budget Committee.

3.06
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We had a meeting this morning, but we still have a long way to go. I think we need more time, probably another two days and maybe by Thursday, we should be ready to report back to the House. In actual fact, the members of the committee will most likely find a place where we can sit undisturbed so that we work very fast, because there is a lot of work to be done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman Budget Committee. Hon. Members, part of what delayed the Budget Committee in transacting business was apparent incomplete information that was sent to the Budget Committee; so they did not know exactly what we agreed on at the time we adjourned the House on Friday evening. So, I need to re-state for the record, what we expect from the Budget Committee.

The decision that I took on Friday evening at the close of that sitting was based on what has arisen, as a matter that we now had to resort to our Rules of Procedure to resolve. We looked at the provision of the Budget Act, sections 7 and 8, and the time limits imposed in those sections of the Budget Act. We had also seen that several matters had been raised in the course of the debate on the reports of the respective committees; many questions were asked that needed answers, and not answers in words, but answers in terms of figures that were not very clear. 

I looked at the provision of Rule 147(3)(c) which gave the Speaker and this House the authority to refer a matter back to the Budget Committee; whatever the House deems is necessary for reference to the committee to be referred back to the Budget Committee. I found that this was an appropriate matter that could be referred to the Budget Committee. And what was the matter? 

The matter was that several issues were raised. First of all, that some of the budgetary provisions that were made did not follow the direct orders given by the President in the State of the Nation Address, which was repeated by the Minister of Finance in the budget speech relating to reduction of expenditures on:

1. 	Purchase of vehicles;
2. 	Seminars and workshops; and 
3. 	Travel abroad and several other things.

The circular that was circulated to the accounting officers stated that there should be a reduction of 30 percent on all those expenditures, but the issue that was raised by the committees was that it looked like some of those things had not been observed. Therefore, the budget that had been proposed to the House contained some of those things and they needed to harmonise. Because of this and several other facts that were raised by the committees and the Members of this House, we said for purposes of proper movement forward, we needed to harmonise the positions, and the best way to do this is to have the Budget Committee, which comprises all the chairpersons of the committees, interact with the ministers so that they could harmonise everything and come back to the House before we move for appropriation. That was the reason we had referred this matter to the Budget Committee to handle.

But it seemed that the information that was relayed to the Budget Committee, and which has been captured by the press, gave the impression that it was specifically referred to the Budget Committee to deal with the issue of the teachers’ salaries. This was misinformation. The reason why we referred the matter to the Budget Committee was bigger than the issue of teachers; it was much bigger than that because the issues that are involved are much bigger than the single issue of the teachers’ salaries.

The instructions, I repeat, to the Budget Committee, are to go back, look at those figures, see if these issues are true and see if these monies have been put in areas which are not priority areas, and find some way of reallocating. This will be done in consultation with the people who have proposed this budget and then we move from there by the time we come to appropriation. 

I should also state here that under the Constitution and basic practice of budgeting, there is something called financial initiative. Financial initiative rests with the President. It is only the President that can propose expenditures and Parliament confirms them by appropriation. So, we do not want to come to a situation where this House seems to be acting as if it was the one proposing figures. We want to conform to the practice of financial initiative, where the initiative rests with the President who can exercise, in accordance with his own wisdom, through his ministers and Parliament, his powers to propose. In other words, the President proposes, and Parliament disposes by appropriation. We want to strictly follow those procedures. 

So, the Budget Committee, please, you need to help us and harmonise these so that the country knows that this Parliament means business and nobody is going to allocate funds to wasteful activities when there are priority matters that should be handled. (Applause)

That is the focus of this Ninth Parliament and that is the focus the country wants to see this Parliament achieve, and we should all be committed to achieving exactly that.

This has been the longest communication from the chair, but I think it serves a good purpose to redirect our original intent for referring this matter to the Budget Committee. Thank you.

MR SABITI: It is true that the Executive proposes, and we have a look at what their proposals are. I thought Parliament had a constitutional right to look into what has been proposed and we can initiate amendments within as long as we do not exceed the ceiling proposed by the Executive. So, in other words, we can look at every item and re-adjust accordingly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is why we are taking it back to the Budget Committee to interact with the ministers and see how to make some adjustments within whatever has been set, and then make reallocations if possible.

3.14
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hope we have got the issue very clear, that each committee will have to present its findings to the Budget Committee, and also the Budget Committee should use its office and the staff that we have to look at those areas. 

For example, if the Committee on Agriculture says that the Ministry of Agriculture has budgeted for vehicles, travel inland, advertisement and seminars, and the committee says, “We also got it” and they bring a report so that we do not call all committees at the same time and start discussing. I think it is prudent for the Budget Committee to deal with each committee at a time. That will make the work easier.

Also, as you have said, the minister of that sector must be present; whether we agree or disagree, it is important that they come. Then the Budget Committee will present a report showing where they agreed and where they disagreed. Is that what you meant, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think some of the matters will be decided by the Budget Committee on how to proceed with this matter. 

3.16
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am at a loss. The Minister for Finance presented the budget after the President had given the State of the Nation Address. It was the duty of the Minister of Finance to submit the right figures because it was those figures which the Minister of Finance had given to the respective ministries; that is number one.

Secondly, we are talking about travel inland; but I am sure if you looked at the budget – at that time, fuel was at about Shs 3,000 or less. Now, because of the inflation, the 30 percent has already been eaten up.

And when you consider advertising; we have to advertise. There are other areas we could cut, but advertising is very vital. If you do not advertise, how will people know about the roads which are due for construction? You are creating lack of transparency and that way, we shall lose more money. 

So, I propose that the Ministry of Finance should tell us what we should do in the Budget Committee. Otherwise, the Budget Committee might make more mistakes in the process. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why we said that the Minister of Finance will attend those meetings to harmonise this thing to a close.

3.18
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with the assignment you have given the committee in relation to the budget. But some specific issues have to be handled immediately. For instance, the issue of strikes in my district is alarming. Although the schools have opened today, the primary schools are not operating. The teachers are on strike.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that information is for those people who are going to sit there to see how best they can deal with the situation to help this country. We do not need to go into the specifics of the situation; otherwise we will have to talk about the currency exchange rate and so on. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, but at least I have told this House that Adjumani District is on strike. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think we can close it there. Hon. Members, I was earlier contacted by the Member for Kampala District that she needed to raise a matter of national importance. But as soon as she was leaving my office, I also received the Minister in Charge of Kampala Capital City Authority with a statement that she needed to present to the House; basically on the same matter that hon. Ssempala had come to seek authority to raise. 

Now, in terms of procedure, to have the matter exhaustively dealt with, I will use my prerogative under Rule 22, to amend the Order Paper to allow the honourable minister make the statement formally so that we can deal with it in a more comprehensive way than if we raise it as a matter of national importance. So, the Order Paper is accordingly amended and I allow the minister to make her statement. 

3.20
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Kabakumba Matsiko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a brief statement on a city wide clean-up exercise. I hope the copies have come; if they haven’t, they are on the way.

The Kampala Capital City Act, 2010 came into force on 1 March 2011 and the Executive Director was appointed on 15 April 2011. A lot of gaps and challenges were identified ranging from lack of systems of accountability, mismanagement of procurement and revenue collection, poorly supervised, corrupt and under motivated work-force, week enforcement mechanisms and political interference, poor records and assets management, inadequate solid waste management, among others. 

The Executive Director with her interim team embarked on a huge challenge of re-organising KCCA and putting systems in place and improving on service delivery. A lot has so far been achieved and I will brief Parliament about this in my subsequent statements. 

On the city wide clean-up exercise, there are many angles to it. However, on the current issue of vendors, KCCA issued notices in June 2011 instructing all illegal trading activities off the street, citing their negative impact to trade, security and congestion on streets and walk-ways. Besides, they prevent normal operations of licence to businesses and also create unfair trade competition. 

Moreover, they cause littering in the city and make it impossible to maintain and clean the roads and walk-ways. They also cause traffic congestion. 

For now, I wish to report that day one of the exercise to evict illegal vendors from Kampala City streets has been successful with a very high level of compliance. KCCA enforcement team backed up with the Metropolitan Police Force were on the streets early this morning and the majority of the people and vendors who were operating in the central business district complied with the directive to leave the streets. 

I am happy to inform you that some vendors have already acquired part of the 8,000 vending facilities in the 89 markets in and around Kampala that had been identified to assist the vendors relocate. 

KCCA advises the illegal street vendors who have not yet got alternative working places to continue registering with the respective leaders of the markets in order to secure space. KCCA has a job to do in the move to restore trade order in the city and the journey has just started. The intention is to continue with this exercise peacefully. However, those who choose not to comply with the law will be dealt with accordingly.

The transformation of Kampala from its current state of filth and disorder into a modern city requires the involvement of all key stakeholders. This journey will be spearheaded by transforming KCCA into a reputable corporate entity capable of delivering to the citizens, the value promised. 

I, therefore, would like to appeal to all stakeholders to be part of this transformation effort. All of us who live and/or work in Kampala are yearning for a clean and orderly city. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Okay, can we now hear from hon. Nabilah Sempala?

3.26
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the minister for a timely statement that has at least given us time to debate and discuss the merits and demerits of the work of KCCA.

We know very well that the planning role for the people of Uganda and Kampala in particular, rests with the minister and KCCA. Planning for the people who do their work and other activities in Kampala, is a holistic endeavour that KCCA is mandated to do. The minister knows that the KCCA Development is not yet in place as we talk. Also, we know that part of the congestion is caused by the non-existence of parking space provided on each building. That is why some of the roads were encroached upon to create parking spaces for all the buildings in Kampala. Most of the markets in Kampala are not new, but old ones, which Government has been trying to improve. Some of the markets that we think have space like the one at Wandegeya are awaiting demolition and reconstruction. Actually, even the vendors in Wandegeya Market are looking for alternative places, which they have not found to date.

Kampala City Council Authority and the councillors with the Lord Mayor are not part of this plan. The Lord Mayor had called a meeting to discuss this issue with the vendors on 7 September, but the directive from the Executive Director came saying that the deadline for vendors to leave the streets was yesterday. So, this forced him to hurriedly call a meeting for today to harmonise this issue; we are all part of it. However, we got perturbed by the action of the Metropolitan Police, who came to disrupt that meeting at City Hall. From that action, we now don’t know who is planning for Kampala. Is it the Executive Director alone? Is there some coordination with all the stakeholders including the resolutions from the KCCA? These are some of the issues that I would like to ask the minister to clarify on.

Right now we know that schools are opening. And I want Members to get to know that some of these people have actually been working from the streets for the last 25 years with government having no plans to relocate them. Actually, many of the proud entrepreneurs that we have in Kampala today, built their business capacities from those streets.

Anyway, my concern is how do we deal with this? Are the vendors the problem? Should the plan to accommodate them come in first or later? We know that there is increasing insecurity because of poverty. The age bracket for most vendors is 15 to 30 years –(Mr James Kakooza rose_)– no, let me first present before I let other people come in.

MR SEGONA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. James Kakooza to rise up and speak to a Member holding the Floor directly without your permission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had given very clear guidance on the issue of rising and starting to use the microphone before you have been permitted to do so. Yes, the honourable member rose on a point of clarification, but he accessed the microphone before he had been given the permission to do so. So, he is out of order.

MS SEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me continue with my reaction to the presentation of the minister on the issue of street vendors. What I was saying is that the Kampala Development Plan is not yet in place. But I also want to add that the relocation mechanisms are also very lacking. The 8,000 spaces that they are talking about are located in wetlands, for example, the Wakansake Market. Other places like Owino Market are also not enough; there are many people in there who work from the corridors. 

I want to say that the traders in the leadership of these markets are also not aware or they have been hijacked by the information in the newspapers. We have just ended a meeting at City Hall where we had the Lord Mayor and the councillors, but we were also shocked to learn that the eviction is being done without their knowledge. In the circumstances, I would like to ask the minister to clarify further on whether KCCA is just made up of the Executive Director alone so that whatever she decides is final. Do street vendors have an opportunity to be heard like the teachers have been heard? What I know is that though these people are informal in their operations, the vendors have a right to be heard like any other Ugandan citizens, as the harmonisation of relocation is being done. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you too. Hon. Members, after the presentations from the Minister and hon. Nabilah, you will restrict yourselves to three minutes. I informed you that she had come to me because she wanted to make a statement and that is why I gave her additional time. 

3.34
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to put it to this House that most vendors do contribute to our economy. Those people who are denying this should know that it is a fact and I am putting it to you that they do contribute to our economy because they buy from people who pay taxes. 

These people are Ugandans who want something to take home to eat like you, Members. These people should be given clear alternatives and should not lie to them that they are going to be put somewhere when actually they will not be put there. 

Whereas KCCA is talking about street vendors, there is also another tragedy of people presenting to Kampala Capital City Authority plans that they will have parking in their buildings but at the end of the day, they make them to appear like arcades. 

Before we start evicting vendors, why shouldn’t we suggest that these people should and must make sure that the places they converted to arcades, the lower floors, which they submitted as parking space, should be made real parking spaces and then we can continue with evicting the vendors? 

However, I am not criticising the minister. I am only giving you something that can guide us because those vendors are Ugandans and they are many in number. Let’s sit with them, give them actual alternatives and not lie to them. We should not tell them to go somewhere when there is actually no place to go. After doing that, we can tell them that it is not good to be on the streets. None of them should be allowed to trade on the streets. We need to modify the way we shall do this. I thought they would be given some time because as I talk now, some people are not going to eat today; some people are not going to get school fees. 

The mistake that was made was that you allowed them on the streets during election time. You should never have allowed them there. Human beings are animals; when an animal gets used to something, leaving it becomes a tug-of-war. We should never allow them to go back to the streets if we succeed in evicting them. (Member timed out_)

3.38
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Betty Nambooze): Thank you. Mr Speaker, if you would grant us opportunity, we would present to this House a detailed alternative on what we would have done if it were us in power. 

Listening to the minister talking about KCCA, you get a feeling that Kampala Capital City Authority is made up of the Executive Director and her interim team and the minister. I want to bring it to the attention of this House that Section 5(3) of the Kampala Capital City Act provides that the Authority is the governing body of the capital city and shall administer the capital city on behalf of the central government subject to this Act.

Section 6 clearly provides the membership of the Kampala Capital City Authority that includes the Lord Mayor, the Deputy Lord Mayor, the councillors and councillors representing professional bodies. 

On 20 July 2011, the Lord Mayor wrote a letter to the Executive Director, which I want you to allow me to lay on Table. The subject of the letter was to notify her of a consultative meeting on service delivery and policy formulation. In this letter, it was indicated that a meeting to discuss the fate of street vendors would take place on 7 September 2011. A copy of the letter is here with me. I wish to be allowed to lay it on Table. 

On 21 July 2011, the Executive Director wrote back to the Mayor and indeed indicated that as much as she will not be able to attend this meeting in person, she had directed someone and the City Advocate to represent her at that council meeting. 

It comes as a surprise then that KCCA, as provided for under the law, was going to sit on 7 September 2011 to discuss the fate of street vendors with the full knowledge of the Executive Director and the same Executive Director, issues an ultimatum for the street vendors to leave by 4 September 2011. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Two more minutes for the shadow minister.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to lay this letter on Table. 

I want to talk about the 69 markets where the vendors have been told to relocate. Some of these markets are Ntinda Market, Wandegeya Market, Kansanga Market, Kasubi Market - these five markets are going to be funded under a project called MATIP with $ 13.5 million from BADEA and ADB for reconstruction. The sitting vendors in these markets have signed memoranda of understanding with KCCA to leave these markets in 30 days starting from today. So, the street vendors are being relocated to markets where the sitting vendors are being requested to leave to pave way for construction. 

The other markets where vendors are supposed to relocate include Owino, Kisekka and Nakasero markets. But KCCA has already sub-leased these markets to vendors. KCCA does not own these markets. They belong to vendors. The condition for this sub-lease was that vendors would redevelop these markets. Common sense tells that they will also be leaving these markets to pave way for redevelopment. And indeed Owino Market has secured two acres of land from Mr Ssebaana Kizito in Kisenyi where vendors of Owino Market are going to relocate to pave way for the redevelopment of the 7.7 acres where Owino Market sits right now. It comes as a surprise –(Member timed out_)

3.44
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am greatly disappointed with the minister’s statement. We are all here because we were elected by our people and I know that all of us are representatives of these people. We happen to be the representatives of all those who are in Kampala and we know that we have people from all over the country.

In a situation where the economy is in a very bad shape; in a country where we have patients sharing a bed; in a country where we have a congested Parliament; in a country where we have teachers on strike; in a country where we have Police officers sleeping in “Mama ingia pole”; a minister should not just come and say she is doing a clean-up exercise. This clean-up exercise is encroaching on the livelihood of people who are on the streets, not because they like it, but because of the state of the economy. When you see a frog jumping during the day then you know that there is a problem. The problem is there and there is no way we can sit here and not talk about these things as Members of Parliament, when our people are suffering. 

There are over 30,000 vendors. There is no genuine programme that the minister is talking about. KCCA is acting as if it is on Mars. We are not saying that they should not leave the streets, but where are they going and how are they going to earn a living when the country has failed to get them employment. Every day, they try to ensure that their children are in school and they earn their living from the streets. How can we as Members of Parliament chase these people from the streets without any genuine alternative? 

For the good security of our country, we should hold on until a proper programme is drawn. The revolutions sweeping across the African Continent have come as a result of such people who are suffering. Remember what happened in Tunisia; someone who had spent many years without employment sparked off all that is going on in Africa. (Member timed out_) 

3.48
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): I want to support the minister and I think we need to be genuine and practice the standards of business. It hurts when you pay rent and taxes and then somebody sits at your doorstep to sell and Government is looking on. When you go down and identify those people on the streets, you might find that they do not pay taxes. People in the building are paying in dollars and we have been complaining that we need to clean up the city; we passed the law in the last Parliament to this effect.

We have been admiring other cities and people were comparing Kigali to Kampala. I am bamboozled because my brother hon. Ssebaggala has been to Sydney and has seen how it is arranged. He knows that we passed this law to clean up the city. 

We must start somewhere and practice of proper business must begin. It is not about politicising, but we must start somewhere and clean the city. If we gave the city authority the power to ensure good practice of business, then we must support it now. Government and Members of Parliament must start now and stop looking for cheap popularity.

I am requesting Government and those people in Kampala - because some politicians deceive people; they tell them to go on the streets, promising them protection - this is not the time for that. If you go to the streets - people in shops are not trading; they are being prevented by these people –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, when we are talking about cleaning up the city, where we have street children from Karamoja, is it in order for the honourable Member of Parliament to stand up and say that we called them to the street for campaigns. Did we campaign among the street children from Karamoja? Where did we find them? Is he in order to insinuate that those people are on the streets because we called them there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is more of a clarification, please wind up. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I think for some of us who practice business, the Government should give us a leeway to start from somewhere - and not hawkers interrupting our business premises - so that we can get the clients that we need.

3.51
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe East, Kampala): One time I was attending a function of the former vice president and this is what he told the congregation, “If it was not for my mother, I would not be where I am.” The mother was vending Waragi. Many of us have come from such humble backgrounds –(Interruption) 

MR TUMWEBAZE: The matter is generating debate with interest from different sides. I take note and sympathise with the Kampala MPs because these are their constituents. I also take note of the concern the Member raised; they need to walk the talk of cleaning up the city. I have also seen documents being laid on Table by hon. Nambooze about correspondence between the city director and the Lord Mayor. I was wondering whether it would not be procedurally right to have this matter referred to the relevant committee such that the detail is studied and all sides are listened to. Then we can debate from an informed point of view.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the procedure is fairly clear. This is a ministerial statement and you know how to conclude on what you feel about the statement. It is not about the chair to say that we do it this way. So, please go through the rules and see how to proceed.

MR SSEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: The point I was raising before I was interrupted is that most of our parents have come from humble backgrounds. We agreed in principal that we must clean up the city, but we should not take our human resource and the vendors as rubbish. They are not part of the rubbish which we ferry in the cars to Kiteezi. They are part and parcel of us. 

How do we do it? The modus operandi is wanting; the process has not been given the due diligence it deserves, and these are human beings and they come from all over the country. They are not coming from only Kampala or Kawempe; it is a mosaic pattern of the people who are here. Therefore, we should listen with a lot of passion. We are crying for the beloved country; the Pearl of Africa. Let us give an ear to the wretched of the earth. 

Mr Speaker, this has come at a time when the economy of our country is in doldrums. It has come at a time when children are going back to school; and it is coming at a time when they are not discriminative of the people with disabilities, the orphans, the widows and the wretched of the earth. They have not restructured their movement and where they are going; the places are not there. We implore and plead that let us have an understanding on this issue. They should have been given ample time and that is the responsibility of we, who are here. 

Look at the background of where you come from; what was your mother doing? Most of your mothers used to vend matooke; they were crude Waragi vendors; they were vending cassava and vegetables. Hon. Members, let us be humane; not because we are in this environment and we are dressed neatly and smartly. These people are contributing to the society. They are contributing to the economy and they are human beings. Mr Speaker, I thank you. 

3.56
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I rise on a motion. It is a motion without notice and I am moving it under Rule 46(1)(g) of our Rules of Procedure. This afternoon, the Minister for the Presidency brought a statement – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The House has to dissolve itself into a Committee of the whole House to consider the minister’s statement? 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I beg your pardon. It is Rule 46(1)(k). I wish to move as follows:

“THAT the evictions presently taking place of vendors operating along the streets of Kampala be suspended; 

THAT the matter regarding the evictions and subsequent relocation of vendors in Kampala be referred to an appropriate committee of this House.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, which motion are you putting to the House? Can you make up your mind? 

MR AMURIAT: I prefer to go with the second part of this motion, Mr Speaker, but cognisant of the fact that once we put in place a committee and KCCA and the Police continue with the evictions, then the purpose of the committee is lost. And so, I think the two should really go hand-in-hand. 

I would like to appeal to my honourable colleagues that, since you seem to support the idea of instituting a committee of this House [HON. MEMBERS: “No”] well, I heard it in the applause I got from the second one. Since we think we shall be doing justice to the affected people, if we have a committee of this House to investigate this and finds solutions at the end of the day – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you were following what hon. Frank Tumwebaze said, his submission was that the matter should be referred to an appropriate committee of this House. If you had followed up on that - and that is the point you are making; that there seems to be support - then you are bringing something new. Is that what you are saying or do you want something new, like a completely new committee?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I am open to proposals. It is something that I have put before the House and if anybody wants to amend this motion, they are welcome to amend it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek guidance. This statement by the minister was made under Rule 40, and Rule 40 says, “A minister may make a statement at the appropriate time on the sequence of business prescribed by Rule 22 with prior permission of the Speaker…” and Rule 40(2) says “No debate shall follow from the statement, but elucidatory questions may, with the permission of the Speaker, be asked of the minister making the statement.” I assume that because of what is going on in the city, there were these elucidatory questions and statements. 

Secondly, my understanding is that these very people who are trying to halt the exercise of cleaning the city are the same people who are condemning the government for not cleaning the city, and some of them are the ones who have made this city dirty. Wouldn’t it be better that the statement – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have risen up on procedural point. Can you resolve the procedural point?

MR NASASIRA: Wouldn’t it be better that we finish this statement under this rule? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the issue before the House is the issue of vendors’ welfare and vendors trying to earn a living on the streets. Actually, I heard that they are 8,000 of them with an average family of eight people, and that could be 64,000 Ugandans on the streets or more. I heard hon. Nasasira say that we are cleaning the streets. Is the phenomenon of vending the same as garbage on the streets of Kampala? Is he, therefore, in order to equate human beings created in God’s image to garbage and filth in the city? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think what the hon. Chief Whip was referring to was the disorder, except that the words he used may not have been appropriate. But that is what he was talking about. Please finish up. He is on a procedural matter. Hon. Nasasira.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, if hon. Alaso was here when the minister made the statement; there is no way I can call people garbage. I mean that is completely even beyond commonsense. There is no way I can call people garbage. But the point is one. I want all of us to join and say that we need a city that is orderly and that is organised -(Applause)- that vendors are vendors by licence; hawkers are hawkers by licence; and markets are in place; streets are decongested. I want to ask people on this side to join us in that process. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon we have - the Speaker is speaking. In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have hon. John W. Bosley, former Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada. He is here to do research for Chemonics International, related to the upcoming USAID project, to continue to link Parliament and civil society. Please join me in welcoming him. You are welcome. (Applause)

Yes, debate continues. There was the issue of the motion. Can we deal with the motion? I had asked whether there was secondment to the motion. Yes, hon Wadri.

4.07
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi -[Hon. Members: “What motion?”]- Mr Speaker, I thought those who were asking me what type of motion I am supporting were in this Chamber when the hon. Amuriat moved it -(Laughter)- and, therefore, I will not waste my time explaining the motion, but give it the support. 

Just like hon. John Nasasira has said, yes, it is true that we need a well planned city. We will need to decongest the city. Nobody doubts that. But our concern is the abrupt nature in which this large number of people is being evicted. (Applause) Mr Speaker, we are dealing with -[Col Mwesigye: “Order.”]- He is new so let me give him way. He wants to learn.

COL MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for a Member of Parliament to create a motion out of a ministerial statement? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All matters that are brought to the attention of the House require an open, frank and balanced debate, and a decision at the end; and the way Houses move to resolve matters is through motions if it is required. So, the hon. Member is perfectly in order to try and speak to a motion and conclude the debate. (Applause)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is an adage that Rome was not built in a day. You stop to learn only when you are dead. When you are alive, learning is a continuous process. So, the honourable member is still learning. I respect him for that. (Laughter)

As I said earlier on, the tenet of this motion is about the large number of people who are to be evicted overnight. These are people who, during this biting economic crisis that all of us are going through, have nothing to do but to look to the streets for survival. Yes, we do agree that they interfere with the smooth-running of businesses of those who are licensed. But I think the most appropriate thing that Government should have done would have been to provide these people with an alternative. Where do you want to take these people?

Let me tell you colleagues. You will not even be safe in your bungalows as Members of Parliament. (Applause) The moment you dislodge these people from the streets you will be the first victims. They will look to you as the people who have and who have denied them an opportunity to eke a living on the streets.

Therefore, my appeal to colleagues is that we who are supporting this motion are not in opposition as far as smooth transcending and removing of these people is concerned. We are saying, make it procedural; give them an alternative and once an alternative is given, it will be to the pride of every trader who has nowhere to display his or her merchandise to move with the agreed position. (Applause)

A few days back, as soon as the minister came up with that decision, Government was talking of 80,000 stalls. Where are these 80,000 stalls? If they have been there, why didn’t you show them to these people from the word go? They are there because they have nowhere to go to. 

So, please, hon. colleagues, I appeal to you, let us discuss these issues with a sober mind. Let us know that those are our colleagues; people who are also struggling to eke a living. We should have feelings for them the way they have feelings for their families for whom they fend. (Applause) I beg that we debate this issue with all the seriousness and the humane touch that it deserves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that this House resolves that a select committee be created to handle this matter of the eviction of the city traders. And the second leg of the motion is that while this is going on all activities of this nature be stayed. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I now propose the question for debate. (Hon. Ekanya rose_) Amendment?

4.13
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have consulted the mover of the motion on a slight amendment, which is good for all of us and I think the minister should appreciate. I would like to amend the motion that the select -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Propose an amendment.

MR EKANYA: Yes, that the select committee also looks at the non-compliance of the building owners in the city, who have turned parking areas underground in their buildings into shopping malls leading to huge traffic jam. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is how it is usually done. Should this House agree to the creation of a select committee? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes! 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, wait. Hon. Members, wait. What I am saying is that in the event that this House agrees that a select committee be created, it would be up to the presiding officers of this House to frame the terms of reference for the select committee. I do not think this House has the time necessary to go down to details of what should go in the terms of reference. So, to that extent, therefore, the honourable member’s proposal would be what would go into the terms of reference, if this House approves that there should be that? Can I ask for debate then, hon. Okot Ogong?

4.15
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I want to note that this House created the Kampala Capital City Authority Act and in the Act, Kampala City Authority was created and their mandates were clearly stipulated. The roles of the Lord Mayor are clearly stated as well as those of the Executive Director, councillors and all the organs in the authority.

I want to appeal to Parliament that we should not involve ourselves in the day-to-day running of the city. (Applause) We have already created the authority; they have all their powers and it is the authority, therefore, to come out with their reference points and points of action -(Hon. Sempala rose)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sempala, you are ruled out of order.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am just appealing to Parliament because I think this is the best way Members of Parliament should do it. I am not supporting or throwing away the vendors, but I am supporting putting order in the city.

What I want to propose to this House, now that we know the authority is there, is that we should refer this matter to the authority and allow them - because they have councillors - the Lord Mayor and everybody in the city, to sit down and discuss. I do not want Parliament to usurp the powers of the authority and we start running the authority on the Floor of Parliament. I think that is not good at all.

So, I beg my Member of Parliament to withdraw his motion and we agree that the matter should be referred to the authority and we give them a timeframe to handle this matter and report to Parliament.

4.18
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are in difficult times as a country and it will be unwise to hurt ourselves. You have the main university in the country closed down and you have teachers more or less on the streets. I think we need to change the attitude of those who are holding key positions and running the affairs of this state.

Why do we provoke other conflicts when we cannot resolve a single one of those that have happened since this new Government was sworn in? You are dealing with Mabira and you cannot resolve it. You cannot bring down the prices of fuel and sugar, the dollar, and you want to provoke more conflicts.

You have the power, right; you have the Police, okay; but you are dealing with human beings. We must have a heart. Hon. Okot has a good proposal, that we must leave Kampala Capital City Authority to run its affairs, but the fact that this matter has come to the Floor of Parliament tells you of a big failure.

You have people responsible for putting order in the city and they think the best way of restoring order is by undermining the authority of the elected leaders in Kampala. So, in the end, you have the minister and the Chief Executive running the city. When you ask us to refer that matter back to the city authority, you are actually referring that matter back to the Minister for the Presidency. 

Therefore, my proposal, as a way of supporting the motion, is to let Parliament put in place a select committee. We can sit here and pretend, take sides as if we do not live in this city, but I have seen Members of Parliament here running when the city is on fire -(Member timed out_)

4.21
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance. I am standing to second the motion, but with some amendments. I want us to amend that Kampala City Authority law -(Interjections)- This is my motion, I need protection. Let them first stop chasing away vendors and let the committee, since the matter is now in Parliament, first sit and investigate and then they come up with the right option.

We are all human beings. Even we Members of Parliament are making noise about the crisis. I do not like the vendors being on the streets and causing congestion, but the way we are doing it - Even if you go to the USA, they have these vendors on the streets, unless you have never travelled.

As I finalise, what we have to do is relocate these people. They are saying the market is there, but we are paying rent in dollars, which these people cannot do, and that is why they are on the streets.

Members, you should know that when we come to Parliament, we do not ask where they come from. We represent even those that do not have - do not think that we represent only those that have. So, my amendment is that they first stop and a committee researches, investigates and brings the right representation on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought that was the second leg of the Motion, which is seconded, but she is proposing an amendment. That is what they had said initially, but I allowed you to speak.

4.24
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to oppose the Motion on the Floor. The moment KCCA changed from KCC, it took on the shape of an authority in its own right, with a law that protects it. I understand there is an elected leadership; there is an Executive Director together with the whole staff. 

I appreciate the challenges that come up as a result of the eviction of the vendors, notably, the problem of where to relocate and the operationalisation of the markets where they have been told to go. 

There is also the challenge of lack of awareness on roles between the various organs in the council. But I think these are administrative matters which we should leave the authority to handle. (Applause) The moment this Parliament starts engaging itself in administrative issues of an independent authority, then we shall lose and we shall find it difficult when we need to come in as the appellant organ. 

I would like to request that we give KCCA the opportunity to exercise their authority until they fail, then we shall come in later. Thank you. (Applause)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, Article 79: Functions of Parliament reads: “Subject to provisions of its Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” Now – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is that Article 79 or 78?

MR SSEWUNGU: It is Article 79 on functions of Parliament. Now, is Kampala out of Uganda? Is it in order for a Member of Parliament who received a copy of this Constitution to fail to support this motion, knowing that there is disorder in Kampala City? The Minister herself said that Kampala City is littered, but is it only littered by vendors or by all of us as Kampala residents? So, is it in order – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Article you are quoting relates to the enactment of laws in this House, which law has already been enacted. The issue you are raising relates to the substance of the contribution of the honourable member on the way forward; it does not impeach any Rules of Procedure. Hon. Ssewungu, you are the one who is out of order. (Laughter)

4.28
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the proposal that we leave the matter of vendors to KCCA. I did some work with the Executive Director of KCCA while she was still in URA and that was the time URA was being restructured; she did due diligence. I know her as a person who respects the law and she works professionally. (Applause) And I want to give one example, when that lady evicted Gen. Tinyefuza from the mayor’s house, the Opposition was happy. Why can’t you be happy in the same vein when she is attempting to clean the city?

Mr Speaker, cleaning Kampala City is going to be a painful exercise. (Applause) There is no way the KCCA Executive Director will put the city in order without hurting some people. Let us be realistic; the Opposition has been highlighting issues like the city being dirty; comparing it to Kigali. How can you get Kampala clean without putting your house in order and respecting the law? (Applause) However, the government has responsibility over its citizens and I want it to resettle the vendors properly -(Applause)- I propose that we leave this matter to KCCA and as Parliament, we need to have one position and support the issue of cleaning up our capital city. Thank you.

4.30
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that all of us want a clean city. Some of us have lived in this city for more than 30 years – (Interjection)– I have said more than 30 years; it could be 80. But the important thing is that we are talking about procedure; we want to give all the support needed by KCCA and we will give it. However, when we talk about KCCA, we do not refer to an individual lady. She may be doing a very good job and we will give her the support. But all we are saying is simple, KCCA is not working in unison as we speak. The organs of KCCA include the Lord Mayor and the entire elected leadership. But they are not working in tandem with the Executive Director.

The law has been quoted and I do not need to repeat it; these people are administering the city on behalf of the central government, of which we are part. What we are saying is that as an interim measure, can we have the exercise halted – (Interjection)- Okay. 

The second issue is that assuming, Mr Speaker, that people have an obligation to listen and a right to be listened to. They seem to be fighting; you have seen the letters laid on Table here; the Lord Mayor on behalf of the elected leadership is saying something entirely different from the Executive Director. There is a meeting and it is being forestalled. We do not have a resolution of the leadership to say, “This is how we are going to do it.” If we are talking about implementing a law that has been in place, why are they doing it today and not yesterday or tomorrow? That means there is something lacking in terms of procedure. 

When we talk about alternative markets, where are they? Can we improve them first before we provide them as an alternative if they are there anyway? We have received information here that they are not even there as we speak. 

I would humbly appeal to colleagues, including the Minister, that it is not an Opposition or NRM matter, but for all of us. We want a city that is clean and a population whose welfare comes first. 

In supporting the motion, I suggest that we agree – I know it may hurt some people’s egos and feelings – and have an orderly process by allowing a committee of Parliament with clear terms of reference to investigate and handle the matter. We are not interfering. Let us have interim measures – Mr Speaker, you understand these best; they are intended to forestall an explosive situation, which we are facing now –(Member timed out_)

4.34
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we are not here to play games, but we were sent by people to do proper deliberations on things that matter in this country. KCCA was formed when Parliament was here and, therefore, it is not here illegally. It is a very clear-cut - KCCA is supposed to be doing things in Kampala in collaboration with the Lord Mayor –(Interjections)- I am coming -(Laughter)- I represent people from a municipality, which I want to become a city, and I will request this Parliament to do it.

Now, if you are a Member of Parliament and you want to do very good things in a municipality or a city, you have to collaborate very well with the Mayor you have left behind, and there is no question about it. This Parliament will not sit down here and start resolving small issues concerning the Lord Mayor and KCCA, because they both know what to do. -[Hon. Members: “Yes.”]- I think the Lord Mayor has got a Constitution and I think he is a lawyer, just like the KCCA person who is also a lawyer. Why should Parliament spend a lot of time trying to enter the problems of KCCA when we have those issues here to discuss? -(Interjections)- I have stood here to oppose the Motion that has been put by these people. We need to leave KCCA to do its work in collaboration with the Mayor, and we should concentrate on Parliamentary work. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank you. Mr Speaker, you told this Parliament in your communication that you had been approached by hon. Nabilah who represents Kampala District. She wanted to present a matter of national importance to this House and in your wisdom, you had granted that request. Subsequently, you were approached by the hon. Minister for Kampala with a request that she be allowed to present a statement to this honourable House and in your wisdom, you granted this request and a statement was presented to this House.

As a reaction to that statement, a motion was raised and with your good guidance, the motion is being debated. There are insinuations here that this Parliament has left serious business and we are right now discussing none issues –(Interjections)- I am talking about the insinuations –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will restrict yourself to statements that have been made in this House and not insinuations. Please restate the statement you are calling to order for the judgment of the Speaker.

MS NAMBOOZE: Much obliged. Is the Member in order –(Interjections)- to state that we are discussing none issues when we are discussing matters concerning the country’s capital city? (Applause) Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was just comparing issues. He says we should, in his mind, be dealing with the other things like the budget. He says we are spending a lot of time on this issue comparatively smaller, in his opinion. (Applause) It is within your right to say the matters are big and it is within his right to say the matters are small and those are normal rules of debate. The Member has violated no rules of this House. Motion, hon. Jalia Bintu?

4.40
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Mr Speaker, after listening to several debates from both sides, those opposing and those in support of the motion, I want to propose that the question be put. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the rules are clear that once a motion of that nature is moved, it is not debatable and the Presiding Officer shall put that motion to vote. I, therefore, put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion that this Parliament creates a select committee to handle the matter of eviction in the city. Order!! Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion. Hon. Members, I am in a situation where I am not able to balance up and ,therefore, order a vote by show of hands. Can the clerks and the tellers help me with this?

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the results of the vote are as follows: Those for the motion - 45 Members; those against - 76 Members; abstentions - 2 Members.

The motion is lost.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the clarification I want to seek from you is that, the issues have now been debated and the motion has been lost. We know that Parliament consists of 375 Members of Parliament; therefore, this House here has no quorum. So, are we right to continue with business when we are not even the right number of Members to make a decision; because we are not even a third of the number of the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the quorum of this Parliament is a third of all voting Members of Parliament. One third of 375 would be 125 Members of Parliament. The total number of votes cast is 123; so, this House did not have the competence to take this decision for lack of quorum. (Applause)

Hon. Members, today’s business had been framed to handle the financial Bills that are before this House. From my earlier communication, it is clear today that we will not be able to handle the Bills because we need to do some consultation through the Budget Committee so that the process can be handled properly. 

Under Rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure, the Speaker has the prerogative to determine the order of business and the order of business has been determined. At this moment I would, therefore, like to adjust the Order Paper to accommodate the laying on Table of papers to accommodate the supplementary funds for recurrent expenditure under Schedule III of the supplementary.

Hon. Minister of Finance, it is just laying of papers. This is to facilitate the whole budgetary process so that when they finally come back to the House, everything is comprehensive and complete.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The tax Bills we are talking about are the ones which will determine how much money we are going to get, and that is the money, which the Budget Committee will be dealing with. I think we had even adopted that we should always start with the Bills, determine the money then we go to the budget. So, maybe there are issues of quorum, but if it is not quorum, we should be able to deal with the tax Bills -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is the situation. The Bills and the reports to the Bills are actually ready. That is why they were put on the Order Paper for finishing. The only thing that we needed to harmonise was a discussion between the minister - we had a previous discussion before coming here between the chairperson and the minister on some of the issues that would help us pass these Bills faster, if there was agreement between the two of them. So, they asked for a short stay to allow them deal with this. So, can I ask the hon. Minister to lay the paper on the Table? Thereafter, I will make my communication.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.3 for financial year 2010/2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I communicated earlier, that particular document will now go to the committee for handling. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, in the interest of co-ordination, we have discussed with the hon. Chairman of the Finance Committee and we are ready to discuss the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if that is the situation, then we proceed with the Bills according to the Order Paper. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
	 
4.57
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for a second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, seconded.

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, the objective of this Bill is to amend the Income Tax Act, Cap. 340, which mainly provides – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, which order are we dealing with here?

MRS KIWANUKA: The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, Sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the first one is the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING 

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

4.58 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read a second time. 

The object of the Bill is to amend the Excise Tariff CAP 338 - 
a)	to vary the rates of excise duty in paragraph c, d, e and f of item one of the schedules; 
b)	to vary the rate of excise duty in item 11 of the schedule; and
c)	to exempt illuminating kerosene from excise duty.
 
I beg to move.

4.59
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011.

The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development under rules 113 and 161(c) of the Rules of Procedure, and the committee wishes to report to the House.

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure, the committee has considered the Bill in detail and I hereby present the report of the committee.  

As a method of work, the committee had discussions with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, URA and BAT Uganda Ltd. Their submissions informed this report. 

The object of the Bill is to amend the Excise Tariff Act Cap. 338 to vary the rates of excise duty on cigarettes, sugar and exempt illuminating kerosene from excise duty.

Observations by the committee

Taxation of luxurious good

The committee noted efforts by Government to collect more revenue from luxurious items like cigarettes. 

The committee, however, observed that there is need to increase tax on imported spirits and wines whose demand is price inelastic, to increase the current narrow tax base. The committee intends to move an amendment to this effect and further urges Government to consider increasing taxes on beer progressively.

Another observation was dependency on the Kenyan sea gateway and escalating fuel prices. The committee is concerned that the continued escalating fuel prices have resulted in increased prices of necessities in the country. 

The committee notes with concern that the increased prices are a result of challenges arising from the petroleum supply chain from Kenya, which remain a big challenge for the Uganda market. The committee, however, informed that the Government had taken measures to address the problem by ensuring that Uganda had a representative in the bidding room at Mombasa. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy briefs Parliament on: 

a)	Whether having a representative at the open tender system in Kenya has helped Uganda receive its petroleum import quota of 30 percent for its market.
 
b)	When Government intends to implement its earlier commitment to create another gateway to the sea through Port Bell, Mwanza and Tanga in Tanzania to ease dependency on the Kenyan route.

I beg to report, Mr Speaker. We will come back with the proposed amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Hon. Members, you have heard from the chairman and from the minister. Debate is now open. 

5.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, this is a small Bill and I want to thank the committee for the good job. 

The problem is that we removed taxes on kerosene, yet we have not felt the reduction. The reason is simple; the trucks which transport the kerosene use diesel or petrol, which is subject to tax. For that reason, the price of kerosene has gone even higher.

So, I propose that if we are to exempt kerosene, even the trucks which carry kerosene should have the diesel they use exempted from tax –(Laughter)– so that they are able to deliver the kerosene at the cheapest price and that is the purpose we intended. I think that is the best way to achieve it. 

The second issue is that the chairman proposes that we consider increasing taxes on beer progressively. I think the only beer you can increase tax on is the imported beer. But the one we make from our sorghum, like Senate and Eagle, we should even remove the tax so that we are able to consume more and the sellers –(Interjections)–  yes, listen to logic first. Like I was saying, this will let us produce more of such beers that only require us to have sorghum. It will also help us to promote the profit margins of our producers of sorghum, which will help improve their welfare. (Applause) That is why I said you should always listen first.

Finally, there is a problem about what our Minister of Finance said on the port charges of Shs 500 per litre at the border of Mombasa. I would like to say that Government of Uganda should negotiate with the Government of Kenya, to waive this Shs 500 because that also increases the cost of a litre –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In Mombasa, there are two terminals: There is the Kipevu one, which is the bigger terminal; and Kimanze, the smaller one. The practice is that each country has a quota. But what the Government of Kenya has been doing, for many years now, is that the petroleum dealers are conditioned to dock at the small terminal as they import fuel products from the different suppliers in the world. However, this small terminal cannot allow ships with big capacity to dock there. So, if there are 10 importers of petroleum products, for example, it can take two months before their products are offloaded. 

While this is going on, Kenyans dealing in petroleum products are allowed to import such products using big ships that can dock at Kipevu. And immediately they dock, the products are offloaded and released to the market, including the one in Uganda. This leaves oil dealers with no alternative and so they are forced to buy from middlemen, who will sell at a higher price because their products are still stuck at the port, maybe for two months. A simple calculation shows that a difference on a litre of between Shs 300 to Shs 500 can be realised if this problem affecting Ugandan dealers is resolved.

The second one is about the open tender system, which Government said has a representative. What they used to do, in the past, was to allow any company – without looking at the point whether it has a distribution chain in Uganda or not – for example, I would just form Ekanya and Co. Petroleum Products and start dealing in fuel. But the rule worldwide is that, if you have to deal in petroleum products with an aim of lowering costs, you must have pump stations. Because if, for example, Ekanya and Co. Petroleum Products imports those products and has no pump stations, it will have to sell those products to companies with distribution chains and that is done at a profit.

So, if Government solves this issue, we will not even need the Dar-es-salaam route because it is a long one and so costly. The Kenyan route is cheaper because petroleum products are pumped up to just Eldoret here, which makes them cheaper.

Under the circumstances, and because this is the third time we are raising this matter, hon. Minister, when are you coming up with a concrete solution to this issue? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can you continue? Otherwise, that was a long piece of information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, it is because he knows those border areas. 

Anyway, let me talk about sugar. I know we have removed taxes on sugar, but why should we remove only Shs 25 per kilogramme? We should also waive taxes on the locally produced sugar because now all the imported sugar is tax-free. This means Ugandans should also buy it free of taxes; they can only pay the cost. How do you look at that, Madam Minister?

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to the House. That imported sugar has a VAT tax of 18 percent. So, they are just waiving the excise duty.

Also when you look at what the Bill is talking about, you realise this has been the public concern; that luxurious goods should be taxed highly so that taxes from them can compensate for taxes that would have been collected on goods for public consumption. When I look at the tax levied on cigarettes, which is at 75 percent, this is even on the lower side. It could have been moved to almost 85 percent because it is a luxury good – what does the public benefit from cigarettes? It is even a health hazard!
 
However, now that we already allowed Government to spend when we passed a Vote-on-Account, I don’t see any reason to prevent them from doing this because this is already projected in the budget. It might be difficult for the ministry to do this if we change the tax rates now. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we should not pretend to be tax experts yet we do not know what we are talking about. For example, there is what we call a “collection order” that stops within just four months. That collection order will expire when we pass the Bills. So, what you are saying that we should not amend these Bills is a great mistake. These Bills are here for us to debate them and make contributions by either increasing or reducing - though I know that a reduction will affect the budget. I thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bill seeks to vary the excise duty on sugar downwards by 50 percent, which is Shs 25. But in the presentation by the Minister of Finance, there was a proposal to reduce the excise duty on sugar by 50 percent given the fact that sugar is a key welfare item in many households in Uganda. The import of this was that she intended to have this variation in taxes translated into reduction of prices at which people are going to buy the sugar. Otherwise, there would be no justification for that.

If the intent was actually that, then I don’t see any good reason why Shs 25 should have been the deduction. I am saying this because there wasn’t any reduction in the prices of sugar by any businessman. Even when there hadn’t been sugar price escalations, I don’t believe, after that budget, there would have been any changes. It would have just created an opportunity for the producers of sugar to make more profits.

Let me, therefore, seek this clarification from the Minister of Finance: Did you think that by reducing the price of sugar by Shs 25, that would translate into reduction of prices of sugar for the households? Otherwise, I would propose that the amendment downwards should not arise. We should maintain the percentage as it were of excise duty because the effect is not there for the common man whom you intended to benefit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Henry Banyenzaki, would you like to take your proper place in the House?

5.15
MRS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am looking at the observation by the committee on page 2. Whereas you think of having taxes of imported spirits increased, as a health measure, I also feel you would increase the tax of some of the locally made spirits - these ones packed in kaveera that have turned to be a health hazard, especially those in the countryside. There are some that are made out of ethanol. There is: Latest, Officer, Signature, Zebra, Coffee Spirit, Horse and there is Tyson. We feel we could attract some revenue out of these. Otherwise, if we concentrated only on imported spirits, we would still leave some of these untapped. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am very impressed by the honourable member’s knowledge of these things. (Laughter)

5.17
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance and the chairman for bringing this amendment on the excise tariff. I view it as two-fold: Firstly, to raise taxes in order to sustain the economy; and secondly, to increase the value of the Ugandan shilling as compared to the dollar. 

When I talk of increasing the value of the Uganda shilling, it is because items like cigarettes, wines and spirits are imported from abroad. Businessmen dealing in them tend to have high demand for the dollar. Therefore, it indirectly increases the value of the Uganda shilling as compared to the dollar. 

On the question of increasing the tax base, you will find that as you take more alcohol - for those who take it - the urge of taking more increases with time. Therefore, we would be getting a lot of tax from you. When you take the first one, it will demand a second one and you will go on up to the tenth one. So, you will be paying taxes to Government. So, there is no way that increasing taxes on these items will cause one to stop their consumption, but you will continue being in demand of the same items. 

I, therefore, wish to support the minister on this same amendment. Thank you very much. 

5.19
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am looking at page 3 of the report, recommendation No. 2(3)(b). The committee is urging Government and it says, when is Government intending to implement its earlier commitment to create another gateway to the sea through Port Bell, Mwanza and Tanga to ease the dependence on the Kenyan route? 

Before the committee gets my support for this recommendation, I would like to get clarification. Have you looked at a study to see how cost-effective it is to have this particular alternative route? How much money will Government spend in having this alternative route, and what will be the cost per unit compared to the route that already exists?

It is not about having many routes. Some of them may not make economic sense. We get fuel from Eldoret. What is the unit cost of transporting that fuel from there to Kampala, and what will be the cost if we used this alternative route? Can we have the figures and we see whether it makes economic sense? 

The second point is about sugar and the reduction of the Shs 25. Hon. Minister, don’t you think this has been overtaken by events. With the crisis in the sugar industry today, I don’t see any usefulness in this reduction. According to your budget speech, Government might be losing close to Shs 8.0 billion as a result of the implementation of this excise duty reduction. Do you still think that in the current circumstances, it is advisable to proceed with this reduction? I thank you. 

5.21
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three observations to make: First, I want to make a comment and indeed agree with the committee on varying rates on excise duty for cigarettes, particularly upwards. I think it is high time as a country that we really make cigarette consumption a very luxurious venture. Therefore, I wouldn’t agree less on this. I would want to seriously agree with the committee and even propose that you double the duty on cigarettes. Many of our young people are just submitting to the consumption of cigarettes, not out of informed decisions, but out of peer pressure and are succumbing to all sorts of cancers, which the country at its present state is incapable of handling. 

The second observation has to do with excise duty on sugar and kerosene. By the time of the budget speech, way back in June, a kilo of sugar cost Shs 3,000. We are now talking about sugar which is at Shs 10,000 a kilo. Since then we have had an increase of about three times in the price of sugar. So, like my colleagues have asked, is this of any value or of any meaning? Besides, history has it that once prices go up in this country, the government has no specific interventions to bring them down. So, now that sugar is Shs 10,000 are you going to force them to bring it down so that this Shs 25 on kerosene and sugar becomes meaningful? Are you going to set prices so that the household, which is now buying sugar at Shs 10,000 can buy it at Shs 3,000? Because if it is not going to make any sense, I doubt that it is important to carry this. 

I would like to argue that there is no relief –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, hon. Alice Alaso, for yielding the Floor. I think we need to have the facts correct. By the time of the budget, the factory price of sugar was Shs 2,250. Today, the factory price of sugar has risen to Shs 3,100. This is because the Government has allowed importation and it comes here at about Shs 3,100. Our local factories have increased their factory prices in response. If we are to raise revenue, this is the time to tax because the factories are making a lot of money as result of them trying to be competitive with the imported sugar.

MS ALASO: My argument then was that the removal of Shs 25 was not going to bring any relief at household level, and I think hon. Katuntu has put it better.

At the time of the budget speech, some of us were making serious appeals to Government and we were asking Government for real intervention in the economy to save this country the skyrocketing prices. We thought that intervention in the fuel sector would have helped. My argument is that if you do not address the fuel prices, you will not help anybody. Even if you remove Shs 25 and they charge them highly to deliver that sugar to Serere, they will still sell it at Shs 10,000. 

Hon. Minister, as an economist, you know the impact of the double digit inflation that we have. I doubt that Shs 25, which is not available in the denominations, can make any impact at household level. 

I would like to ask the committee to educate me. The committee recommends that revision of exercise duty on beer should be done progressively. I do not consume beer so I would be happy if we get money from it. What do you mean progressively? Technically, how is this going to be implemented? If we pass the Bill tonight and it becomes law, shall we change using a statutory instrument? Shall we have our own powers to revise? I need to be assisted.
 
5.28
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): I want to thank the committee for thinking about having another gateway to the sea. Remember our businesses were suffering during that time of the strikes in Kenya, and we thought of the alternative of passing our goods through Tanzania. What happened was that roads were impassable and it would be expensive to use them. If our Government wants to use that alternative, then we need to think about working on that road. If we work on that road together with Government of Tanzania, and get security along it, then we will be helped, as we are a landlocked country. It is not good for us to depend on one route.

On imported spirits and wines, I think we need to tax both the imported wines and the beer in the country. I believe our people are ready to continue consuming even if we raise taxes. After all, Uganda has been ranked as one of the highest consumers of beer and alcohol in the world. We need to tax for us to get revenue from our consumers.

5.30
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to comment on the issue of having a representative in the bidding room at Mombasa. Uganda being a landlocked country, we are affected by what happens in Kenya. If we could use the Nile Basin initiative as an example; you will find Egypt dictating a lot on what to do with River Nile waters. Uganda should be sharp enough to participate in the bidding room at Mombasa.  It may provide a solution on the costing and the management of flights, and cargo handling charges may be reduced and this will help the taxpayers in Uganda.

I would like to inform the committee and the Ministry of Finance that costs involved in getting the goods from Dubai to Mombasa, are lower; and the costs involved from moving them from Mombasa to Kampala are much higher. The reason is that, we have powerful multinational companies that are doing the handling charges there. They overbill our taxpayers leading to tax evasion or avoidance. I would like to interest the committee to take particular interest in that, and to visit Mombasa other than sitting here in Uganda. They merely advise us on sending representatives there. This may be misused if we do not look into it.
 
I appreciate the idea of increasing taxes on luxurious goods because we have enough producers of spirits and wines in Uganda. I want to say that as we increase the taxes on imported wines and spirits, we should not forget that some of these manufacturers, whom we are going to promote, may not be Ugandans as such. 

I want the committee to give an extra incentive to local manufacturers of wines and spirits because they will take on board Ugandan youths for employment.
 
5.33
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I would like to interest the chairman of the committee and the minister on the issue of cigarette taxation. You noted here that you had a meeting with people at BAT, and I do not know whether you had time to discuss with them the fact that they closed their factory at Jinja and they pick the leaf from here and then take it to Nairobi Kenya. They then bring back the cigarette.

One thing is very clear, they denied our people employment in this factory and the small factory we have on Jinja Road produces less than a half of our consumption. Maybe my proposal is futuristic - I think that BAT should be compelled to put up a factory in Arua and we have our people employed, after all, we consume what we produce. It would even be a motivation to produce more cigarettes and then more employment and maybe export it. As long as they are not about to ban the consumption of cigarettes, I would rather that we encourage them to put up a factory in Arua instead of taking the leaf to Nairobi for processing and then importing back the cigarettes. 

Second, is an observation I am making for the attention of the minister. It is not the first time that we have prices of petroleum going over the roof in this country. My concern is that, we have not had a time when these prices are reducing sharply. The explanation most of the time is that international crude oil prices are rising. Some of us are keen to see them falling on the international circuit, but we never see prices dropping in Uganda. Is it a problem of the dealers? Is it a problem that Government has not taken care to really compel dealers to react to these changes in the international prices of petroleum? We see the rise, but we never see the fall. What is the problem? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought you would be the last contributor to this debate. Can we have the chairman and then the minister? 

5.36
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, for your wonderful comments. My responses will not be as many as you expect.

The honourable Leader of the Opposition and hon. Alaso had the same question. When we talk about increasing taxes on beer progressively, first we are mindful of the locally produced beer made from sorghum or locally known as Epuripur. We are very sensitive about it because Nile Breweries is among the breweries that have contracted farmers in the Teso region, and many other parts of Uganda, to increase their acreage of sorghum production. So, anything that increases the price and, therefore, affects the consumption, will consequently affect the acreage and the farmers will lose. We are very sensitive to that. 

While the argument of the ministry was that it is also elastic – in other words, consumption will increase with the price - our reasoning was different. We felt that it is more a luxury and actually more toxic. So, we said that the tax would be to raise revenue and in a way be prohibitive, but the ministry had a different opinion. 

For increasing taxes on beer progressively, not all beers are locally manufactured. Here you have the Tusker and Guinness. I do not even take them, but we had someone in the committee who explained to us the details, and for purposes of confidentiality, I will not mention the name. Not all of them are Epuripur beers, but again the ministry was so emphatic and argued that bringing an increment in beers now, would sharply affect the sales of the beer industry - I think, it is the first or second leading taxpayer - and income tax would be affected. So, the committee conceded on that, but said in future, we should categorically look at these beers. 

The second was from the learned honourable Shadow Attorney-General about the alternative route of Mwanza-Tanga. Well, we have not yet known what it takes for Government to open that route, but I think our argument is simple; anything that will increase the availability of petroleum products on the market to us is worth investing in, in any way we can. 

Mr Speaker, the committee found out that currently, our market demands for petroleum are only met up to 40 percent of what is required, meaning that if we increased the availability of this petroleum to at least 80 percent, logically, the prices that hon. Mpuga and everybody else is concerned about, would automatically shrink because the law of supply and demand is self-explanatory. So, we are not saying that if the Tanzanian route is developed, then we will forego the Kenyan route; but you have an alternative because the dynamics in Kenya are simple. You have a committee called the Supply Chain Co-ordination Committee and that is where Uganda has a representative from the Ministry of Energy. 

The minister had agreed sometime back to give a full detailed report. That is why we are urging Government to do the same. The Supply Chain Co-ordination Committee is like the procurement or contracts committee that we have here. So, they chose who bids and is allowed to import petroleum. 

The docking points that the honourable shadow minister talked about are Kipevu and Shimavu. Kipevu is the biggest and because it is the biggest, it has so many ships. They dock and they are there for months and months and the demurrage is so high. The premiums charged there are slightly lower at the other port. 

In addition to the Eldoret pipeline being not in really good shape, all these constraints affect the supply chain and our quota, which is 30 percent of the total imports of the petroleum, is not given to us. So, if we can have another alternative route, then we can somehow ease the problem. 

I pledge on behalf of the committee that we shall study this matter in detail. We are even going to make a study trip to Mombasa; and at your discretion, when you allow us to go, we will brief you and give you handy solutions. That is what I had to say, Mr Speaker. Thank you so much. 

5.41
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for their comments and queries. I will try to answer them as quickly as possible. 

The question of diesel and petrol taxes has come to us again and again. Our position in the Ministry of Finance is that, it is difficult first of all to separate those fuels used for transport from the fuels used for other things such as illumination or for power generation. But most of all, we do not feel that the reduction in the absolute tax on petrol or diesel will benefit the consumer. Right now, Uganda’s tax component of petrol is about 12 percent of the pump price. This is lower than the component in Kenya or Tanzania. 

I had the opportunity to interact with the Kenyan Minister for Finance on Saturday in Nairobi, at the East African Finance Ministers Forum, and I asked him about the experience when they cut their taxes on diesel and petrol, as you may recall sometime back. His words were and I will quote: “Zero! We just lost revenue and there was no movement in the pump price.” So, we would like to recommend to honourable members that this is more than just a matter of what taxes the government is imposing on the transport fuel.

We had the opportunity sometime back to lay a paper before this august House, about the effects of the exchange rate and the international events on the movement of fuel prices - and due to lack of time, I won’t go through that again. 

As far as the open tendering system is concerned, I would like to give my thanks to the honourable Chairperson of the Finance Committee for a very detailed explanation. 

Granted, right now the cost to the second route is more expensive - going through Tanzania is more expensive than going through Kenya - but a lot of this is due to the present inefficiencies in the TRC. The lack of a viable road between Uganda and Tanzania - I again had the opportunity to interact with the honourable Minister of Finance for Tanzania yesterday, and he confirmed to me that they have received funds to rehabilitate TRCs up to Mwanza, even before they think of a new one from a port slightly to the south of Mwanza to Tanga. That is a complete new railway that is going to come up; it is going to be a standard gauge railway. But right now, they intend to rehabilitate the narrow gauge railway of TRC from Mwanza to Dar-es-Salaam. 

The other thing on this is that being a landlocked or land-linked country - as we prefer to call it in the Ministry of Finance - we feel that the psychological effect of our neighbours knowing that we have a certain route can solve many of the administrative problems we are experiencing right now. 

A case in point is when Kenya had these unfortunate riots about three years ago; when they went through that time of difficulty. They were very keen to negotiate downward transport costs with us because they could see that we were suffering through no fault of our own. So, we feel that the mere existence of a certain route which is not being paid for by Uganda - this will be Tanzania’s own investment and we will be merely consumers - 

Excise taxes on luxury goods

On spirits, we beg to differ with the committee’s recommendation to increase excise duty on spirits from 45 percent to 65 percent, and on others from 70 percent to 75 percent. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is as keen as anybody else to raise revenue, but we must keep in mind the wellbeing of our people or the consumers of these alcohols. We feel that an increase of tax to 65 percent will lead to an increase of prices and corresponding decrease in consumption of what you would call hygienically produced drinks. The consumer will shift from the taxable spirits to illicit liquor which, as we all know through the media and our own experiences with our families, are dangerous to people’s health. 

Secondly, there could be evasion of this tax, especially by the smaller producers who are difficult to locate and we feel that there would be loss of revenue given that spirits are elastic goods especially in a time of economic constraint.

On beer, I would like to inform the honourable member who was concerned about local materials, that we have a three-tier system. Beer produced from local raw materials like sorghum as was mentioned earlier, attracts a 20 percent excise duty. Beer using locally grown barley attracts 40 percent, and beer using imported raw materials like malt, attracts 60 percent. So, we feel that the encouragement of local production is in-built within that three-tier system. We aim to encourage use of local materials and we feel that the three-tier system already provides for this.

On sugar, we had the problem where we saw the price of sugar shooting up, but when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with URA decided to seek permission from the East African Community for a waiver of the 100 percent sugar duty on non-COMESA sugar, I think we all saw the very rapid, though temporary, drop in prices. In my local supermarket, it went from Shs 4,500 to Shs 3,000 in two weeks. 

However, the importation is off to a slow start. People need time to gear up and during this interval, the price has gone up again when people did not see trailer loads of sugar being trucked in over the border immediately. We would like to mention at this point that we feel that as the importation of sugar picks up - so far, we have had about 500 tonnes imported into Uganda and that is very little compared to the 40,000 tonnes that are open for importation. We would like to encourage our traders to take this up and to import the sugar so that the price goes down. It is all a matter of demand and supply. 

Again, on the second gateway to the sea, this was another reason we were very keen to sign up on the revamped Rift Valley Railways project. As rail transport picks up - we are using an Argentina company which is used to running a small gauge railway in Argentina and already, they have turned the profits this year as they tell us. As this transport picks up, we will get more commodities coming in by rail, especially fuel, and this will break the monopoly that the Kenyan trucking lobby has on fuel transport so far -(Interruption)  

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving up the Floor. Hon. Minister, my concern is - and I would like to be assisted - you are seeking this reduction of excise duty on sugar, but what is its effect on the retail price and to the consumer? That is what I want to know, because up to now, I do not see any. Can you assist me? Thank you very much.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Minister. Mine concerns the issue of importation of sugar. You said about 500 tonnes have been imported and it has had no effect so far. You are also aware that the Ugandan currency has lost value and that means the actual situation is that the importers are using dollars, which means that they have to buy the dollars from here and then go to import sugar. So, I do not see any justification that the importation of sugar from elsewhere is going to bring down the prices here. I think you are putting our citizens in more luxurious expenditure than before. Thank you. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the outgoing speaker. I am sorry if I gave the impression that I had finished with the sugar topic. It is just that I had written the questions in order. As far as our cut in the excise rate of sugar is concerned, it was relevant at the time. However, it was a good gesture we feel, but if the House presses for reinstatement to Shs 50 a kilo, the ministry is willing to concede to this point -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have listened to the minister very attentively. She is raising issues to help our people, but I do not know how you can help them. According to you, is Shs 25 of any help? That is simple. 

You even said that we are not going to raise taxes on spirits because we do not want people to take the other bad thing which is affected by the Nguli Act. But if you want them not to take the bad one, if you are really an economist, why don’t you look for items which are not dangerous like the beer, then you reduce the tax on the beer like the one on “Epuripur” to maybe zero, then people will leave the other bad one and go for this one, while at the same time the demand as it goes up, the production - don’t you see that is some simple economics, Madam Minister? 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Hon. Sabiiti rose_)I think I would like to finish. Mr Speaker, if I may finish, I am sure the honourable members would like to come in again. I will begin to lose my drift. Thank you. 

When it comes to the taxes on beers and spirits, we have stated the ministry’s view and stand. Beer is a good revenue producer to this country as are the spirits. Our concern on the spirits, as we have mentioned previously, is that we did not want people to resort to life-threatening illegal brews, and asked whether a spirit drinker will move to beer - I think we will have to ask the alcohol drinkers amongst us. (Laughter) 

As for doubling excise duty on the cigarettes, increasing the rates significantly will be an incentive to increased smuggling, and also, this duty will be out of step within the East African Community, where we have to adjust in order to align with Kenya and Tanzania. 

I would also like to point out, as far as the transport routes are concerned, that we feel that emphasising the second gateway through Tanzania and Rift Valley Railways increasing participation on transport of oil products can only be useful. It is a well known fact that on distances over 150 miles, rail is much cheaper than road and water is much cheaper than the other two. Thank you very much.

Was there another question, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think we should roll up this debate and move forward. If there was a question pending - I had ruled that these were the last contributions from the debate.

On my ruling, I had asked the ministers to respond, so I am not going re re-open the debate.

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITEE STAGE

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

5.57
Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 1 of the Bill stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we beg to amend Clause 2 by inserting new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (a) as follows:
(b) By substituting for item three the following: 3). “Spirits - 65 percent”
(c) In item four (i) by substituting for paragraph (b) the following: Other - “75 percent”.

Our justification is to raise more revenue for the government, especially from luxurious goods whose demand we feel is price elastic. I beg to submit.

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, I agree.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment that the trucks, which carry paraffin or kerosene should have the fuel they use exempted from tax. We shall have them gazetted and determine this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairman, the amendment proposed is that the fuel being used by the trucks carrying kerosene should be exempt.

MR TUMWEBAZE: How will you determine that this is for transporting kerosene? I am looking for the logic. I do not agree with that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, would you like to withdraw this amendment and we move forward?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we can decide as long as we mark the trucks. One can decide that a truck carries diesel alone or kerosene alone. It is well known because this is the business I am well conversant with.

So, we can say, for those which are going to carry paraffin, we can mark them and even mark the paraffin like for Army vehicles.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, these trucks would be taking fuel along the way, they cannot take it once.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, sometime back, these international organisations used to get tax returns on their fuel. That should also be applicable for those that are transporting kerosene. This is so that it can reach at the cheapest rate, as we anticipated, to the last person.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, my knowledge about good tax principles and policies is that a good tax should be easy to administer. If the cost overheads in administering the implementation of a proposal are tremendous, then of course, it becomes counter-productive. Why should we go into that kind of arrangement? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, do you withdraw the amendment? (Mr Ekanya rose_) You want to withdraw it on his behalf?

MR EKANYA: As the Shadow Minister of Finance, I wish to withdraw.

MR KATUTU: Mr Chairman, I am looking at Clause 2 (c) -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, we have not dealt with Clause 2, so there is no need to try and be committed. We have not yet pronounced ourselves to Clause 2, so you are at liberty, let hon. Katuntu finish.

MR KATUNTU: I hope I am right, Mr Chairman, because my amendment actually touches Clause 2(c) where the Bill is seeking to substitute for item 11 the following: “cane sugar and chemically pure sucrose in solid form, Shs 25 per kilogram”.

I am sure at the time the minister came up with this proposal, the situation regarding the sugar industry was different. This particular one has been overtaken by events. And, therefore, this amendment does not make any sense at all. In any case, Government would be losing – Mr Chairman, I was trying to talk to the minister, but she was busy consulting her colleagues. I think – Government would be losing close to Shs 8 billion in revenue as a result of this amendment. And from what I heard the minister saying, she does not mind having this amendment dropped. Therefore, I seek to delete this particular amendment so that Government can raise an additional Shs 8 billion.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to reiterate that Government wishes to keep the excise duty on spirits and wine at 45 percent for the reasons given before. An increase to 65 percent will lead to an increase in prices and a corresponding decrease in consumption. Consumers will shift from taxable spirits to illicit spirits, which are dangerous to their health. There could be evasion of tax, especially by the small producers at a time when URA is working very hard to get people to be tax compliant. There would also be a loss of revenue given that spirits are elastic goods.

On sugar, the government will concede if MPs insist on staying the amendment. (Interjections) It is my understanding that MPs wish to reinstate the Shs 25 cut that had been – [Hon. Members: “No!”]– In that case, Mr Chairman, let us leave it as it is since the honourable members are still at odds.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which amendment is this?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, this is the amendment on sugar. We tried to discuss this matter in the committee. But Members - look at this scenario; no relief is too small. If the factories, as we are told, swing back into production and we have reasonable quantity of sugar on the market, what is wrong with putting that relief no matter how much it translates into a reduction? -[Hon. Member: “Who is the beneficiary?”]- The final consumer.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the consumers of sugar are not VAT-registered and I think the best thing to do here is to remove VAT on sugar so that the impact on the consumers is felt.  (Dr Kiyonga rose_) You are just a late Minister of Finance, do not disturb. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, hon. Kiyonga left the Ministry of Finance long time ago. So, I think the best thing to do is to remove VAT for the impact to be felt; otherwise, the excise duty of Shs 25 is minimal.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Of course, what hon. Katuntu has proposed is good, but whatever shilling is given as a relief to any importer, is an advantage to the importer and ends up reducing costs. A cost is a committed resource to achieve an objective. So, if I am an importer of sugar and I get relief from Government that I would not pay Shs 25, it will have a multiplier effect in such a way that when I am costing my sugar, the price will reduce. That is what the government is saying. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Ministry of Finance proposes that the excise cuts of 50 percent on sugar stays in force. (Applause) We believe that every shilling counts and the current high prices of sugar are a temporary spike and will reduce accordingly to a point when Shs 25 is of no worth. Should the - because right now, when the prices have gone from Shs 2,500 to Shs 10,000 in some places and Shs 4,000 around Kampala, one might ask, “What is Shs 25?” but it means a lot to some people; people still bend down to pick up Shs 25 from the ground. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I really want to plead with the minister to appreciate the amendment. First, by the time you were reading the Budget in June, a kilogramme of sugar was Shs 2,500 while the factory price was Shs 2,200. When Government, because of scarcity, caused importation of sugar, now for sugar to come from Mauritius and Europe, it costs Shs 3,100 including tax. So, there is no way – and this information was given to us by URA when we met them – there is no way factory sugar will continue to sell for Shs 2,700 or Shs 2,200. 

Today, Madhvani exports 40 percent of their produce to the EU because we have a quarter – ACPU. The cost of the US dollar by then was around Shs 2,400 to Shs 2,500 in June. Even if the production goes up, the ingredients they use for whitening and so on, like sulphur for purification, are imported and are bought using dollars. So, there is no way the cost of sugar will come down below Shs 4,000. So, I plead with the minister that by deleting the amendment as suggested by hon. Katuntu, we shall save Shs 8 billion – and this was given to us by URA. 

What Government should do instead is to increase tax on sugar manufactured here by Shs 800 to match. Otherwise, right now, the manufacturers – they used to have the factory price at Shs 2,200, but now it is Shs 2,900 – they are making super, abnormal profits.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we finish with this matter? Hon. Minister, your final position on this. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have stated our final position – we shall keep the excise cut of 50 percent on sugar. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the status of the amendment by hon. Katuntu? Should we vote on this?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I am looking at this economy which needs money badly. I am sure the Minister of Finance needs this Shs 8 billion more than before. If she thinks she does not need this Shs 8 billion –(Interruption) 

MR LUBOGO: I do not want to dwell on the high prices of sugar as of now, but look at what the minister meant when she suggested that the tax be reduced by Shs 25. Her intention was to reduce the price of sugar at household level, but in Uganda, I am not aware of a Shs 10, Shs 20 or Shs 5 coin that will be reduced for the local consumer such that the welfare of Ugandans is improved. 

In effect, there is no sense of reducing the tax, which is not going to impinge on the price of the commodity; then we are only doing it either for the manufacturers or the middle men, but not helping the person she is purporting to be helping. I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank my colleague for the information because I could not have put it any better. We legislate for good governance and for the good of the country. The intended beneficiary of this reduction was actually the ultimate consumer of the sugar. We have seen that actually there is no benefit and the minister, as she stands up now, cannot tell this country or this House the benefit of that reduction. It is instead all speculative and we know the ultimate beneficiary of this reduction; they are the manufacturers. 

We have a problem. We need money because the resource envelope is limited. We have been talking about teachers and so on, and so we are assisting the Government to raise revenue because this reduction, which was supposed to benefit the local person who consumes the sugar, has not been achieved. The minister says that even then, she does not need the money. So, who am I to give you money that you do not need? If you think you do not need this money, I will consider –(Applause)- the record should be so clear that the Minister of Finance does not need the Shs 8 billion, which can be saved as a result of this amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thank you. It has been withdrawn. Do you want to open it? Further amendments?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since we want to make Ugandans happy, I want to move an amendment that we remove VAT on locally manufactured –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That will be when we are dealing with VAT. Not so? (Laughter) Mr Chairman, there is a pending issue on spirits. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: The committee had actually made a mistake by increasing it to 65 percent instead of 75 percent. The argument from the minister is that this will change the drinking pattern and people will resort to locally produced spirits, which is a bit hazardous. I do concede with the reasoning.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you withdraw your amendment? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: When I concede, I withdraw.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that means there is no amendment to this – yes, are you proposing an amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since the chairman has withdrawn from the spirits, for us, we would like to reduce the Excise Duty on locally manufactured beer using “Epuripur”  sorghum so that we produce more sorghum for our people from 40 percent to 20 percent -[Hon. Members: “It is already 20 percent.”]- It is already 20 percent? Okay, now from 20 percent to zero. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 2 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Title of the Bill do stand.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title agreed to.

 MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.21
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.22
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011” and passed it with no amendments –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There were no amendments for the first one. 

6.22
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition, moved that the rate for locally manufactured beer be moved to zero and the Hansard captured it –(Interjections)- and you put a question –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. That was never voted on.

MR EKANYA: It has been captured by the Hansard and it is there and you put the question and the House accepted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I put the question to the clause. There was no amendment. That motion – the honourable member laughed it off. (Laughter) When they told him it was 20 percent, he said, “Okay to zero” and then he laughed. So, we now took it that it was in that spirit because he initially wanted to reduce it to 20 percent.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.24
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

6.24
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE TARIFF AMENDMENT BILL, 2011”


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Minister and you Mr Chairman. (Applause) 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE (NO.2) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we beg for your indulgence. The next one is the Finance, No.2. The situation is that we have allowed the Budget Committee to start the meeting tomorrow on the assignment we have given them and the chairpersons of all the committees are supposed to be in that meeting. We might have difficulty in constituting the House tomorrow in the absence of the entire - because the meeting will be attended by over 90 Members of Parliament. On average, you have the full Budget Committee, you have chairpersons of the committees and then you have the ministers going there as well. So, that is the challenge we are confronted with, and they will have this meeting for two days. I do not know whether we will have the requisite quorum to deal with these Bills tomorrow. That is the challenge I have.  

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, there are two approaches to this matter. I would wish to plead with Members; these are very small Bills that we would sit and handle, but also tomorrow, we do not need all chairpersons of committees to report to the Budget Committee.
 
The Budget Committee should handle sector by sector. When it has finished this sector then it invites the chairperson and the clerk, then they come out. We should meet in the Conference Hall or South Committee Room, even the vice chairpersons. 

I would really plead with you and the Government Chief Whip that you talk to the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to handle one committee at a time instead of having all of them there seated and we waste time. I would beg my colleagues that these are simple amendments that we should handle now and close.

MR KAKOOZA: Supplementary to what hon. Ekanya has said, you know, Mr Speaker, this finance Bill which they are talking about is the one which allows Government to collect taxes. The sooner these Bills are passed - it releases business people to import goods, the tariff rates are known - the tariff rates which we are going to pass will help us quicken business. The moment you delay, then you are tampering with the collection of taxes and even with URA not to be able to do their job. 

In conclusion, I would beg that Members agree - these are simple Bills, we sit and pass them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if the Speaker who has been sitting here from the beginning is not raising any of these issues  - and yet I see honourable members who have sat in this House for only 30 minutes concerned about the House sitting late. Are you being fair to the Chair?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. We need more training in these areas of taxation so that when we come here to talk, we talk from an informed point of view. I had expected the Leader of Government Business to educate hon. Kakooza that there is a collection order which will expire on 31 October 2011, and even if you pass these laws now, you will not change anything until 1 November 2011. So, I would like to teach you so that you understand. (Laughter) (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: The point of order I am raising on item No.4, which we are going to start is the Finance No.2 (Amendment) Bill. The Finance (No.2) (Amendment) Bill, 2011 has got tariff rates and they cannot work in retrospective. These are the Acts we are saying we can deal with. People who know the rates which are passed now can easily transact business instead of speculating and waiting for the 30th. Is the honourable member in order to say that I do not know what I am talking about?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is basically between you and the honourable member. It is not to my knowledge who knows more than the other.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable member will agree that I know very well the area I am talking about. I am the one who was teaching him. I think that is the reason he missed on a few issues. These Bills are so small, but they have a lot of implication. These reports have just been distributed to us a few minutes ago. I think we need to agree that some of us need to read and internalise these reports. We allowed the other one to go for testing, but now we need to go and study them.
 
Even if you look at the Stamps (Amendment) Bill, it has only one amendment. We agree and it is talking of Shs 2 million. Somebody must justify the Shs 2 million. I must understand why you want only the Shs 2 million. I may also need to consult experts like hon. Kakooza to help us to understand. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, we want to give you our total assurance that we go and study these Bills and the reports. Tomorrow, in the afternoon, when we have studied them, we shall finish in two hours.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Notwithstanding the statement from the Leader of the Opposition, I would pray that we just finish this one Bill only. This is the Finance (No.2)(Amendment) Bill, 2011 because the area of amendment is only one and I know that the Leader of the Opposition and also being chairman of a union, does a lot of reading and he has already ready through this. So, my indulgence is that we deal with it now then we handle the rest tomorrow. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we for once hear the plea of the honourable minister and move for only an additional 30 minutes to clear this business? Hon. Members, I beg for your indulgence.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, may I draw your attention to Rule 21(1) and (2) for your information and guidance. Thank you very much. This being at the beginning of the Ninth Parliament, I would hate to see anybody, either inside this House or outside it, take a short for passing certain decisions when we are not following the rules and the Constitution and this is why I am seeking your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

(House rose at 6.35 and was adjourned until Tuesday, 6 September 2011 at 2.30 p.m.)

