Monday, 7 September 2009

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to today’s meeting and to say that I am exceedingly happy to inform you that the title deed for Parliament has been secured. (Applause) Our address is Plot 13-15 Apollo Kaggwa Road. Here is a copy of the title. I am now sure that we will soon be moving forward with the programme for the construction of the new Chamber. (Applause)


PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

2.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Ms Winnie Matsiko): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, in line with the mandate that I get from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I have the honour and pleasure to present, for your consideration and adoption, the report of the Committee of Natural Resources in respect to the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the FY 2009/2010 covering the following votes: 

    • Vote 017, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 
    • Vote 019, Ministry of Water and Environment. 
    • Vote 150, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA).  
    • Vote 157, National Forestry Authority.

The committee used the following procedure in scrutinising the respective ministerial policy statements:

i) 	We invited the respective ministers to present their policy statements; 

ii) 	We analysed the statements together with relevant materials regarding the sectors (policies, laws, regulations and write-ups);

iii) 	We raised questions on the policy statements for clarification by the relevant ministers; and

iv) 	We met autonomous bodies that take policy guidelines from the ministry.

Madam Speaker, allow me to highlight aspects of this report. Under the highlights, we have the following aspects: 

i) 	The sector mission; 
ii) 	The performance of the previous budget; 
iii) 	The achievements in the sector in FY 2008/2009; 
iv) 	Planned activities, projects and programmes for FY 2009/2010; 
v) 	Funds requested from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to implement the planned activities; and 
vi) 	The committee’s observations and recommendations.

I will dwell more on our observations and recommendations.
VOTE 017 - THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me to once again remind you of the mandate of the ministry. The mandate of the ministry is to establish and promote the development, strategically manage and safeguard the rational and sustainable exploitation and utilisation of energy and mineral resources for social and economic development.

Under this ministry, we have technical directorates and four departments namely, Energy Resources, Petroleum Supplies, Petroleum Exploration and Production, and Geological Survey and Mines. These are supported by the Finance and Administration Department, the Sectoral Planning Policy Analysis Unit, a resource centre and the Procurement Unit.

The ministry supervises five autonomous bodies, and these are:

i) 	The Uganda Electricity Generation Company Ltd (UEGCL), which owns the electricity generation facilities of Nalubaale and Kiira, concessioned to Eskom.

ii) 	The Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Ltd (UEDCL), which owns the electricity distribution network, concessioned to Umeme.

iii) 	Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd (UETCL).

iv) 	Rural Electrification Agency. 

v) 	Kilembe Mines Ltd, wholly owned by Government, and in turn holds 25 percent of Government shares in Kasese Cobalt Company Ltd.

In addition, the Electricity Regulatory Authority, though legally independent in its operations, takes into consideration policy guidelines issued by the minister in managing the electricity industry. 

Allow me to go straight to the observations, but before I mention them, let me mention the budgetary provisions. The budgetary allocation for Vote 017, including Government taxes and arrears, is as follows: The recurrent budget is Shs 5,945,659,000, and the development budget is Shs 839,384,855,000. 

The committee’s observations and recommendations under this vote are: 

1. 	The committee observed that the performance of Umeme since the concession agreement has proved to be wanting. It was noted that at the time Umeme took over from UEB, commercial energy losses stood at 23 percent and the undertaking was that these losses would go down further. However, the reverse has proved to be true as to-date energy losses stand at about 40 percent and the policy directive to install prepaid meters has not taken root as yet. It was further noted that the billing process is also wanting.

	The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that this policy be implemented as one of the ways of controlling the energy loses. In addition, Government needs to urgently review the concession with Umeme.

2. 	The committee observed that compensation of land owners during land acquisition for big investment projects is becoming a problem to the sector. 

	The committee urges Government to consider the possibility of amending the Land Act in order to streamline the land acquisition process. 

	In addition, Government should also consider the public-private partnership arrangement as an alternative to compensations in land acquisition, as it may be a cheaper option. 

	Government should also come up with an integrated planning approach to acquire land for utilities in order to avoid double compensation where land owners may get compensated under wayleaves, telecommunications and the oil pipeline. The committee further recommends that the ministry comes up with a comprehensive policy on the wayleaves.

3. 	The committee observed that the process of approving the petroleum supply regulations is taking too long. 

	Government needs to develop and approve these regulations in order to effectively regulate the activities of the private sector. 

4. 	The committee observed that the requirement by the Umeme agreement to allocate two percent levy on all resources generated under the Electricity Act to the Rural Electrification Agency is not being put in consideration as a priority. 

	The committee recommends that these funds should be reallocated to rural electrification so that pending schemes are completed as a matter of urgency. 

5. 	The committee observed that people have continuously encroached on UETCL wayleaves especially along Jinja Road where most of the transmission lines pass. This is detrimental to human health. It was further noted that most of the encroached land was formerly a wetland. 

	The committee recommends that the sector takes the necessary steps of evicting all the people who have encroached along these lines to set up car depots, and NEMA should take the necessary steps of ensuring that this land is restored as a wetland. 

6. 	The committee noted that the investment proposal to construct an oil pipeline to South Sudan has dragged on. 

	The committee recommends that as a way of boosting economic activities in the region, Government needs to urgently expedite the process of connecting the old pipeline with South Sudan. 

7. 	It was also noted that construction of the Malaba–Jinja oil pipeline has delayed due to Government’s delay to work out modalities to compensate land owners where the pipeline is supposed to pass.

	The committee recommends that Government should expedite the compensation modalities so that construction works can get underway.

8. 	It was noted that there is need for Government to come up with a comprehensive plan on energy mixes in order to cut down reliance on thermal and hydro electricity. 

	The committee recommends that Government and NEMA come up with a clear road map for producing alternative energy mixes and should pursue the importation of technology for production of alternate energy instead of calling upon foreign investors.

9. 	The committee noted that there was limited information dissemination about mineral prospecting and issuing of licences. 

	The committee recommends that the process of mineral prospecting and tendering should be widely publicised using both electronic and print media, so that the process becomes more transparent. 

10. 	Concern was raised on the numerous petrol stations mushrooming around the city, bearing in mind that the Government is ill-equipped to handle big fire disasters in case of a fire outbreak. 

	The committee recommends that Government takes audit of the fuel stations around the city licensed by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, and also the illegal ones, in order to come up with a policy on strict safety and operational measures.

11. 	The committee observed that the law and regulations on oil and gas are taking long to be formulated to address the people’s high expectations in this sector. 

	The committee recommends that the ministry expedites the process of drafting the laws and brings on board the challenges arising in the energy sector.

12. 	The committee observed that UEDCL has collected fees and rentals from its operations amounting to approximately US$ 50 million, which they are planning to use to put up an office block. 

	The committee recommends that the funds be used for rural electrification since the core business of UEDCL is to provide power to the population. This money should be reinvested in power generation by establishing mini-hydro electricity power plants, and to complete rural electrification schemes which have stalled due to lack of funds 

	The committee further recommends that UEDCL should use Amber House as their offices instead of renting some of the office space to private institutions. 

Vote 019 - THE MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT 

Madam Speaker, once again allow me to remind ourselves of the mission of the ministry. The mission of the ministry is to promote and ensure the rational and sustainable utilisation, development, effective management and safeguard of water and environment resources for social welfare and economic development.

The structure of the ministry is as follows: The ministry is led by a senior minister, who has the overall political responsibility, supported by two ministers of state - the Minister of State, Water and the Minister of State, Environment.

The ministry oversees and coordinates the operations of three autonomous bodies and these are: The National Water and Sewerage Corporation, the National Environment Management Authority and the National Forestry Authority.

Allow me to skip the budget performance of the sector since honourable members have copies of the report. I will also skip the key planned activities that were carried out in 2008/09 and the achievements of the sector, which are on page 12.

Allow me to go to the proposed planned activities for 2009/10 and these are: Rural water and sanitation programmes; urban water supply and sanitation; and there will also be activities in the sanitation sector and water for production.

The budgetary allocation, including Government taxes, is as follows: The recurrent expenditure 2009/10 is Shs 6,872,604,000, and the development expenditure is Shs 95,767,915,000. 

Vote 150 - NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY 

We have the priorities and a mandate stipulated on page 15 as well as the achievements of the sector in 2008/09.

On page 16, we have the planned and proposed activities for FY 2009/10, which are: 
    • To restore degraded ecosystems. 
    • Carry out 600 environmental inspections and audits. 
    • Establish environmental monitoring police. 
    • Sensitise the police, prosecutors and the Judiciary on environmental crime investigations, prosecutions and case management. 
    • Participate in international programmes and activities. 
    • Provide institutional and legislative support to oil and gas exploration and production. 
    • Build capacity of partners on environmental compliance and enforcement.

The budgetary allocation to vote 150 is as follows: The recurrent expenditure is Shs 4,810,919,000, and the development expenditure is Shs 11,797,340,000. 

VOTE 157 - NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY 

The mandate and mission of National Forestry Authority is to manage the 506 central forest reserves covering over 1.2 million hectares, and to contribute to sufficiently forested, ecologically stable and an economically prosperous Uganda respectively.

There were some achievements in the sector listed on page 17. The planned activities of 2009/10 are: 

    • To raise 9,895,250 seedlings - broadleaved and coniferous species - for NFA planting and the private sector. 
    • To establish 2,797 hectares of new plantations. 
    • Rehabilitate 10 urban central forest reserves. 
    • Maintain 10,882.8 hectares of established crops. 
    • Open 639kms of fire lines. 
    • Protect 9,959 hectares of established crops from bush fire. 
    • Sign 20 CFM agreements with communities adjacent to central forest reserves. 
    • Re-survey/re-open 392kms of forest boundary. 
    • Open 32kms of forest boundary. 
    • Construct 30kms of new forest roads. 
    • Import 480kgs of conifer seeds from Brazil and Australia. 

The budget provision for National Forestry Authority: The recurrent expenditure is Shs 200 million, and the development expenditure is Shs 1 billion.

The committee made the following observations and recommendations: 

1. 	In this year’s Budget Speech, it was observed that the Government of Uganda banned the importation and production of polyethylene bags in Uganda. However Government, through the sector, has not proposed alternatives to the polyethylene usage and enforcement methods. 

	The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should come up with a policy on enforcement and alternatives to the banned polyethylene bags.

2. 	In the same Budget speech, the Government imposed a ban on the importation of used computers, freezers and refrigerators. This proposal arose from the dire need to protect the environment from equipment that emits environmentally unfriendly gases that destroy the ozone layer. It has been observed that even the new equipment that comes into the country eventually becomes old, but there is no policy on recycling these products to protect the environment. 

	The committee urges Government to plan for e-waste management and recycling systems to mitigate environmental problems that may in future escalate from disposal of e-waste. 

3. 	The committee observed that the monitoring and evaluation function is too weak in the sector, which makes evaluation of programmes a challenge.

	The committee recommends the establishment of a fully functional monitoring and evaluation system in the sector to properly inform planning and resource allocation in an efficient and effective way.

4. 	It has been observed that the functionality of water systems in the country is a very big problem.

	The committee recommends the institutionalisation of a national data system that captures progress, functionality, location and lifespan to effectively enable accessibility of baseline information for planning and evaluation processes.

	The committee further recommends that an annual report on the functionality should be brought to the committee to facilitate the oversight role of Parliament.

5. 	It was also observed that most fresh water sources and hot springs in the country are not protected.

	The committee recommends that Government comes up with a plan to protect these water points as a source of tourism potential and for the promotion of agricultural production.

6. 	The committee noted with concern that the country has experienced prolonged drought, which has escalated the problem of famine in the country. However, the sector has no plans for alternative technologies to harvest water from most of the country’s water resources. It has also been observed that most of the country’s seasonal rivers are drying up, but no effort is being made to dike these rivers in order to conserve the water for production.

	The committee recommends that Government comes up with a comprehensive plan for water harvesting and measures to restore the seasonal rivers.

7. 	It was noted that the enforcement of environmental policies and regulations is weak. The rate of deforestation, encroachment on forest reserves and wetlands has reached astronomical levels.

	The committee recommends that Government provides an armed enforcement unit to enforce the environmental policies and regulations. The committee further recommends that Government institutions should work together on the enforcement of environmental policies and regulations.

8. 	It was noted that Government, that is, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Uganda Land Commission, district land boards, in particular Kampala District Land Board, have been cited in the leasing of wetlands contrary to Section 44 of the Land Act 1998.

	The committee recommends that Government desists from leasing of wetlands. The committee further recommends that Government desists from interfering in the process of reclamation of wetlands, and that it puts in place a strategy to ensure that wetlands are not haphazardly opened up especially for rice growing and settlements.

9. 	It was observed that there is lack of a legal and policy framework for public-private partnerships on water management and a policy framework to attract investors in the sector.

	The committee recommends that Government comes up with a legal and policy framework in order to address some of the challenges being faced in the sector.

10. 	It was observed that the budget for water stressed areas and water for production is inadequate to deal with the challenges involved.

	The committee recommends that Government prioritise resources towards water stressed areas and water for production. In addition, the committee recommends that Government gears more efforts towards sustainable water sources instead of sinking boreholes, given the volatile water levels.

11. 	It was observed that the Ministry of Water and Environment and other Government departments do not have a comprehensive approach towards sanitation.

	The committee recommends that Government comes up with an all encompassing strategy towards sanitation in all Government departments that deal with that component.

The committee recommends that the budget for the Ministry of Water and Environment be approved as follows:

Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 6,872,604,000
Development Expenditure – Shs 95,767,915,000

The budget for NEMA:

Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 4,810,919,000
Development expenditure – Shs 11,797,340,000

The committee recommends that the budget for NFA be approved as follows:

Recurrent Expenditure - Shs 200,000,000
Development expenditure - Shs 1,000,000,000

I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and your committee. Thank you for using our time succinctly and very usefully. Hon. Kasigwa, I hope you can summarise.

3.24
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Harry Kasigwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope everybody has received a copy of the report. I beg your indulgence; it is a short report and the font is big.

I would like to thank the committee for the report they have just presented and in response, this is what we have to say as the Opposition. The success of any undertaking depends on the foundation on which it is premised. In this case, since we are debating the ministry’s budgetary request with a view of appropriating them, then it is equally important that the policy that drives the ministry be brought into the equation.

We have taken this approach for basically three reasons:

One, on numerous occasions, this institution and moreso the Sixth Parliament and a few individuals, have been blamed for the slowdown of the energy sector in this country.

Secondly, the sector has registered a less than significant assets growth rate over the last 23 years despite being provisioned for annually. 

Thirdly, we have found it important that for the House to appreciate the enormity of the challenge before it, a brief critique of the ministry’s energy policy suffices. 

Madam Speaker, I have the policy with me here. We have read this document and analysed it and it is regrettable that in the 21st Century, Uganda parades this document as its National Energy Policy. This is evidenced in some of the assertions that are in this document here. On page 10 they say that, “Uganda’s electrification rate is very low, with grid access of only five percent for the whole country, and less than two percent in the rural areas. This means that only 200,000 customers are connected to the grid with an annual growth rate estimated between 5.5 to seven percent.” If Government policy or focus is to attract private investments to develop the sector, then how does this statement impact on this strategy?

Secondly, isn’t it this analysis that puts us where we are today; underestimating our energy requirement in this country? 

The other assertion is – and this is criminal – “Biomass plays a very significant role in Uganda’s energy supply. It constitutes over 90 percent of the total energy consumption in the country… It saves foreign exchange, employs 20,000 and generates Shs 36 billion (US$ 20 million) per annum in rural incomes.” You can only qualify this statement if you accurately determine the contributions of the energy service sector to the national energy mix. Secondly, as a country, have we as yet determined what our energy mix is and what we need to have as an energy mix? 

It is our contention that this statement is fallacious and misleading, and above all criminal, because when we talk of biomass as an energy option in Uganda today, we are talking of environmental degradation. 

The other assertion in the policy is that, “Although agriculture is the mainstay of Uganda’s economy, the sector’s fuel consumption is negligible because of the largely non-mechanical nature of the sector. Therefore, energy consumption in agriculture is not usually accounted for in the national energy balance of Uganda.” Is this in tandem with Government’s plan for the modernisation of agriculture? In our opinion, there is no doubt, therefore, that the thinking that informs this policy has dealt the sector serious drawbacks. 

It is, therefore, our considered opinion that for us to recover and evolve a more compliant policy, Government ought to carry out a detailed analysis of the interrelationships between the economic sectors and their potential energy requirement. 

We have also read the Renewable Energy Policy, which is this document, and it is more of a lullaby. What is very interesting is that Government is running away from its responsibility in this document. Government desires to attract 86 percent of the investment required in the energy sector. 

Secondly, the document is superfluous in content and should, therefore, be scaled down to specifics for easy reading and marketing. 

Thirdly, Government should not abdicate its responsibility by proposing to finance only 14 percent of what is desirable over the next 10 years. In this regard, we expect Government to be a lot more intuitive and proactive. 

Madam Speaker, presidential pronouncements also form policy options. There is no doubt that statements of this nature spur development, if only they are strategically thought-out. However, they equally have a devastating effect considering that most of them are populist. You will recall, for example, that in 2006 the President stated that with or without donor support, he would construct two hydro power stations within 44 months. The rest is everybody’s guess. 

The point we are making here is that these statements create a situation of inertia and timidity among the technocrats, hence inconsistencies in policy implementation. 

Having said that, owing to the foregoing, it is imperative to note that Government’s emphasis is on the various sub-sectors as a stand alone, an approach which is parochial and more of an academic exercise. 

It is our contention that the resilience of the energy sector greatly depends on the coordination between the energy sector supply options, demand and macro economic imperatives. 

Secondly, this integrated approach leaves no room for gambling as has been the case, but ensures optimal use of limited budgetary allocations. 

Madam Speaker, the committee has ably handled the issues to do with recurrent expenditure of the ministry, but I want us to look at the budgetary allocations over the last nine years from 2001 to-date. There is a table, and the source of this information is the ministerial policy statement, and you can see that over the last nine years, Government has invested only Shs 588 billion. It has budgeted Shs 753 billion over the last nine years, but invested only Shs 583 billion. 

Cognisant that energy plays a pivotal role in the development of modern states, we found it noteworthy making the following observations:

1. 	Government has only paid lip service to this sector as evidenced in the allocations.

2. 	There has been no significant investment in energy generation made by Government during the period under review, which is a gross miscalculation. 

3. 	Of the impressive figures that appear in the budget from 2005, the bulk is geared towards thermal generation thus subsidising the tariffs. There is no doubt that this strategy has bled the economy, therefore, lending credence to the old age saying that the higher your energy costs, the less wealth you create. 

4. 	Government consistently budgets for donor funding, but does not have data on donor expenditure on the sector because the donors have opted to spend directly on the sector, a stance that is not appropriate but has been occasioned by Government’s budgetary indiscipline.

5. 	If these figures are juxtaposed against the budgetary outturn figures, and against the proposed investment figures as mentioned in the Renewable Energy Policy, 2007, because the sector needs US$ 6 billion, but if you put the Shs 558 billion against the US$ 6.6 billion, then you will realise we are moving in circles. 

Madam Speaker, I hope this finally puts to rest who has caused a slowdown in the Energy Sector. 

The Energy Fund 

There is no doubt that this was a timely initiative considering what the sector has experienced to date. The endowment we were informed has yielded Shs 211 billion and US$ 75 million. This financial year, the Fund has been allocated about Shs 191 billion. This puts the endowment close to US$ 300 million. What is required now is to put together a team of persons of intuitive dynamics to evolve a financing mode that will jumpstart the construction of the Karuma power project immediately, instead of waiting to accumulate more money. I think now is the time to get rolling. 

It is important that we look at the operations of the Bujagali power project. Bujagali, for a while, has been projected as a magic wand that will once and for all resolve the high power tariffs experienced in the country, and the power outages. In our opinion, this is a fallacy, because as a country, we have failed to date to accurately or approximately determine our desired energy requirement and potential growth trends. This is because of lack of mechanisms to accurately determine the growth patterns in the economy. In addition, various sectors of the economy operate disjointedly. 

It is worth appreciating the following, to be able to understand whether Bujagali power project was a good deal for the country. 

    1. The government granted Bujagali close to US$ 75 million interest-free facility to kick start construction of the project. 
    2. Bujagali Energy Limited received a partial risk guarantee from the government worth US$ 115 million. 
    3.  Finances for the project are being borrowed at 6 and half per cent above LIBO. This translates into between 12 and 13 per cent per annum. LIBO is the London Inter-Bank Offer rate. 
    4. The Bujagali project was granted a rate of return on investment of 19 per cent per annum over the duration of the agreement. 
    5. The agreed upon generation, operation and maintenance costs are equally ridiculous. 
    6. The equity of the project promoters is US$169 million, while that of the government of Uganda are the assets inherited from AES valued at US$20 million. This equity will not earn dividends for the duration of the loan’s repayment.
    7. On a recent visit to Bujagali as a Committee on Natural Resources, we were informed that the Bujagali power project undertaking was purely a private sector development. However, we are of considerable opinion that the government having: 

    a. Jumpstarted the project with an interest-free facility;
    b. Executed a partial risk guarantee; and 
    c. Handed over its assets worth US$ 20 million for the project; then the project should be categorised as a private-public partnership and not a purely private sector venture. 
    8. The world over, the cost of building a 250 megawatt facility of hydro-electricity ranges between US$ 1.5 and US$ 2 million. However, Bujagali power project, which is a 250 megawatt facility, is going to cost over US$ 1 billion. It is incredible. I think this is mainly because of its nature; it is an Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) contract. There is no doubt that this project is an immense financial rip-off to Uganda. In the interest of the country, the government should negotiate a buy-back of the facility 10 years after its completion.

Privatisation as a policy option

As stated earlier, once matters regarding policy are not given a back and forth logical analysis with a sense of patriotism, as is the case with most developed countries that we intend to emulate, then mistakes, fatal in nature, will always abound. It is for this reason that we contain that the rushed privatisation of UEB and its successor companies was driven by mediocrity and avarice. Therefore, Parliament should rise to the occasion and address these mistakes. If  inefficiency and mismanagement form the basis of unbundling and subsequent privatisation, we demand that the minister lays before this House the benchmarks that were considered to ensure that  the concessionaire is efficient and not a mere change of guards.  

We have also opted to look at the successor companies. The companies that emerged out of the unbundling of UEB have performed dismally and should, therefore, be subjected to an investigation. 

On this note, we wish to appreciate the minister’s efforts in trying to reform the industry. I think you have heard hon. Onek carrying out investigations and the like. However, what is intriguing is that UEDCL with the approval of the Ministry of Finance, is bent on spending Shs 50 billion on constructing their head offices. The core business of these entities is energy-generation and distribution, not construction of office space. Therefore, we request Parliament to halt this initiative and the funds put into Rural Electrification or the Energy Fund. 

Umeme

Umeme started its operations in 2005 when the government concessioned its assets that belonged to UEDCL to it (Umeme). In the lease and assignment agreement, one of the salient issues was the need to invest so as to reduce distribution losses by a certain percentage annually. Noteworthy is that UEDCL, during its tenure, managed to reduce the losses to 28 per cent and this was the agreed position when Umeme took over. However, in 2006, they turned around to claim that losses were at 40 per cent. 

What does this imply? 

    1) By taking the losses up to 40 percent then bringing them down to 30 percent will be a lot easier for them as compared to moving them down from 28 percent to 18 percent - the internationally accepted losses. On the face of it, it appears as if they are investing, since there is a movement in figures. However, in reality, by the time they achieve the 10 percent reduction as stipulated in the agreement, they would have got back to the inherited position of 2005.

    2) Considering that ERA adopted a tariff setting system whose principle is the total pass through of costs, the consumer will inevitably bear the consequences by way of increased power costs because of the unilateral losses that Umeme has declared.

    3) There is a likelihood that Umeme is profiteering from this discrepancy and, therefore, a thorough investigation is warranted.


Eskom

Eskom began its operations in 2003, but since then, it has been dogged by high turnover of high level staff, an indication that there exists serious managerial problems within the establishment. 

It is worth noting that in the agreement to concessionaire, the two power plants, Eskom undertook to invest a certain minimum amount of money - I think close to US$ 8 million, but was not required to show evidence of them actually bringing money into the country. All that they do in as far as accountability of managing our natural assets is concerned, is running adverts. 

Also, the generation, operation and maintenance costs were left to run as a constant for seven years. These costs stand at 45 percent of the total sales of power to UEDCL which approximately translates into US$ 6.7 million per annum, and yet Shs 8 billion was the generation, operation and maintenance costs when the assets were managed by us. We used Shs 8 billion and they are using US$ 6.7 million per annum.

Additionally, Eskom was allowed a lot of return on investment - 12 percent per annum. However, our contention is, what investments have they executed? Can the minister lay on the Table a copy of audited investments carried out by Eskom? 

It is our considered opinion that the management of Uganda’s generation facilities at Nalubaale and Kira Power Plants ought to be investigated.

Madam Speaker, in March, I was reading The Monitor and this is what Eskom had to say, “Government entered a concession agreement with the South African-owned firm after it lacked funds that UEGCL would use to ensure uninterrupted power supply to the consumers.” It is extremely ridiculous that a foreign parastatal can insinuate, in the host country’s media, that its government is incapable of raising money to execute its obligations. How on earth do we let that happen?

In our opinion this means that the Government of Uganda is bankrupt and yet to the best of our recollection, by the time Eskom took over, we had guaranteed a loan to Uganda Electricity Generation Company of millions of dollars, to be invested in upgrading of the power plant. 

Mini Hydros

In as far as the management of our mini hydros is concerned, the situation is not any better. It is marked by speculation and unseriousness. Speculation in the sense that no financial diligence was done on the “potential investors.” You just wake up, go to ERA, apply and are given the site. This explains why to date, less than 5 percent of the sites licensed have reached the pre-feasibility stage. To emphasise this situation, in December 2006, GTZ offered to give grants to companies that had been issued with licenses to develop the mini hydros, but none of them showed up.

The petroleum sector

Madam Speaker, you will recall that for quite a while we have demanded that the production sharing agreements signed between Government and the petroleum prospecting companies be laid before Parliament. The ministers have always made an undertaking but to no avail. This, in our opinion, bears the hallmarks of a sinister motive in the offing.

The desire to personalise Uganda’s petroleum resource is not new. For those of us who served in the Seventh Parliament, we vividly recall that the NRM administration sponsored a very interesting amendment to Article 244 of the Constitution. At that time it read, 
“Subject to any right granted to any person under any law, the entire property in, and the control of all minerals in, on or under, any land or waters in Uganda are and shall be vested in the government, notwithstanding any right of ownership of or by any person in relation to any land in, on or under which such minerals are found.”
Sub-section 4, “’Mineral’ means any substance whether in solid, liquid or gaseous form occurring naturally, in or on the earth, formed by or subjected to a geological process, that does not include petroleum.”

I remember this particular amendment caused uproar in the House when we were debating the amendments. This, in our considered opinion, partly explains why some individuals in Government are hazy about this issue. 

Secondly, I wish to make it very clear to all and sundry, because there have been media reports that these agreements were brought to the committee. I want to state that we have never seen those agreements.

Thirdly, in the petroleum exploration business, any discovery made is automatically entered into the books of accounts of the prospecting firm. This in turn has an upward spiral effect on the share price of that firm once enlisted on any internationally recognised stock exchanges. This explains why the shares of such firms are easily traded in. So far, in Uganda, we have witnessed the takeover of Hardman by Tullow under this arrangement of being listed on the stock exchange. 

Unless we tread carefully, we shall inadvertently, on our part as Parliament or advertently on the part of the Executive, handover our petroleum resource to a monopoly, to the detriment of this nation. It is, therefore, our treasured desire that as an arm of Government let us do this country proud as mandated by the Constitution, and exercise our oversight role, by holding the passing of the ministry’s budget until they lay these agreements on the Table in a closed session. Let us go for a win-win situation. Bring these agreements in closed session and take us through them so that we get to understand what we are talking about as Ugandans. 

The Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline

Uganda remains one of the few nations in the world that still transport their petroleum products by road, an act which not only damages the roads, but exponentially increases the costs of products in the market locally here. Therefore, the oil pipeline is a welcome investment. However, we note the following:

    • Funds for acquisition of the wayleave have not been budgeted for this financial year

    • We have been informed that Government intends to borrow money for compensation from TAMOIL East Africa Ltd to compensate the communities and individuals affected by the wayleave

    • The terms and conditions of this undertaking have not been made privy to Parliament as is mandated by the Constitution 

    • The shareholdership structure of TAMOIL East Africa is suspect because we have been informed that one Ugandan individual owns 40 percent of TAMOIL East Africa and both the Governments of Kenya and Uganda control 12.5 per cent each. But we have been further informed that there is a proposal to downgrade the shareholding to 10 percent each; that is, Uganda Government, 10 percent, and the Kenya Government, 10 percent shareholding in TAMOIL East Africa. The rest will be owned by TAMOIL Africa. We find this very interesting and I think as a House we should take keen interest in it in the interest of the country.

Recommendations

    1) Considering that energy is a fundamental component of growth and development, and a highly sensitive matter globally, we wish to recommend that Government sets up a constitutionally recognised energy commission that will handle matters that relate to formulation and adoption of energy policy options with the independence it deserves, because what happens is that the Ministry of Energy is having its cake and eating it as well, and I think that is too much for the ministry.

    2) We recommend that a more compliant energy policy that takes into account global dynamics and trends, be developed as a matter of urgency.

    3) UEDCL should be empowered to have greater latitude in overseeing the use of its assets.

    4) The current tariff model of total pass-through ought to be reconsidered. For example, it is irrational for the power consumers of Iganga to pay for the inefficiencies in transmitting the power to Kampala, taking into account that there already exists a marked disparity in income levels. It becomes very unfair.

    5) Parliament should, as a matter of urgency, investigate the operations of Umeme and Eskom.

    6) Government should review its priorities in relation to the PEAP, thus refocusing the call on national resources.

    7) Government should, as much as possible, try to generate substantial local revenue capacity for the construction of energy assets, in order to reduce on the costs of borrowed money. In this regard, we propose that instead of rushing to liberalise the Social Security Sector, Government moves to strengthen the existing player as it has done with URA with a view of utilising its potential to grow its energy assets. Why do we bring this in? It is because we were informed that the workers of Uganda only earn 3 per cent on their savings with NSSF today. But here we are, giving Bujagali 19 percent annual return on investment. It does not make sense for us to give outsiders this amount of money yet we could generate it internally and use our assets internally to develop the sector. Instead of the workers earning 3 percent on their savings I think they can earn 10 or 11 percent as would be the case with any other financial institution.

In conclusion, turning this sector around requires a lot of ingenuity, frugality, patriotism, pro-activeness but above all, transparency. There is a lot of haziness in the energy sector in this country. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development in its current form does not exude these qualities. Therefore, we are of the view that the ministry should be restructured and re-tooled to suit the times. 

Finally, several sector development models should be designed to ease implementation and give the sector direction so as to minimise any “ad hoc-ism”. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us hear from the Shadow Minister for Water and Environment.

3.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources for presenting her report.
I would like to quote, “In this world today, the greatest global challenge is elimination of poverty and the reversal of environmental degradation.” And, “Protecting the earth’s nearly 10 billion acres of remaining forests and re-planting those already lost are both essential for restoring the earth’s health as a foundation for the new…” -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Madam Speaker, as the sector ministers, we do not have a copy from our colleague -(Interruption). We do not. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How many Members do not have the report? At least you ought to give the ministers because you are responding to their-

MS ANYWAR: Please have the copy. I think it was not my problem but the printery perhaps made few copies.
 
Madam Speaker, I was making a quotation. “Protecting the Earth’s nearly 10 billion acres of remaining forests and replanting those already lost, are both essential for restoring the Earth’s health as a foundation for the new economy.” I quote from Lester Brown who was published in Washington D.C on 14 April 2009. 
“Reducing the rainfall runoff, associated flooding and soil erosion; recycling rainfall inland, depend on simultaneously reducing the pressure on the forests and on reforestation.”

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, with this, as I will lament on the destruction of our forest cover, I would want to give a way forward on how we can both balance the equation of elimination of poverty and the reversal of the degraded environment. I propose that as a way forward, let us invest in wood cooking stoves - this has happened in Kenya and is being funded by USAID. These stoves pollute less and use less wood to reduce on the cutting of the forest cover.

We should invest in the Solar Cooker Project funded by Solar Cooker International, which is affordable because each cooker goes for about US$ 10 and I think through using them, we shall reduce the pressure on our forests. 

Therefore, I say alternative energy sources and tree planting are the way to go.

I want to also address myself to the issue of climatic change.

The current greenhouse gas emissions already commit the planet to further global warming, and despite being the least responsible for current and historic global greenhouse gas emissions, developing countries, Uganda inclusive, are already the worst affected by global warming and this will continue for a while. 

Despite this, we are least equipped to respond to both the prediction of severe humanitarian crisis and adaptation challenges. I am bringing the idea from a Commonwealth Parliamentary conference we attended in the UK on climatic change from which I make the following suggestions on the way forward:

As a country, we propose that measures to ensure that climate change mitigation should go hand-in-hand with adaptation. We should adopt strategies of early actions and mitigation disaster preparedness – in fact the minister is here - and adaptation should be one way to go.

Furthermore, we propose that we increase funding for raising awareness and the highlights for the urgency of action on climate change at both national and local levels. 

Ugandans need to be aware of the dangers of climate change in their lives, and make all efforts to act now. The fact that extreme heat and flooding is here with us; and we have food and water shortages, that is famine and drought, which needs all of us to act now. 

Therefore, the government should increase funding in research efforts into drought resistant and early maturing plants and animals as this will help in mitigation and adaptation to climate change. 

We should interest ourselves in Biotechnology to help us mitigate and adapt to climate change, as this impacts on the lives of our people. They should know which plants to plant early and which ones should be planted to resist drought. 

We further recommend that since climate change is a serious issue globally, we recommend that we create a committee of Parliament to critically handle the issues of climatic change. The unit is placed in the ministry, but as we heard, even in the report of the committee, the monitoring and implementation of policies is weak, and this justifies why we should create a committee of Parliament on climate change to critically analyse, and fast-track mitigation and adaptation, and give the necessary information to all stakeholders so that we embrace and act on climate change.

Other countries have gone even further than what we are recommending - that is creating a committee of Parliament. They have a whole ministry, and like in Austria, we were told there is a ministry for climate change; and that is how serious such countries are getting head on with climate change. 

I also want to take note - and I know that the committee has already alluded to this, that the Meteorology Department which is vital in giving weather information, has a lot of setbacks and has been heavily underfunded. Their budget has not enabled them to do their work properly, and the step we have taken to make it an agency is a most welcome idea.  We should even increase their funding to enable us as a country to have accurate and timely information on the weather as a way of combating the climatic change effects.

I also want to take note on rainwater and underground water harvesting. The government has not taken water harvesting seriously, yet we dearly need clean water for our lives. Water is life, and as such, it is not negotiable and shouldn’t be given selectively, as all of us need clean water. 

Government has tried to carry out water harvesting in schools, local government headquarters and in other institutions. We propose that Government subsidises water tanks for household water harvesting. I am just looking at a poor family upcountry. I know we have traditional mechanisms, which are also being used for water harvesting, but if a poor family is helped with a water tank at an affordable price, this will go a long way to harvest -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, please stick to your text. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to implore the government to increase funding for visible dams in all the dry areas - visible, not the ones which are invisible - for both animals and irrigation. Currently, dams cover only 3.1 percent. So, we implore Government to create more visible dams to help our people.

National Water and Sewerage Corporation has tried to spread out and supply water in urban towns. The biggest setback we have with National Water and Sewerage Corporation is that the service it provides does not go by its name. Most of the times you see expansions in the urban centres focusing on water pipes and the sewer lines do not match the expansion of water pipes. This has created a lot of problems. We would want to see that National Water sticks to its mandate to provide both water and sewerage services. As it expands and flies across the borders, they should ensure that Ugandans have clean water and sewer lines.

You will note that even in Kampala where they are expending their services like in Akright - Kakungulu where they provided piped water to 200 families, this was without sewer lines. So, it is a serious matter. We want them to take this on.
I also want to recommend to National Water that they should start giving us bottled water. Before I left National Water, those were some of the suggestions. This is because even the bottled water on the market is questionable in terms of cleanliness. Who is supervising them? We would be more comfortable if National Water ensured the quality of bottled water. Furthermore, the price would also come down. 

This is not strange because I read in one of the newspapers in Australia that they had to protect their environment and their pockets by banning bottled water. But for us we are saying, National Water should ensure quality and reduce the price for Ugandans.

On the issue of sanitation, Government strategy to improve sanitation has failed, as it has not been felt on the ground. If you read the National Environment Health Policy, it defines environmental sanitation as - and I am quoting from the ministry’s document of 2006, page 77 - “The safe management of human excreta and associated personal hygiene; the safe collection, storage and use of drinking water; solid waste management and protection against famine and other disease vectors”. 

When you look at the definition from the government document, issues like continuous Cholera and Hepatitis E outbreak shouldn’t be an issue. The Minister of Health is looking at me seriously. This is an issue that we should probably join hands on.

As a country, we should take sanitation head on. Because of its absence, however, we should have massive sensitisation in the country so that issues like having latrines in homesteads are addressed. This should be coupled with the provision of clean water sources for drinking for our people. I still find people in my constituency fetching running water and this is not desirable. Also funding should be increased in this sector so that we get rid of those repetitive diseases like Hepatitis E and Cholera in this country, which diseases cause us to spend even more money.

On the issue of wetlands, the cover has reduced tremendously. We now have 11 percent and this has been due to destruction and construction of buildings mainly by Government officials and the rich. People should note that without the wetlands being destroyed, they are still economically viable, and we have many people earning a living from them. 

Recently, I read about a lady who was planting rice and earning a living from the wetlands without destroying them. We have the mayuni as well as water for irrigation, which can be drawn from there. Wetlands also purify and store our running water and this could help National Water reduce on the costs of purifying water for us. They also help to keep soil nutrients, and these are all economically viable projects; even fishing does occur in the wetlands. 

There was also, in 2005, a research carried out by Sensuit and they found that Nakivubo wetland earned us US$ 2 million. That is the economic value. I, therefore, appeal that we protect the wetlands. Government should punish all the untouchables who are building in the wetlands. The Lake Victoria shores are not also spared, soil is being dumped in our lake shores everyday and our lake is becoming narrower; if you go to Munyonyo, you will cry for our mother country Uganda. 

I want also to thank NEMA for all efforts, whenever we ring, they will always be there. We have managed to rescue some parts of this country which were going away to construction. For example if you came from Entebbe road through Kajjansi that newly created lake was going to be constructed on but when I rang NEMA, they came and stopped them. We have one when you are going to Kitgum on Bombo road that is - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not know whether you wrote this statement. Can you read what you wrote? Please, you are taking so much time.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker for the guidance and with that I would implore KCC and the Uganda Land Commission who keep on issuing land titles in wetlands to stop. Even at local levels you find the authorities are giving out wetlands to investors; places like Kumi, Budaka and the like.

Lastly, I would like to address the issue of kaveera. We thank the government for this move and we think it was long overdue. The reason is that the dangers of kaveera to an agricultural country like ours cannot be overemphasised. We find that over 3,300 tones of kaveera accumulate in the soil every month and this is dangerous to agriculture. Drainage blockage has led to floods and sewer spillovers and this has increased Cholera and Malaria in the towns.

Kaveera, when used for food, has caused cancer, diabetes, liver and heart disease. This is not healthy. When use it then burn it; it releases toxic gases that is carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide in the atmosphere and causes cancer and hypertension. You find that other people wrongfully use it as a mobile toilet. All these are not healthy for our country.

In the policy statement of our committee there was a question of the alternatives. Let me give the alternatives to the banned buveera: we can use paper bags, baskets, banana fibre bags, palm tree bags, reusable bags from textile and sisal. For me practically I have them in my car, I move with them. This will create more jobs in the rural areas. I emphasise this because we are doing the cost benefit analysis, more jobs will be created upcountry because baskets will be needed for us to use while kaveera goes forever. 

However, there are other sectors which might not completely -(Interjection)- I am on the last page. The items which are not hygroscopic, that is those that can absorb water are essential in relation to life saving drugs and this should be given exception. We want also to promote biodegradable materials as alternative to kaveera. However, those who are frustrating government’s effort in this ban stand warned that Ugandans who are based on agriculture and environmentally conscious are tired of polythene bags and will not allow the ban to be lifted. 

The honourable minister in particular, we have heard contradicting statements in the media, I hope she will clarify on that. Otherwise, I put Parliament to notice of motion of displeasure into the conduct of the Minister of Water and Environment for frustrating the effort of government to ban polyethylene bags also commonly known as buveera. 

Lastly, during the Committee of Supply the contradicting figures in the statement will be highlighted as you had earlier guided the House on that view on Wednesday.

4.26 
CAPT. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM Ibanda North County, Ibanda): I want to thank the Committee on Natural Resources and the shadow ministers who have given their responses. First of all, the Ministry of Water and Environment has fairly done very well in water coverage in the country -(Interjections)- someone who is asking where, you know some of you do not travel that is the problem with you. You are limited to only your local areas. (Laughter) I came from Nebbi yesterday, there is water in Nebbi; there is water in major town councils in this country. I know – some of you who are only located in your constituencies have your own problems, but on this I can really tell you that I do not simply praise something that does not exist.

My problem with the ministry is about the environment. The issue of environment is still lacking, hon. Mutagamba. Lake Victoria silting is high, hilltops and river banks of this country are bare. As you drive across Karuma and you happen to look towards Masindi, you will still be in Acholi land but you will be able to see a garden this side. I am sure hon. D’Ujanga also sees this while he is coming back from his constituency. Swamps are being reclaimed, it is really still a big problem. Deforestation is on the increase yet matters of climate are extremely very serious. 

As national leaders, we must look at them. I would like to propose that the Minister of Water and Environment comes up with a law to enjoin local governments to say, for example, that along road reserves, there should be planted trees or that hilltops beyond a certain contour –(Interjections)– there is what they call contours in geography –(Laughter)– should be planted with trees to help us have sufficient cover in this country. Without that we shall all perish. These are very serious issues, no matter whether they are raised by the Opposition or the majority side of the House; they are national issues that we must take into account. 

Let me say a few things on the power policy in this country. I think we need to be much more serious. I told hon. Syda Bbumba, when she was still the sector minister that privatising power would not only be dangerous; it would be reckless. You can liberalise the sector to allow other players come in but government should retain the obligation to extend power. Utilities the world over are very difficult to be privatised because they are not normally looked at from an economic sense; they are welfare sectors. This Umeme monster –(Interjections)– yes, Umeme is a monster. That is my choice of words. I would like to say that Umeme is a monster, Madam Speaker and Leader of Government Business.

Government signed a contract with Umeme that after a certain time, it should have invested something like US $70 to US $80 million in the refurbishment of the infrastructure to minimise energy loses. But how much have they invested so far? Can hon. D’Ujanga tell us how much it is now? On the contrary, they are externalising money to South Africa after collecting it from Ugandans. So when we privatise, do we do it to increase efficiency or to increase inefficiency? Rates are very high. 

The other day I read in the newspapers that a committee had been set up by Hon. Hilary Onek to look into the tariffs. We are still waiting for the reductions. Otherwise, power is becoming increasingly expensive to Ugandans. We think that government should review its contract with Umeme. It has got a lot of disorganisation in management terms. Even when you meet some of the workers, they will volunteer information. So, hon. D’Ujanga and your senior colleagues think about reducing the tariffs. The sooner you do that, the better for the benefit of this country. It will increase productivity –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Kagwera, Hon. Milton Muwuma and others will follow. But maybe to add to what hon. Guma said, Minister for Environment, when will you introduce the environmental police and tribunals? You will be given time to answer that.

4.31
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report and government for the good work being done. However, I have got some few observations. One is about the energy and mineral sub-sector, which is said to have performed poorly due to either high staff turnover, or failing to fill vacant posts. The report goes on to say there is no recruitment going on. The ministers must tell us why this is being done.

The other issue relates to commercial energy loses, which was at 23 percent by the time Umeme took over, but are now at 40. I believe when government was writing that concession agreement, there were clauses that were put – the minister should tell us why this is happening because I think the ministry is not taking it seriously.

Let me say something about the agreement where 2 percent of levy would be given to the Rural Electrification Agency to continue with the work in the rural areas. The report says nothing much has so far taken place. Again can the ministers tell us why these people are taking money and not giving the 2 percent as agreed? And if they are to start today because Parliament complained, will they be able to recover the money that has not been remitted?

Madam Speaker, the other issue is about the people who have encroached on land where transmission lines pass. Our government can be very strong on some issue, but when it comes to other simple issues like this one, I wonder what happens. I really cannot see the reason we cannot move because surely if people have encroached on this land, why can’t we evict them? Why?

Let me say something on the numerous petrol stations. Is there no policy in place to regulate this? It is a matter of just putting up a fuel station? I hope the ministers will tell us.

I also have issues with UEDCL that collected about US $50 million but has not invested this money on the extension of electricity to rural areas and instead wanted to build an office block. I think they are being unfair to this country because if there is Amber House, why can’t they use that and they invest that money elsewhere? We should not behave as we are foreigners in our own country. This country belongs to us and we must behave. 

The other issue is on water. I thank the minister also, like my colleagues have done; you have tried but a lot still needs to be done. 

The other issue is NEMA. NEMA has been mandated to supervise activities related to the environment but we keep lamenting here as Parliament, I think even the ministers lament. Why can’t NEMA use its mandate to give this country what it deserves? If it is lack of money, let us give them the money; if it is lack of will, let us remove these people and put people who are willing to work.

Madam Speaker, on importation of buveera into this country, I totally agree with Mama Mabira because this country is here and we are going to leave it to our grandchildren. Why can’t we stop this nonsense? Let us stop it. The first thing is to stop it. 

The other thing is on the importation of old computers and fridges. There must be a policy. I agree with the committee observation; that is a very good observation, that even if you import new ones today, they would still grow old. Where is the policy for recycling them?

The other issue is on deforestation and encroachment on forests. Surely there is a whole department here and we keep lamenting. We see the forests going now and again; why are we paying these people? -(Member timed out_)

4.34
MR BADHUL KATONGOLE (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank honourable colleagues who have made presentations today. I will start with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

One of the major priorities is to increase energy services through rural electrification and development of new energies but when I look through the planned activities for energy planning, management and structure, 2008/09 and 2009/2010, I do not see any activities that are specifically about rural electrification. Maybe the chairperson of the committee can assist me on that.

Then on the water sector, it is indicated that there was poor performance in respect of the budget for water for production and it led to under performance. But I understand that when there is under performance in that sector, it means loss of the animals in the cattle corridor. In the case of my constituency, around 2003/04, nine sites were identified for construction of valley tanks. A consultant in the names of Norplant was identified and was supposed to carry out procurement and designing of the project. Up to now no water has been delivered. The same goes to water for Kyegegwa town. As far back as 2003/04, the design of that project had been completed and I was told it was 50 percent of the cost of the scheme. Up to today, no water has been delivered to that town. 

I see in the report of the committee that the minister intends to develop a feasible and cost effective plan for rehabilitation and maintenance of dams and poly-tanks in selected districts of water stressed areas in the country. I am very interested in knowing these districts because my district has always been left out when it comes to water for production. 

We have always been told that de-silting existing in valley tanks and dams is more expensive than constructing new ones. So I do not know if there has been a policy shift. 

Going back to the Ministry of Energy, I want to find out, first of all, leave alone that I have not found any activities that are specifically dealing with rural electrification, in the case of my constituency there was a line that was supposed to be constructed from Kiganda and was supposed to supply electricity to Kyegegwa. It was advertised around 2004/05 and it did not attract any bidders. So I want to find out from the government whether that was the end of the efforts by government to provide power to that part of the world. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.38
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me add my voice to my colleagues’ to thank the committee for the good report. Recently I read in the papers that 80 percent of Kampala water is full of faeces; it was in the papers. I got worried and I feel this is an opportune moment for the minister to answer. 

In the Budget Speech you heard the minister talking of Isingiro; and I was disappointed. Much as the Ministry of Water has done a good job all over the country. I should state here that to Isingiro, it is air supply! Look at page 14 of the report. It says, “Works on other dams continues as follows: Kagongo Dam 80 percent …”, and there is another one, Obwonjerero, those two dams are in Bukanga County. They have been under construction for one full year, but you do not see anything like a valley tank. At one time the minister gave me an opportunity to attend a top management meeting that was sitting in their offices; I have appealed to them but there is no work being done in Isingiro. I even called the committee of this House, hon. Masiko, I told them to come to Bukanga before writing the report; this 80 percent does not exist in Bukanga. 

Hon. Minister, with all the funds you have, you could have covered this country well, but I appeal to you to direct some funds to Bukanga; that is a county where we get water from ten kilometres away. So whenever I go there to appeal to Crestank for rain water harvesting, they think of giving us ten tanks. What we need is a holistic approach. We have never had water. We have lake Nakivale which some of you might have learnt about in geography. 

Recently the UNHCR, because of the refugees from Congo, pumped water from Nakivale for refugees but for us the local people who have been there from time immemorial, we cannot get water. I would even say that this Parliament should visit Bukanga County -(Interjection)- we vote wisely of course. I feel that much as we have little funds, we should be rational. Let us not take water all over the country. There are some areas that have water. 

As for animals, when we talk about the valley tanks, they are no longer fashionable. The situation now is that each person fences off his land for animals or for plantation. If you put a valley tank in one locality or parish, people cannot cross other peoples’ land to go  and get water for animals in that valley tank. So the feasible practice is to get money and possibly buy equipment so that a district for example can be able to organise farmers to put in fuel and each farmer gets a dam of a small size. It is practical that way. But as we talk now, the dams are not feasible and I do think they can serve any purpose.

Secondly, on the environment, Members of Parliament, there is a garden outside this Parliament which was made by Kampala engineers during CHOGM, but we have now converted it into a car park. I would not suggest that we move a motion but it is common knowledge that this Parliament should not allow that garden to be used as a car park. We should live by example. Hon. Anywar has said that we should protect our environment but how can we? That garden, Madam Speaker, you have seen it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one; the one across my office?

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I want to thank my friend, hon. Byanyima, for giving way. We talked about this matter in our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we were informed that the people who park there come from the President’s Office. So the issue should be addressed to officials in the President’s Office who have decided that they are above any decent way of doing things. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, also part of the problem is that the park belongs to Kampala City Council. The Commission does not have authority over it. We need to negotiate.

MR BYANYIMA: But much as it belongs to the city council, as Members of Parliament, who should take the lead in protecting the environment? We cannot afford to let the President’s Office just come and park in those gardens just because they are constructing a building. It should stop immediately.

4.44
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this report and also convey the gratitude of the people of Iganga to the Ministry of Water for the provision of piped water to Iganga town. (Applause)

The Ministry of Water has not only ended at that but they have provided three garbage collection trucks that work from Monday to Saturday. The Iganga community is really grateful for this. The people even told me that Iganga is now long overdue to qualify for municipal status because it is very clean. 

Allow me to also convey the disappointment of the constituents of Kigulu South to the Ministry of Energy. We have stalled power projects that were started way back in 2001 but up to today nothing has been done. It is as if the Ministry of Energy is playing hide and seek. When you go to Umeme, they tell you, “That is under UEDCL”. When you go to UEDCL, they tell you, “REA is supposed to handle that”. We do not know who will attend to the people of Kigulu South as far as this stalled project is concerned. There is no economic sense in starting new projects when there are those that only require transformers and energising the lines. That is the message from the people of Iganga. 

The other one is to do with the old pipeline. I would entirely agree with the committee that there is need for us to expedite the process of installing or completing the process of constructing the pipelines. Our people are now helpless. The Ministry of Energy came and surveyed land and told the people not to do anything on their land because they will compensate them. Those whose houses were affected do not know what to do; they do not know the way forward. Can the Ministry of Energy help the people by letting them know what the next step is?  

Allow me thank the ministry again for the battle they have waged on buveera, but I would still appeal to government that let us not change goal posts. Since we have political events ahead of us, let us not mix this with politics. It is my humble prayer that we have a firm position on this in as far as the buveera issue is concerned and we have them banned for the betterment of Uganda.  

The business community has begun making petitions. In today’s New Vision, I saw a cartoon of people going to State House to petition the President. Since the President was for this, I pray that government does not change position. We have better means of securing votes and we shall win. We still have issues that we can tell our people to woo them to give us votes. So we should not change our position on the issue of buveera. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Santos comes, I want the Ministry of Finance to tell this House and the country, in relation to this ban. I am aware that Kenya and Tanzania have not effected the ban. Actually they are manufacturing for the Uganda market. I want you to tell us how you will enforce the ban when the other countries have not enforced it. You think about it and come tell us.

4.48
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would also like to thank the Committee on Natural Resources for the good report produced. 

I have two points. The first point is on increasing access to modern energy in this country. I see a problem in rural electrification in this country. The European countries have developed very fast because of rural electrification. In this country, I look at the rural electrification programme being implemented only on one side of the country. I come from West Nile, Adjumani District, but rural electrification programme is not on the ground at all. Year in, year out, the government has been promising -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order. There is a point of order.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member who is geographically known to be representing Adjumani District on the eastern bank of River Nile to continuously deceive this house and the world that he comes from West Nile and yet we know that he comes from East Nile? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member is speaking for his neighbours of West Nile. (Laughter)

MR SANTOS PIRO: Madam Speaker, thank you for your ruling -

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the honourable member did not say he is from West of the Nile but he says he is from West Nile as a region. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Santos.

MR PIRO SANTOS: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Omach Jachan for that clarification. However, I would like to inform the honourable member that politically Adjumani District is plotted in West Nile, therefore, up to date the district remains in West Nile even in terms of development.

What I was trying to say is that year in, year out, the region of West Nile has been promised connection to the national grid as far as electrification in this country is concerned. To date nothing has been done especially in Adjumani and Moyo districts which have been left out; the people in Adjumani have been living in darkness. The people of Adjumani and Moyo also want to enjoy the modern technologies of internet services, watching Big Brother Africa and also finding pen pals through the internet and other services. Even mere manufacturing, fabrication of doors and windows -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members. No, I am telling them to give you time.

MR PIRO SANTOS: Even mere fabrication of doors and windows, our people have to come all the way to Kampala from West Nile and it is expensive to transport all these gadgets. Therefore, the Ministry of Energy should have a plan to connect West Nile to electricity.

The other issue I would like to point out is that I have seen a lorry full of wires probably meant for rural electrification being carried to aluminium manufacturing industries around the country. I wonder whether the Ministry of Energy has got interested in finding out where these suppliers pick these wires from. Maybe these are wires meant for rural electrification that are being supplied to the aluminium and iron sheet manufacturing industries. This is a very big loss to the taxpayers - if that is the case. Therefore, the Ministry of Energy should really try to find out where these materials carried to aluminium sheet manufacturing industries come from.

On page 14, the committee talked about water for production. The committee mentioned that the ministry was putting in place various dams in different parts of this country. Water for production in this country, which is blessed with water – it is a shame! It seems the ministry does not have a proper programme meant for water for production in agriculture, livestock farming areas and so forth.

I am saying this because I happen to have had the privilege to travel with the Minister of Water and the officials to South Africa to find out how water for production is being handled. In this country you find that there is a wrangle between the Ministry of Agriculture and that of Water and Environment as far as water for production is concerned and as a result the people of Uganda are getting improper services for water for production. I would like the Minister of Water to assert to this august House how far her ministry has gone in solving the issue of controlling water for production in this country. The wrangles that have been going on between the two ministries of Agriculture and that of Water are causing problems in as far as water for production at farm gate is concerned -(Member timed out_)

4.55
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity and in debating this report, I would like to remind ourselves and the country of our pledge, our commitment and our obligation in meeting Millennium Development Goal No. 7 which talks about environmental sustainability.

I will restrict my submission to the Ministry of Water and Environment. The high rate of disease burden that this country is grappling with is still attributed to poor sanitation and poor hygiene and we have always had this long outstanding and perennial problem of poor sanitation in Uganda. It appears something has fundamentally gone wrong with community mobilisation towards issues of good sanitation and good hygiene. I would like to know from the minister what strategy the ministry has put in place in order for us to mobilise our people towards good sanitation and good hygiene.

Before I came in for this plenary, I perused through the committee’s report for last year and there was one fundamental recommendation made by this committee that water be exempted from VAT in order to make it affordable to all Ugandans. I would like to know either from the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Water how far have they gone with this very fundamental recommendation.

Under the National Forestry Authority, I would like to appeal and also recommend that National Forestry Authority finds an appropriate way of resettling people who are settled on land that is purportedly owned by Government, in order to avoid unrest. I am saying this because we have read, seen and witnessed, and in certain instances, people have even lost their lives because of evictions in areas or on land that is owned by NFA. I think the minister should tell us what the standard practice of evicting these people is. What does the law say? Should they be given prior notice or does the National Forestry Authority wake up one day and tell the people to leave the place the next day? Our people should get to understand this so that we avoid issues of unrest when it comes to resettling them in areas that are owned by NFA.

Madam Speaker, under NEMA, there is also a very high rate of reclaiming wetlands, as if the world is ending tomorrow. I am not a prophet of doom, and the world is not about to end; but people are really reclaiming wetlands in this country - within Kampala and in towns outside Kampala. May I also know from the ministry the strategy they have in place to avert this crisis? 

Finally, we are debating the report of the Committee on Natural Resources and we normally say that Uganda is a country “gifted by nature”. Why don’t we live in fulfillment of this good saying? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.00 
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity to contribute to this report, and I would also like to thank the committee for a well written report. I want to make a few comments or observations. The first one is on pages 9 and 13, and it is to do with the proposal to reallocate that fund to rural electrification. We have so many schemes which have stalled in the rural areas, but it would also help us if this government fulfilled the pledges on rural electrification, which the President has often made in many areas. To mention but a few, I have presidential pledges for rural electrification in Ryama and Kameruka, which is in Budaka Constituency, but there are also those in Buseeta and Kasasira in Kibuku Constituency, in Pallisa District. 

I would also like to comment on the Malaba-Jinja oil pipeline. If this pipeline is finished, it will assist us in very many areas. It will reduce on the traffic and fatal accidents which are caused by these heavy trucks on that road. It will also help us to increase the lifespan of our roads, because these heavy trucks do a lot of damage on our roads. 

I would like to request the Minister of Water and Environment to help my people in Budaka, and give us piped water instead of giving us deep wells. There is water in Kamonkoli, and Ikiki, a growing area, is only 10 kilometres from Kamonkoli. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to request the minister to supply water in those areas, instead of digging deep wells. I beg that you give us piped water from Kamonkoloi to Ikiki, and also from Kamonkoli to Budaka. These are areas with piped water, and are not faraway from Kamonkoli.

On the same note, I would like to agree with Mama Mabira that sanitation is a big problem in this country. If you look at the growing trading centres, they get water from wells and springs, but these wells and springs are downstream and yet shops and pit latrines are put upstream; and that water flows from the latrines to the springs. So, when they are making plans for safe water, I want them to consider those growing trading centres which use latrines and yet they draw water from springs found downstream. 

Madam Speaker, I also wanted to comment on recycling of polythene bags, on pages 18 and 19. I visited South Korea sometime back, and I found out that they have a factory which cost them only US$ 4 million. This factory recycles polythene bags, and from these, they make big containers which they use for garbage collection. So, instead of thinking of banning the buveera of Uganda and since you are not banning the buveera of Kenya, Tanzania and other neighbouring countries, you should think of getting such factories to recycle these buveera, in order to get better materials which we can use. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.05
MR FREDERICK MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to say a word of thanks to the committee for a job well done. Secondly, I take this opportunity to thank the Ministry of Water and Environment, and the Ministry of Energy, for the good work they are doing, given the fact that these ministries are so demanding. I really want to say that we appreciate the kind of work that has been done by both ministries. To many who are pessimists, they will always see challenges as big obstacles which cannot be overcome, but at least a word of thanks goes to them.

I heard some of my colleagues talk about Umeme and one of them referred to Umeme as a monster. I would like to add my voice to that of my colleagues to say that the Ministry of Energy needs to do a lot with Umeme. It is quite unfortunate that the agreement between Government and Umeme is meant to run for 20 years, but four years down the road, we already have a very big problem with them. There is a lot of public outcry on so many issues: On service delivery; the billing system; and the tariffs; and I remember that sometime back, there was a probe committee which came up and many of us thought that this committee would handle the issue of the problems arising out of Umeme. Unfortunately, I was told that it basically centered around the issue of the tariffs. I urge the minister concerned to take serious concern over the issues that are being raised on the part of Umeme. 

So many of my constituents are complaining, especially on the issue of billing. Many transformers are being vandalised, but even during a time when people are not consuming power, the bills still come and you find that someone who has not consumed power for about five months still gets a bill for those five months. I wonder what has gone wrong. 

On the issue concerning the metres, recently, we had a situation where most of the metres were changed and consumers are complaining. They are paying threefold or four times the bills that they used to pay before these metres were changed. All these are concerns that have to be looked into. 

Today, as I came into Parliament, I came across a fact sheet from Umeme talking about an improvement in the collection rate to 97 percent. Well, that is okay, but I do not think that we should concentrate on issues of improving the collection rate while ignoring the quality of services being delivered to our people. I, therefore, urge the Minister of Energy to do all it takes to ensure that at least something is done in that area. 

Lastly, I have commented on the challenges that are being faced by the minister. However, on the issue of rural electrification, huge sums of monies are being sunk into this project and I want to raise the issue of equity in distribution for the minister to consider. 

So many power projects have been started in my area in Kagoma, just like hon. Muwuma said, and they delivered poles and wires in some places, but those poles have stayed there for several months and years, and some are rotting. Surely, I am concerned, and my people are wondering what the essence of bringing poles -(Member timed out_)

5.10 
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to thank the committee for their precise report. I have a few recommendations and observations to make. 

One of the activities of equity in distribution is to protect our environment, but I am concerned on how they are doing it. Therefore, I want to support the recommendation of the committee that we need to support equity in distribution by providing them with an armed unit to protect the environment. Personally, that recommendation is very good and it should be implemented. 

In the North and some parts of Eastern Uganda, we have species of a tree called sheer nut butter, and that tree is very important. From it, you can get cooking oil and soap, and it produces very good charcoal. It is a tree that our people used in the olden days to protect the environment, in a sense that there was a custom whereby women were not supposed to use that tree for firewood, and men were not supposed to cut it for building. That custom was so good, because it preserved those trees. That tree has a lifespan of over 30 years and it produces fruit. But we have lost that culture and the government is not doing enough to protect that specie. We are losing them; and they are becoming rare. Government should tackle this and perhaps assign the Ministry of Trade so that we add value to it. That is one of the income-generating activities for the people of the North and eastern parts of Uganda. I feel that that concern must be considered. 

I also want to talk about deforestation and tobacco growing in West Nile. Madam Speaker, our environment has been destroyed because our people completely rely on tobacco growing and Government is not showing concern, since it is getting a lot of taxes from them. But the people of West Nile have lost their environment because we cut the trees to cure the tobacco and yet they get very little money from that tobacco. We do not have any alternative. The people rely only on tobacco growing, but at the same time, they are destroying the environment. They are not planting any new trees and the old trees are gone; we can see the effect of climate change. Cutting down those trees is worsening the situation, and we are near Sudan - a desert area; our area will soon become a desert area. Therefore, I need Government’s intervention here. 

On the issue of health, tobacco is something which almost the whole world is now condemning. I want our government to come out strongly and condemn tobacco-growing in West Nile, and introduce other alternatives so that our people also benefit. 

I want to mention a few things about Umeme. It is of grave concern. We have been over-charged and indeed, even the committee has reported that when UMEME was inherited from UEB, they had losses of 23 percent. But the reason was that they wanted them to improve. But now they are operating at losses of 40 percent. Now, what is the use of having Umeme? We may even recommend that we go back to UEB where the losses were a bit less than today. (Member timed out_) 

5.16
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report well done. I have a few concerns, and the first has to do with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

I want to urge the minister to keep updating Parliament about mineral discoveries and petroleum explorations on annual basis, because we always get this information from newspapers. The shadow minister has actually put it right; that they become part and parcel of our account about how wealthy Uganda is. So, there is need for Parliament to be updated about every discovery - the quantities, such that we can actually be on board. 

I want to thank the Minister of Water and Environment. In my constituency, they have started opening up the boundaries -(Laughter)- such that landlords can know where their land stops and even the forest authorities know where their land begins. I am talking like that because recently, after opening the boundaries, it was established that some of the forest land has squatters. Some of these squatters were settled by the government officials like the parish chief, sub-county chief and purported landlords. 

But what annoys me is that when NFA comes to evict these squatters and the squatters have agreements, purported agreements, they do not consider, or there is no charge attached to the person who actually sold them those lands. So, I want to urge the ministry that before evicting the so-called encroachers, if they actually bought the land from a landlord or a Government official, some action should be taken.

The committee has recommended that they should use force, but I want to advise Parliament and the entire ministry that at the stage where the world is, we need collaborative forestry management, because if you stay near the forest, you will have to get medicine from the forest. But if a forest is going to be guarded by a gun, you will not be able to differentiate between somebody who is going to cut a tree, or to get medicine from the forest, or even fruits. So, the idea of using force should not be very much emphasised. Let us work as Ugandans; let us sensitise the communities around the forests about the benefits and the dangers.

On the issue of polythene bags, I really agree with the ministry; let us ban polythene bags. The concern that there is no alternative use, is not called for, because long ago, about 10 years ago, we did not have polythene bags; people were using paper bags. Now, the question is, where did the factories for paper bags go? Let us take serious steps to ensure that polythene bags are banned because of recent I have been seeing paper bags coming up. So, when they hear the entire Parliament saying that think about the policy, those businesses are going to close; let us ban polythene bags. Let the discipline begin with Uganda; even if in Kenya or Tanzania they continue to produce, let us not destroy our country.

On the issue of land, a lot has been talked about compensations, that is, within the Ministry of Lands, the Ministry of Agriculture acquiring land for various projects. I want to urge the ministry that now that we have the Land Bill, and it is soon going to be debated in this Parliament, I would love it, if the ministry can find time to sit and come up with all the relevant amendments they would like to make on the Land Bill, such that we can debate them once and for all.

I want to end by thanking the Ministry of Water for providing water to Mukono District.

5.22
MR GORDON SEMATIKO (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I would like to point out some few issues. 

On page 4, the Ministry of Energy - in the planned activities- has no item on rural electrification, yet we have several pledges in my constituency. These include: A power line from Bulera to Kyamusi Health Centre, and to Kyantungo Health Centre. These are neither highlighted in the report nor in the ministerial policy statement. 

Of recent, there have been some helicopters or small jets flying around my constituency, and rumour has it that they are doing a geological survey. The population is wondering. Others are saying that they are coming to take our land because we have a lot of land disputes. So, if it is true that the Ministry of Energy is carrying out geological surveys, I think the population is supposed to be informed. Some people were even planning, and are saying, “The moment this plane lands we shall burn it because they are coming to take our land.” So, it is important to inform us of what is going on.

On page 14, under Ministry of Water’s planned activities, I would like to thank the ministry for having availed water to Mityana town –(Applause)- it is flowing, but unfortunately, there is no sewer line, and people are complaining because the few streams used are getting  contaminated. 

The rates are also deemed to be high. We need to look at the tariffs, not only in the rural areas, but even here in Kampala. Recently, there was an article in the newspapers that some MPs, or was it ministers, had cheated on Water. That is because, for sure, the tariffs are relatively high.

In my constituency, we are among the stressed areas, but there is no plan for valley tanks or valley dams because during the dry season the boreholes are also dry.

Also, there is no provision for water for most schools. The biggest population of Uganda stays in a school environment and if we do not provide water for the schools as a first priority, it is as if we have denied the biggest percentage of the population clean water. And what the ministry and the district local government have done is to provide boreholes at the lower end of the school, yet most of the schools have no sewer lines. They are using latrines. As such, water from both the latrines and the bathrooms flows downhill where the borehole is. So, I think we need a policy for our schools, to ensure that most of the schools have a clean water source.

On page 17, among the achievements, they recovered 570 hectares from encroachers, but the way National Forestry Authority handles these people - as a colleague, hon. Nsubuga, earlier stated - leaves a lot to be desired. Some of them, like those in my constituency, were actually given this land by the same organisation so that they could grow crops and at the same time maintain the trees. Some of them defaulted, but the way they were evicted was very inhuman. So, I think National Forestry Authority must also mind the way they are evicting the people. No wonder some people have turned against them. Recently, in Mukono and some other areas, the wanainchi went ahead to lynch these people -(Member timed out_)

5.26
MR HASSAN KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Honourable members, I thank you too. I think there is something wrong; there is a serious diversion of attention by the government. If you look at the reasons for privatisation, it was meant to improve efficiency. In Arua, WENRECO has escaped after messing up the production and distribution of electricity. The ministers have been here, yet even their role of supervising the performance of WENRECO has not been performed. If privatisation was to solve the problem by giving the work to Umeme, why don’t we also privatise your work as ministers, because you have also failed to do your work? (Laughter)

While complaints are taken to Government about the ill-performance of any organisation like WENRECO and Umeme, the very government does not take action on that ill-performance of WENRECO. So, it means that privatisation must either be scrapped or extended to you. (Laughter) Government is losing a lot of money, and a lot of time which was meant for development. 

If electricity does not reach Arua, Yumbe, Moyo and Koboko, it will not reach Obongi. So, the time is being wasted. Obongi’s time was wasted in Arua by WENRECO - (Laughter)– yes, Obongi’s time to get electricity is wasted in Arua.

MS BAKO: Thank you my brother for giving way. Not so long ago, the minister was supposed to update us, as people from Arua, as to when we would get power from Nyagak. It is exactly two weeks today and we have not received any update. So, hon. Fungaroo, when your time of getting energy in Obongi is being delayed in Arua, hold your brother hon. D’Ujanga responsible, and directly so, with hon. Omach. (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, my sister. On a very serious note, when we saw the exploration of oil taking place in West Nile, Pakwach, Rhino Camp and Obongi, we took a deep breath of relief saying, “Ok, if they delay with the hydropower, now oil is being explored here. This will be the best shortcut for us.” However, they only declared that there was no oil in Rhino Camp but there was no report on the oil exploration in Pakwach and Obongi. What is happening? Is it true that there is no oil in the whole of West Nile? Is this not malice, Madam Speaker? Are they not malicing West Nile including Obongi? You did not bring hydropower and you did not complete Nyagak. Owen Falls Dam has been here all these years and you have not brought power to Obongi and West Nile. Nyagak is not completed; oil is not there; there is no report. What are you doing? (Laughter)

Now, my minister, hon. Kasigwa, cried and I cried with him on the issue of the licence - the agreement of the oil exploration in Uganda. Assuming we respect institutions and we are conscious of the fact that the existence of a government in place is a temporary thing, and the departure of a government from power is a permanent possibility. Now, assuming that you go now and you have not given us any information about the agreements signed, where shall we start from? You are supposed to leave because you are not performing! 

Madam Speaker, I am very happy about the time you have given me but these ministers should not waste our time or malice us. We need power in Obongi today!

5.32
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting the report. I would also like to thank the shadow ministers for their report. 

I would like to address myself to one issue that has been raised by the committee, which is under performance in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The reason given is the failure to fill vacant posts, which is not an isolated situation, because it has been mentioned in the Ministry of ICT and other ministries. 

Is it possible for the hon. Prime Minister to tell this House why these vacant posts are not being filled, because we are seeing inefficiencies in ministries.  My problem is that the Wage Bill is provided and allocated. What is done with the Wage Bill provided by this Parliament? 

The next point I would like to address myself to, is the Ministry of Water and Environment. I would like to start by thanking the hon. Minister of Water and Environment for the production of water in Apac District in Olami A and Olelpek. 

I would like to tell the minister that the two dams are a drop in the ocean in Apac, and we would like some more. I would like to say something about these deep-water wells – boreholes. These have been provided in most of the primary schools in Uganda, and I would like to congratulate the minister for that. 

But when these water wells break down, it is a problem, because we all know that primary school children cannot do without water. I would like to suggest that the ministry thinks of providing alternative ways of maintaining the deep-water wells, particularly in schools.

I am sure the Minister of Health will agree with me that these deep-water wells have actually contributed to the reduction of intestinal infection by worms. So, madam minister, try your best to find ways of maintaining these water wells in schools.

Last but not least, there have been occasions in Apac District, where money meant for these deep-water wells was diverted. Those involved were arrested, and I am appealing to the government not to say that these people were arrested because of their political orientation. They did something bad - money meant for boreholes was diverted and the boreholes could not be sunk.

5.36
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by seeking for clarification from the Minister for Water, as to when the Gulu water works on River Tochi will resume. In Uganda, Gulu town is the next most populated town after Kampala. The population of Gulu is big - and even when you look at the other infrastructure and the institutions available in the town, Gulu requires this as a necessity. So, when will these water works by the World Bank resume?

Secondly, I hear people talking about sinking of boreholes – but boreholes also drain the soil. I do not know what the ministry is doing, because when you sink a borehole, for environmental purposes, you should be able to plant trees around those areas where you are sinking these boreholes. But if you go on sinking boreholes, in the long-run, these areas are going to get dry; yet you are the same ministry - so what are you thinking? Sinking boreholes alone is not enough; because the environment needs to be protected?

I am a little bit disappointed with NEMA. I only wish that the roles and responsibilities of NEMA are taken  up by the National Forestry Authority. If you look at the money we are giving to NEMA and the National Forestry Authority, and you go around to see the work that the National Forestry Authority is trying to do - I do not want Members of Parliament to look at the National Forestry Authority with a lot of suspicion especially when they evict people, because they are fulfilling their mandate; and we are the ones who put the laws in place. 

We should, therefore, not make U-turns when we come here, because the National Forestry Authority is performing its duties, and we say no, the National Forestry Authority should not do this. We made the law; if we want to change, then we should come back here and amend the laws.

The municipalities are putting a lot of pressure on the National Forestry Authority to shift forest reserves from towns to elsewhere, and I want to give an example of Fort portal, Gulu and Mbale municipalities. I urge the ministry not to listen to these municipal authorities because forests can co-exist with urban growth. You do not need to shift the forests - although pressure from urban centres is now a lot because they have allocated themselves prime plots and they are telling National Forestry Authority, “You can go somewhere else, we shall buy you land maybe 30 kilometres away.” That is backwardness. Our municipal leaders should know that forest existence is part and parcel of urban growth; so we need these forests to remain in town. 

I was a little disappointed when we met the National Forestry Authority and asked them what role they played in CHOGM. They said that they had actually applied to plant trees during CHOGM with all their expertise and experience but government denied them the opportunity. Actually their bid was lower but government decided to give somebody who does not know how to plant trees Shs 4 billion to plant trees along Kampala-Entebbe Road. They would have done it much better and at a much cheaper cost but I really do not know how government operates. There is a government agency, which can do the work but because of money, you deny them that responsibility and give it to fraudsters! If you move along Entebbe Road, you barely see these trees, but we spent Shs 4 billion.

On energy, I want the committee to know that the management of the house where Uganda Electricity Distribution Company sits is Amber House Limited, an entity that is self accounting to this Parliament in its rightful role. I, therefore, would like to know why the Ministry of Energy is not paying rent to Amber House yet you budget year in year out for rent. Why are you not paying rent to Amber House Limited? Why do you subject them to these difficulties yet you have given them authority to manage this property? Why? (Member timed out_)

5.41
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take off from where hon. Reagan Okumu has ended. I just want to make a correction on the last statement that he made. I have been in the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and this statement in the report about the Ministry of Energy not paying rent is not true. In the last session, when hon. Odit was the chair, we undertook summons after we had got that information from the management of Amber House that the Ministry of Energy was not paying. We summoned the PS and the PS brought all the relevant documentation. The management of Amber House apologised for having given wrong information regarding the Permanent Secretary who was the accounting officer of the ministry. I think that information needs to be cross checked and corrected. 

When we look at this fact sheet here, which we found on the table about Umeme, it lays out the objectives and achievements. It shows that 95 percent has been achieved and if this were true then we would be seeing wonders from Umeme, but it is not the case. So I doubt the correctness of the information, which has been distributed to this House today. May I know from the Minister of Energy why Umeme does not allow UNBS to check their meters? Can the Minister of Energy explain that to us?

Can I also know what has happened to the MD of Umeme? We have had financial institutions collapsing because the executive directors were awarding themselves excessive bonuses. You have heard what has happened in Nigeria in the banks. We have also read in the papers about this man who was getting Shs 102 million per month yet Ugandans are paying heavily with the poor service delivery to the people of this country.

I support the position of the committee regarding the reallocation of Shs 30 billion from building the proposed headquarters to rural electrification such that the people of Kasilo can also benefit from this extension. They have lived for a very long time without electricity after the line was vandalised in 1989. 

I also want to seek clarification because we have read in the papers that the Minister of Energy, Hon. Hilary Onek is moving to nationalise Umeme. How true is this? I would be in support of this because of what is happening now and I think we need to have that policy reversal.

Dr Mallinga a few days ago moved to ban the sale of waragi in sachets. Can the Minister of Environment help the minister by banning polythene paper production because it is the one encouraging the packaging of waragi in sachets? We should do this fast because we have seen loss of lives as has been reported, and this has continued. 

Madam Speaker, you remember when we were in Gulu for these regional conferences. The people of Northern Uganda in Gulu brought to your attention the request to ban the packaging of waragi liquor in polythene papers because one, children are getting spoilt. They go to school with these sachets in their pockets. Two, the women of Northern and Eastern Uganda have complained that the men who take this waragi have failed to perform. (Laughter) That is what was reported in that conference and it is true. So can we save the future generation of the people in the affected areas?

These are the issues that I feel should be taken seriously regarding this ministry. The specific issue is liquor packaging. Let us all come out strongly and help the enforcement of the ban. Let us help the Minister of Health to enforce this because it is not good for our generation, for our children and for our people. We should be on the front line in banning this and ensuring that this is enforced. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, just for the record, when we returned from the outreach in Gulu, I wrote to the Executive Director of the Uganda Bureau of Standards enumerating those nine noxious drinks and asking them to tell me what these things are and also verify what I had heard in Gulu. They have neither acknowledged my letter nor have they answered since May and this is now September.

5.47
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to start by thanking the chair for very effectively presenting the report. In a special way, allow me to thank our Shadow Minister of Energy for representing us very effectively by elaborating clearly the alternatives he provides for this country concerning this sector. Ninety percent of Ugandans use charcoal and firewood as sources of energy for cooking. I believe about 80 percent of Members of Parliament use charcoal for cooking in their houses. This is not because they are not able to access to electricity but because the tariffs are so high for them to afford. The urban centres in Uganda that have electricity only use it for lighting but not for cooking because of the high tariffs. I agree with the Shadow Minister for Energy that access to electricity and poor rural electrification in the country is letting us down.

I want then to ask the Minister of State for Energy - I have interacted with him many times over the issue of rural electrification and he has often told me they are providing as a ministry some cheap solar alternatives especially for schools and communities that are able to at least contribute 10 percent, but I have not seen any in my area of Northern Uganda.

On page 6 of the committee report where the ministry proposed activities, one of them is to promote financing mechanisms for solar technology and this is a clear manifestation that they really had it in plan. I want to ask the minister: where is this plan and how long should we wait for this before our poor rural women can access some sort of lighting, and in order for our schools to stop using what in my language we call “laputu”? When you go to any boarding school in my district, we do not have lighting systems. If you happen to visit any of my schools in my district, you will see how the young girls are using local lighting systems and this increases the emissions in the country. That is why we have a very bad climate. I wish the minister would talk about that.

My second and last concern is on how NEMA can really act as an institution mandated by this country, on behalf of Ugandans, and spearhead an aggressive education system for Ugandans to learn to sustainably use the environment. I say this because, for instance, we cannot stop women from cutting trees. I cannot for example go and begin telling my people, my women from Pader, to stop cutting trees to make charcoal for sale. This would be telling them not to feed their children. How will they survive? This is because they survive on charcoal and firewood for everything in their life. 

I want NEMA to come out clearly as an institution mandated by this country to responsibly spearhead an aggressive education campaign to show us the way we can sustainably use our environment. I suggest having childhood education systems that will encompass how to use the environment sustainably. And this should go down to the smallest unit of our society, that is, the family.

I say this because all of us have seen that climate change has already come and it has started affecting us very much. This year alone, we have experienced a lot of drought and the majority of Ugandans have not been able to access food despite all the efforts they put in to cultivate or to till their land. People were not able to reap anything and next year we are going to experience worse famine than ever before because of climate change. NEMA, together with -(Member timed out_)

5.53 
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): I thank the committee for this report and I thank especially these two ministries for upholding the mandate of keeping our natural resources and managing them sustainably.

I have two or three problems that I want to put across, the first one being how we are actually praising the alternative source of natural waters for consumption by sinking a series of boreholes. First of all, these are not deep wells. These are shallow wells because when we need them most is when the taps are dry. The ministry should be able to review the strategy they use to sink these boreholes. More so, when pipes are dry, that is when they attract a lot of underground decadence. At the time the water table rises, you find that the pipes are rotten more or less. Therefore, we want to make sure that the ministry engages effective materials and good engineers who can fix the boreholes properly.

Number two, on our state of the environment, one of the biggest contributors to environmental degradation is the Vice-President of this country. The Vice-President has gone all over the country promoting only one crop and that is rice. Monoculture is discouraged in the agricultural sector; over and over this crop consumes the same type of food, minerals and nutrients. They have not provided a crop rotation pattern. So, how on earth, do you expect the soils to retain nutrients? In the past we used to grow paddy rice, but now upland rice has come on board, which means both sources of our natural nutrients are suffering. The paddy rice is consuming from the wetlands while nutrients from the upper lands are being taken away by the upland rice. Without a check on this activity, we will soon get into problems.

My last comment relates to what has been quoted in this House by the shadow minister. It relates to Article 244(1) and (4). If it is true that there is no clear definition of where petroleum belongs and that it is neither a solid, liquid nor a gas, then what is it? We need to work on this because it is being treasured throughout the country. We need to know where this petroleum, as a product, falls.

Finally, as Article 244 is being cited, minerals are supposed to be a preserve of government. We know that minerals exist all over this country. But should government develop the interest of mining any of them, it means the people in those areas will be affected by way of being relocated elsewhere. I notice that this is one careful way of grabbing people’s land. I would like to suggest that when time for the constitutional amendment comes, we should revisit this provision. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.58
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee together with the spokespersons of the Opposition on environment. I would like to restrict myself to two issues and should I repeat myself, I will be doing it as a matter of emphasis.

Let me start with the issue of forests and forest cover in this country. The committee seems to have emphasised the role of the National Forestry Authority as the only entity that would help in developing a forest cover, but I think this is a mistake. The ministry and government should come out boldly to state that every Ugandan is responsible for developing a forest cover in this country. There must be a deliberate policy to reforest Uganda. The role of the Authority should therefore be to provide cheap seedlings to every village of Uganda for Ugandans to plant trees. 

And for those who are involved in charcoal burning, we need another piece of legislation to say for example that, “Before you cut a tree, please report to the LC”, and that such a person should plant a certain number of trees. That is how it is done in other countries. I really do not know why we are being soft on this issue. Even areas like those in Ankole where there is no more forest cover, nobody is talking about planting trees. Nobody is sensitising Ugandans about the need for trees. The ministers just wait for the President to talk before they start acting yet they are given ministries to manage. Why don’t you sensitise Ugandans –(Ms Kabakumba rose_) I am very informed about this matter. I do not need any information. Now she is jumping from information to order?

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I am raising on a point of order with a lot of pain. My colleague, hon. Ben Wacha, has been in this House for a long time receiving policies from government including those from the Ministry of Water and Environment. He also is aware that government has been advocating for tree planting. Even some Members in this House including those from Ankole - if hon. Charles Ngabirano for Rwampara were here - would give testimony. Even myself, I also plant trees. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Ben Wacha to deliberately mislead this House by saying that government is not advocating tree planning whereas he knows that it is a key government policy to promote tree planting?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we need to be realistic. What I know is that what hon. Wacha is talking about is not to involve only the 300 Members of Parliament but the whole country. For example, in Rwanda, every Thursday people plant trees from 8 a.m. to 12 noon and that is throughout the country. He is talking about the whole country, not just selected people.

MR WACHA: I hope the Clerk at Table has recorded that I have received information, which is not useful, and has eaten my time. (Laughter)

On the issue of seedlings that are cheap – I think this is important. I have been to the seedling source at Namanve to pick some seedlings, but I got surprised to find these seedlings are more expensive than the ones from my local sources. Please, ensure the seedlings are cheap for the people of Uganda to access them. By the way, I am also a tree planter and over the weekend I planted 400 seedlings.

Secondly, let me talk about polythene bags, whose banning people are agitating. I would like to suggest that we should go on to criminalise production and usage of these polythene bags. These things were not there at the time of creation. It is a very recent invention, but a very destructive one. I even wonder why some senior individuals in government have become apologists of the producers of these polythene bags. (Laughter) It is really a shame. These things are destructive; we should criminalise their usage.

Third, let me go to electricity tariffs. We have been talking about rural electrification. When we talk about rural electrification, we are only talking about the coverage of electricity in the country; we also talk about the usage of electricity in the rural areas. However, at the current rate of tariffs, the usage of electricity in the rural areas is going to be a pipedream. I do not see the people in my local area, Anyeke, using electricity. Whereas I would like to thank you very much for extending power to Oyam Town, I would like to say that it is going to be a useless exercise if we continue with these tariffs. Something must be urgently done about these tariffs because they are a burden to Ugandans.

Fourth, I have a comment on petroleum exploration. I know that we are emphasising the exploration of petroleum or oil, but we are not seeing the fact that we can also get cheap alternative fuel through biofuels. In some countries, there are laws that require that for every 80 percent of petroleum, there should be a mix of 20 percent of bio fuel. This does not only make it cheaper, it also helps the producers of bio fuels earn some income. For example, if you are using cassava as a bio fuel, you encourage the planting of cassava in the country. Cassava will be on demand with the local peasants getting a lot of money yet petroleum becomes cheaper with the use of cassava as a bio fuel. I think we should start thinking about getting laws in place that make it mandatory for petroleum companies to use bio fuel in their production. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.07
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also a tree planter; I have so far planted over 10,000 trees. I can also assure you that this was not with the support of any loan. 

We borrowed about us $40 million for tree planting but we cannot tell who is accessing this money. In Eastern Uganda, the late Kakungulu planted trees without borrowing any money. How come we cannot tell why we borrowed money? I am very suspicious that the Front Bench might be using this money as their loose change that is why you see one of them is getting up on guidance, but without knowing what is taking place. (Laughter)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I do not want to disrupt debates in this House but hon. Nandala is giving sweeping statements and making everybody like – I was in this House when that loan was passed. I would like to tell you that I am planting trees and so far I have planted 25 hectares using my own resources. For the record, I would like to say that I have not used or benefited from any of those schemes. So, is he in order to make sweeping statements without substantiating?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, are you suggesting that the money has not been utilised? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker, because if the money had been utilised, you would have in the report something to tell us the output of that money. Outcry for deforestation is on the increase – as you drive all over the country, where have you seen trees being planted? Instead they are being cut down everyday. (Prof. Kabwegyere rose_) I am well informed. What can you inform me about? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I think we have got to be very fair to ourselves. The honourable member, Daudi Migereko has planted 1,000 hectares and is about to go in for another 10,000 hectares. Also, there are many people in this House who are planting tress, including Hon. Ben Wacha. I also know that in Oyam, seedling plots were developed by the local governments. So, is it in order for anybody to stand in this House and say there is no effort being made to plant trees when the honourable members of this House, like Hon. Reagan Okumu, are planting trees?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you recall, in the last Local Government report discussion we had the farm enhancement project where trees are being planted by the local governments in this country, probably out of that loan. So, there is some work going on, hon. Nandala.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I will be very comfortable if they can produce to this House the list of the beneficiaries of that money in respect of planting trees, district by district. I am saying this because the linkage between trees and electricity is too powerful. You cannot tell us not to cut trees when a villager has no alternative sources of energy. Unless we get alternative sources of energy, tree cutting will go on.

In Kenya, Tanzania, and Rwanda, electricity is cheap yet it is exported from here. What is the rationale? And do you know why the increase is 40 percent? It is because of the cost of connection. I do not know how Umeme brought this theft to us. I am told that to be connected, you have to part with Shs 190,000 and to inspect, you have to pay Shs 45,000; for materials, you pay Shs 100,000 and for them to come and do the work another Shs 100,000. That in total is Shs 435,000. Where will a villager get Shs 435,000 from? What he would resort to is to go and hook the line and when he hooks, that is already wastage. You see, hon. D’Ujanga was working in UEB. It is unfortunate that the man who was in UEB cannot explain why there was a loss. I think it is wastage of money and power because we would put people in those places who can think ahead not people who are thinking in the reverse order.

On VAT, we have heard Umeme saying that they paid Shs 44.5 billion in VAT to URA. I want to tell everybody seated here that the VAT is paid by the last consumer, not Umeme. Let not Umeme lie to us. We the consumers are the ones paying that VAT; they should tell us how much they have paid in terms of corporation tax and how much they have got as subsidies. In fact, if we are to nationalise Umeme, then we have delayed, unless someone in the Ministry of Energy wants to benefit from this. Otherwise, this concession should have been cancelled yesterday. 

I do not know why the Minister of Energy is interested in buveera; probably he has a factory of them. They have put up factories of US $50 million, but the cost of that US $50 million now is over US $100 per year. We lose our soil, we pollute the environment; this cancer we are suffering from is a result of buveera. 

MR OYET: Thank you, hon. Nandala. The information I want to give is in regard to the position of the Minister of Environment disagreeing with banning buveera. When she was appearing before the committee, she was very honest and said that we cannot pass a law that we cannot implement. That in the Financial Year 2007/08, when the partial ban was passed, one of the culprits whose Lorry was caught was a person of high profile - so she asked: why do we get excited and pass a law which we will not implement? She was very honest and she had a point. A government minister was one of the culprits importing the buveera. She said there are some important people behind the creation of these factories. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you. We have invested a lot of money in National Water and Sewerage Cooperation but the returns –(Member timed out_)

6.16
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank the committee for bringing this report. I want to comment on the issue of the Ministry of Environment. This House passed an Act to protect the wetlands. According to this Act, construction of permanent structures in the wetlands is not allowed. But when you go to most wetlands, the Uganda Investment Authority awarded over 30 acres of wetland to investors. Now they have put there permanent structures, they grow maize, rice and cotton which are degrading the wetlands. 

In Kasodo, the 30 acres of land have caused a problem in Pallisa Town. The water pump which pumps to Pallisa Town has dried up as a result of degradation and so water is now a problem in the town. So the issue of political will to protect the wetland must be addressed in this House. The investors have gone ahead to survey the wetlands in order that they may get land titles. I thank our wetlands officer in Pallisa and political officers who have stood their ground and stopped the investors from surveying the wetlands. 

The districts have passed ordinances to make the local people get out of the swamps - I want to know from the minister whether this Act that we passed here is supposed to be implemented in a selective manner. The investors are in the wetlands yet the locals are being chased out of them.

As far as the Ministry of Energy is concerned, I want to know from the minister whether under rural electrification, the people have to pay money for surveys. My people have paid a lot of money to survey the line from Kaboro to Abule and Kameke sub-county. I want the minister to assure me so that my people may know whether they have to pay that money or whether it was just extortion of money from the local communities.

On the issue of water, I want to know from the honourable minister whether the reports in Kigezi about the number of boreholes which have been drilled are correct. I have brought this because in Pallisa, over 48 boreholes have been cited since the 2006/07 Financial Year up to 2008/09. But these boreholes have not yet been drilled. If the money has been allocated for drilling the boreholes, what is happening with that money, because eventually the boreholes are not drilled?

The other thing is the issue of the town councils. The setting of the boundaries in the town councils affects the poor people. In Pallisa Town, 80 percent of the people occupying the town council are poor people and the spot where the piped line ends is over four kilometres to the boundary of the town council. But I am told that they are denied the boreholes and there is no spring water in the town. How are we going to help the poor people in the town councils? Is it possible to revisit the policy so that we have the boreholes drilled in these town settings because the people there are very poor?

Finally, I want to know from the Minister of Water – the issue of boreholes that have not been drilled has not affected Pallisa alone. It is a general problem and it shows how these people are eating the money from government. 

Madam Speaker, people have lamented about Umeme –(Member timed out_)

6.28
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee of Natural Resources for a very good report.

I would like to talk about the issue of water and the environment, and to raise the issue of water for Koboko town council again. Other towns and town councils are rejoicing because they have water. They are thanking the ministers again and again, but the people of Koboko are mourning and cursing the minister because they do not have water. 

I do appreciate the efforts the minister is making to address the problem, but I think that this is just addressing symptoms. She has tried to give us 10 water tanks of 10,000 litres. Unfortunately, during the dry season, these water tanks are useless. 

The minister has again come up with another remedy, to pump water from boreholes and bring it to the town council. We were supposed to have the water in June last year, but today, believe me, there is no drop of water in Koboko town council. The taps and the tanks are there but there is no water. Last July, the honourable Minister of State went there and saw for herself. She promised that by July we shall have water, but up to now, there is no water. What the Ministry of Water is doing is only addressing the symptoms. 

The population of Koboko town council is over 46,000 and even if this emergency water is put in place, within a year or two the water underground would be exhausted. People from the parish where the water is being pumped from are even worried because all the water will be pumped out within a very short time. 

The people of Koboko want a project that will stand the test of time. We want water to be pumped from Kooki to Koboko hill and then have it distributed to the town council and surrounding areas. Time and again they have said that it is expensive. We have been passing billions and billions of money for different ministries including Ministry of Water and Environment. Is it true that we cannot get water for Koboko town council? 

The sanitation situation is worse because of the latrines they use. We had good water called maji muzuri, but today it is condemned, it is maji mbaya because of the water table; the water there is now contaminated. 

I would also like to talk about the National Forestry Authority. I do support them because we should not destroy our environment. However, what is important is that we must talk to the community and explain these problems to them and show them where the boundaries of the forest reserves lie. Currently, they strongly believe that National Forestry Authority has gone beyond its boundaries, and many of our people who had started farming there are now moving to Sudan because of anger. When they go to Sudan, what will they do there? Will they not return as rebels? So, I request the minister to come around and we talk to the people, explain to them and show them the boundaries so that they understand National Forestry Authority. Otherwise, they have developed hatred for NFA and in future they might do them harm.

I would also like to talk about this city of ours. It is an environmental hazard to us. The air we breathe in is full of dust, fumes and particles. If there was a way of filtering it and we see what we inhale, I think we would refuse to breathe it. I am sure that when you go upcountry and then you return to town, you develop some cough because of this environment. 

Why do we have this bad air? It is because of the discharge from these second-hand vehicles that have overpopulated our city. We have talked of reducing the number of second-hand vehicles, but why don’t we eliminate them altogether, so that those who can afford bring in good vehicles that we can use for public transportation, other than everybody coming in with scrap for a car. We need to address this.

Still on the environment we live in, I hope the minister is aware that a blind person cannot walk freely on these streets. A person on a wheelchair cannot move freely because of the manholes and ditches that are everywhere. Can’t you advise the city council to improve the streets such that the environment is friendly to people with disabilities? Let us address the issue of accessibility. 

There is the issue of the environment and the factories in the city. I think the Industrial Area is now very near – (Member timed out_)  

6.31
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have four concerns to raise. The first concern is on electricity. Uganda imported expensive power from Rwanda to supply to Kisoro town. Since the power came, it has been confined to the town and there are those near the town who want to be supplied with power, but they are not getting it. Fortunately, people have the willingness and ability to pay; they have effective demand. The practical question I would like to raise to the minister is: Why shouldn’t electricity be extended to people with effective demand?

The second concern is water for human consumption. We have a sub-county called Muramba. This area used to be supplied with water during Obote I. The pipes are there and the reservoir tanks are there too. However, when the technicians in that ministry decided to move the old reservoir tank to another place, water failed to flow to the sub-county and yet the pipes are there. The irony is that there are two parallel pipes in the same county, and yet none of them is delivering water. Why is this so? The area is known. 

It is also known that water cannot go above a certain gradient. The solution is that it requires electricity to move by about one kilometre and you put a booster pump in order to enable the water to move, but it has taken such a long time. Why wouldn’t a ministry use the technical know-how and the practical knowledge known by lay people like me, to make the water available to those people? 

The third issue, and I think this will go to NEMA or whoever there is in the ministry, is the question of the lagoon in Kisoro. Globally, it is known that lagoons are one of the ways of managing waste in a given society. Indeed, that lagoon was constructed, but it failed because of technical difficulties. I understand because I happen to be a biological scientist; I know how a lagoon can work. The issue is that people are experiencing bio smells and it has become a breeding ground for mosquitoes and water borne diseases. Why should people in that area suffer as if they did not understand or do not know?

The last point I want to make, given the limited amount of time, is on mineral licensing. We have a situation where the law enabling the powers in that ministry to license exploration of minerals seems to be even bigger than the Constitution itself. I will give one example of Bukirwa mines. This mine has been on the table for a long time. The owner of the mine, as far back as 1970, bought it expensively at that time, at Shs 1.3 million, which was a lot of money, and operated it for 20 years. He has been applying for a licence but it was denied him on grounds that, in my view, were not acceptable or technically viable. Of late, he made appeals; but the issue is that the mine was taken away from the rightful owner, in my view, and given to other people.

This mine has changed hands three times now, and none of them seems to be operating it. They have been given exploration licences when the thing is commercial. Even when it was given to other people, the owner was not given any compensation because he had residual interest in the mine. Clause 26 of the Constitution says, if government for any reason has interest in any venture, they can have it but the owner has to be compensated first before entry of that new owner. This has not been done. What is the problem? We need explanations to these questions. I wish to rest my case.

6.32
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done. I will thank the Minister of Water for having provided water to Mpigi town council. This was an achievement on our part, and this is why some of us think that it is better for these important sectors like agriculture to have separate ministries because at least since Ministry of Water and Environment was established, we have realised that they are doing a very good job.

Another point I want to raise is that I take these reports from the other side very importantly. On page 10 of the report from the Shadow Minister of Energy, he pointed out that there is an individual who holds 40 percent shares in Tamu East Africa Ltd. I do not want to leave this as a rumour. I would request the chairperson of this committee to point out this important individual who owns these shares. This is somebody who is going to take the lion’s share of project money, which would have helped many people in Uganda.

Another issue is the allegation that Bujagali project was over cost. I think we should investigate this. If it is true that one kilowatt - I am not very conversant with the terminology - internationally costs US$ 2 million and we are going to have only 250 megawatts at US$ 1 billion then I think that as Parliament and as an institution that is charged with the oversight function, we should look into this and revise this project. 

The same thing applies to Umeme. If all the agreements in the Umeme contract are not being met then I think we should also revise our work with them as a government.

Another issue is that of banning buveera. When I travel to these developed countries, buveera are being used. From Europe and the US, we come back carrying our merchandise in buveera. I think the problem we have is not properly disposing these buveera. 

We are talking about buveera but empty plastic bottles are a menace especially to the drainages in Kampala. For us who live in Bunga and Muyenga, the drainages are blocked by empty bottles. Empty bottles are worse than buveera as far as I am concerned. 

There is a problem of disposal because when you travel especially on these highways, whenever buses are travelling upcountry, you find people consuming water and throwing empty bottles outside. This is another problem. I think we should enforce handling of these plastic bottles. One time I followed a bus which was going to Teso from – (Member timed out)

6.38
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice in thanking the committee for a well researched report, and I wish to thank the Ministry of Water and Environment for availing water to Ibanda town. However, I would like to bring to the attention of the ministry, the need for water in the outskirts of Ibanda. 

I am also concerned about the National Forestry Authority. If you look at page 17 on the key planned outputs for the financial year 2009/2010, it is a tall order. “Raise 9,895,250 seedlings for planting; establish 2.797 hectares of new plantations; maintain 10.882 hectares of established crops; open 639 kilometres of fire lines… open 32 km of forest boundary; construct 30 kilometres of new forest roads…” To me, this is a very tall order considering the amount of money that has been allocated. Shs 1 billion for the development budget is not commensurate with these activities. I urge Government to avail more money to fund the activities of the National Forestry Authority because all of us have noted that we need forest cover, and it is an urgent issue.

In addition to that, on page 19, the committee noted that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Uganda Land Commission; and district land boards were cited in the leasing of wetlands, and this is very unfortunate because these are the same bodies that should be in charge of protecting these wetlands. I concur with the recommendations of the committee that Government desists from leasing of wetlands, and from interfering in the process of reclamation of wetlands, and that it puts in place a strategy to ensure that wetlands are not haphazardly opened up. It is high time these recommendations were observed to the letter so that this problem is sorted out once and for all. 

My other point is on rural electrification. As observed on page 9 where there is this levy of 2 percent on all resources generated under the Electricity Act, and as observed that UEDCL has collected fees to the tune of US$ 50 million, like my colleagues, I submit that this money should be put under the Rural Electrification Agency to extend power to our rural areas. Most of the areas of Ibanda District are not yet covered with electricity and this would go a long way in addressing this anomaly.

On the planned activities of both Ministry of Water and Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Water has clearly come up with their planned activities. They are even showing the geographical locations of where those activities are to take place, but when I look at page 3 of the planned activities of the Ministry of Energy, the geographical allocations have not been brought out, and I wonder why because the major priorities of the ministry are listed, but they do not tell us where these priorities will take place –(Member timed out_)

6.43
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am concerned about the issue of the construction of bulk water transfer. This issue has come up for a long time and I am surprised that in the planned activities of the Ministry of Water for this financial year, they still talk about the pilot construction of bulk water transfer. Quite a number of times, the President has made pledges to areas like Nakasongola promising to give them bulk water transfer. In this financial year, they are talking about the implementation of a pilot project in Rakai. I am worried that this is going to drag on for a long time. The minister is looking at me, but I want to say that this has been on for a long time and it is high time it is implemented, so that it becomes an action point other than being a planned activity all the time. A number of districts, especially those most affected by drought, are crying out and we are waiting for these projects. 

I would like to request the ministry, when designing projects for water in the urban centres, to be more careful with the areas where they are designing. During the dry spell, most of these projects are non-functional. In Nakasongola, Migeera town in particular, they pumped the water underground, and during the dry spell, this project could not operate and the people in the town lacked water. A jerrycan of water was at Shs 2,000 in Migeera town during the dry spell and –(Interruption)

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Member is aware that recently, a team of 10 Members of Parliament and one minister, travelled to Nakasongola and Migeera in particular, for finals of a youth tournament - Tubwita Cup. On our way back to Kampala, we were held hostage by a mob of people in Migeera town and each Member of Parliament was asked to make a commitment that when we get back to Parliament, we shall support their area Member of Parliament on the issue of extension of water to Nakasongola and Migeera town in particular. The guest of honour at that function was the Minister of State in charge of Sports, Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi. We all pledged, and I think I am now doing my part by giving this information.

MS TUBWITA: Thank you for that information. This shows how serious the problem is. It’s high time another method was designed. We can even pump this water from L. Kyoga to reach these urban areas other than the underground water which dries up during the dry season. It is not something which is sustainable. 

I am going to bring the issue of the valley tanks to the attention of the minister. Most of the valley tanks which were constructed need de-silting right now. My district wrote a letter to your ministry, but we did not receive any reply, and you know that Nakasongola was badly hit during the dry season. All our dams dried up and we had no water for production. Our cows died and even the people lacked water. So, Madam Minister, this issue needs urgent attention. Let us have these dams de-silted, and let us have even more dams, because there are just a few of them and yet the area is very big.

I want to talk about the high voltage power. A number of people have constructed houses under the high voltage power lines. Recently, we had a very bad incident in Sseguku when they were renovating a certain building and the person who was doing the renovation was -(Interjections)- you have got the point. The person died. By the time Umeme came, smoke was coming out of the person and the house almost caught fire. So, I would like to request the Ministry of Energy to work hand-in-hand with Umeme -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, 28 Members have contributed to this report and that is our daily average. I have noted the Members who have not contributed and I would like to encourage them to come tomorrow and the other day, especially those who have not been here for sometime. I am now giving affirmative action to those who attend more regularly. So, if you want to speak, come tomorrow. 

Let me now invite the Minister of Energy and ask that if possible, he answers thematically. We shall then hear from the Minister of Water.

6.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank honourable members for raising the pertinent issues regarding the ministry. Inevitably, some of the issues are common and where I can I will answer them at once.

I will start by reacting to the committee’s report. I would also like to thank the chairperson of this committee for the continuous co-operation my ministry has received from them. A number of issues were raised and one which came up very often in the course of the discussion was the question of losses. I would like to clarify - because losses in the power system are defined specifically, but we find that in most cases we interchange terms, and then we lose sight of the figures. 

A case in point is the comment by the committee on page 8 that, “…the performance of Umeme since the concession agreement has proved to be wanting.” The committee noted that at the time Umeme took over from UEB, commercial energy losses stood at 23 percent. Here, we are specifically talking about commercial energy losses. In the same sentence, “…the undertaking was that the losses would go down further, however, the reverse has proved to be true as to date,” -(Interjections)- That is to call hon. Byandala’s attention. Let me continue. “The energy losses…”- now, here we are talking about energy losses as opposed to commercial energy losses. 

I have explained on this floor before that there are two types of losses. There are commercial losses and technical losses. So, if you just say, “energy losses,” then you mean both combined and this is the one referred to as being at 40 percent.  But the commercial losses being mentioned here are 23 and the current position is that the total loss is 33.5 per cent with commercial accounting for 17.5 percent. So, there is need to distinguish between the two. 

But notwithstanding what I have said, most of the discussions here have been on inaccurate bills and so on. In order to check the inaccuracy of bills, I am glad to report that the procurement process has started to install prepaid metering on our system. This will help the consumer to manage the expenses, and that should do away with inaccurate billing.

Now, on the issue of high tariffs, we have explained this before that somewhere during the course of the Seventh Parliament, there was a decision to be made on whether to continue having highly priced electricity or to have no electricity. I remember we chose to have electricity in the meantime, although it would be expensive.  This is just because we are using light diesel to generate electricity. Half of our electricity demand is met by using diesel power stations and these produce electricity at US$ 0.24 per unit, but Government brings down this tariff to around 17. If you take the weighted power from diesel and that from hydro you get the current cost. We hope to bring this tariff down when we start commissioning the renewable energy sources whose timetable I will highlight very shortly.

But at this stage I should also report that the committee which was set up by my ministry to look into ways of reducing tariffs is now sitting under the chairmanship of Gen. Saleh and more discussions will continue as soon as we receive their report.

Let me talk about compensation of land owners. The land matter, Madam Speaker, originates from land ownership as enshrined in our Constitution. You find people encroaching on land under these lines. This is where we concur with the committee and we think that in the near future this should be solved.

On petroleum supply regulations as presented on page 9 of the report, I would like to say that draft regulations have been finalised and sent to the Solicitor-General for clearance.

Madam Speaker, I wish to correct something on levy. This levy is not two percent but five percent. And it is on the bulky supply tariff collected by the Uganda Electricity transmission Company Ltd, and it is usually passed on to the Rural Electrification Fund for the implementation of the rural electrification schemes. 

I must say that it is not enough, and maybe that explains why very few people have acknowledged what we are doing in their constituencies. Who pays it? -(Interjections)- I said it is levied on bulky tariffs. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a financier; I am sure he will understand what that means.

In the report there is something on the oil pipeline to Sudan that is being considered. Whereas it is a good idea to link up the region to a pipeline system to improve the supply of petroleum products, currently we are only working on the Kenya-Uganda pipeline which will be followed by the one to Rwanda and Burundi. We have not started working on the one to Sudan.

I would like to say that compensation for the people on the Kenya-Uganda pipeline is on going. The evaluation of compensation for the Tororo-Jinja portion of the pipeline has been completed. However, the portion between Jinja and the terminal at a place called Nakilembe on the Western side of Kampala has got complications of dual ownership making verification a challenge. We have land owners with titles, but there are bibanja owners too. So it is a bit challenging to establish who to pay.

At the same time, it is important – we cannot say that we have completed the appraisal of the project. This can only be done when the whole route length of the pipeline is acquired. I can report that government is going to do two things: one will be the instrument of compulsory acquisition; this should be prepared for the entire line from Tororo to Nakilembe. And secondly, an adequate and fair compensation fund should be set aside for that purpose. My ministry and ministry of lands are working on these and hopefully soon these modalities will be in place.

On energy mix and the statement that was made by the Shadow Minister for Energy that no work is being done on the mini-hydro fronts, I must remind honourable members that some time back in 2006, in order to address the shortfall in energy production; government came out with the short, medium and long term plans. These included a mix of energy sources and renewable energy sources.

The Renewable Energy Policy for Uganda of 2007 stipulates the strategy for developing the various renewable energy sources. Currently, there are a number of renewable energy projects being implemented by the private sector. They include: Bugoye with 13 megawatts to be commissioned this October; Mpanga for 18 megawatts to be commissioned in June next year. We also have Buseruka with 10 megawatts, to be commissioned in December next year and Ishaha with five megawatts to be commissioned in November next year; and biomass cogeneration for Kakira, Lugazi and Kinyara Sugar factories. At same time we are also dealing with solar. We concur with the committee that public resources should be mobilised to contribute to the development of these sources.

With respect to the mineral licence, I would like to say that the license is governed by the Mining Act of 2003, which provides that any person who intends to acquire mineral rights should submit an application to the Commissioner of Geological Surveys and Mines through the chief administrative officer of the respective district. The application details on the financial and technical competence of the applicant are given in there. It also gives the work programme to be accomplished together with the budget estimates. The CAOs must ensure that whoever comes first is considered in terms of evaluation of the application.

The commissioner’s evaluation is based on criteria set out in the law. This is, in our opinion, is a transparent process.

The Ministerial Investment Credit, which is before Parliament on the US $5 million is intended to computerise the mining registry system. And accordingly, it will be possible for the public to assess and view the license issue.

There was also concern over mushrooming oil stations around Kampala. The objective of Government in licensing new oil companies is to increase competition in that industry. Some of the companies that were licensed took advantage of the liberalisation policy and constructed oil stations without regard to health, safety and environment concerns. But as new regulations come into play, all the companies will have to adhere to this. Madam Speaker, allow me say that everything we do has got a backlash, but the most important thing is how we correct our path as we go along. 

On the oil and gas law, the principles – the two laws were approved by Cabinet and the matter is now before the Parliamentary Council for drafting and we shall hold extensive consultations with all stakeholders on the draft in the course of this year. The Bill will be submitted to this House during the first quarter of 2010 for debate and enactment.

The last item from the committee’s report was the US $50 million by UEDCL for building the headquarters. My ministry would concur with the committee that this money needs to be put to better use by doing rural electrification. But in order to move in a logical manner, my ministry has instituted a financial audit to examine the finances of the UEB successor companies. We are not focusing on the distribution company alone, but also the other two. We are also studying their proposed investment. Once the audit is ready, we shall be able to know how to move forward taking into account the recommendation of the committee.

There are one or two things, which I have not addressed but which my colleague, the Shadow Minister, touched on. A policy document is a strategic document. And when doing strategy, you ask three questions. The first question is, “Where are we now?” The next is, “Where do we want to be?” The third is, “How do we get there?” So, in formulating the energy policy for Uganda, in 2002, these three questions were asked. 

I am afraid - with due respect to my colleague - that he paid a lot of attention to the situation analysis. That is “Where are we now?” when you say 5 percent electrification that is before 2004; when you say 200,000 customers, that was the situation then. We moved on from there, we had policy actions, for example biomass. This is a fact, nobody can refute this. We put up policy actions of sustained usage of biomass and this included improving efficiency. We have a very successful programme of improved stoves in the ministry. This programme is very successfully, and I encourage members to check in their constituencies. If we haven’t been there yet, we will get there.

The other one is sustainability. We have a programme of growing energy crops. So from “Where are we?” to “Where do we want to be?” We have policy actions that answer the “How do we get there?” 

Then the other was that Ugandan’s agricultural consumption is low. This was a fact then in 2002 and we put up a policy action of prioritising rural electrification to fish landing sites and so forth. So I request that you read the document - you read it fully and do not concentrate on one small part. On page 3 where it says that it took, “44 months to build two dams”, this is an error. The 44 months are referring to Bujagali. We do not know how long Karuma will take although we started on it already. It is after the engineering design that we can know how many months it will take from today. Madam Speaker, these are professional statements. 

On page 7, “Government has granted Bujagali Energy Ltd US$ 75 million and it was tax-free for strategic reasons”. This is a pass-through item. If we charged tax on it; the tax would reflect a tariff. So we said, “Go start the work so that we retire the thermo stations earlier, we do not wait for the financial close; we are not charging you interest because it would go on tariff.” That was the strategy. 

The other thing is that we received a Partial Risk Guarantee; Bujagali Energy Ltd received a partial guarantee of US $15 million. This guarantee is not from the Government of Uganda, it is from the World Bank. It is given –(Interruption)

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do hold hon. D’Ujanga in high esteem but I do remember very well that we sat in this Parliament, I think in the second session, and we extensively discussed the Partial Risk Guarantee – the Government of Uganda guaranteed Bujagali to borrow money. It is on record that Parliament did it. Therefore, is the minister in order to come and deny what government brought to this Floor and we passed it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know we discussed energy here, but are you taking this issue from where it came from? Is it your problem that the government was a conduit for the World Bank?

MR KASIGWA: Madam Speaker, he is saying that it is the World Bank that guaranteed Bujagali. The fact is, it is Government of Uganda which guaranteed the US$ 115 million and it was discussed in this Parliament - here, and it is on record.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, it works this way. If Bujagali Energy Ltd is going to borrow money from a bank other than the World Bank, that bank may say, “Okay, you are borrowing money from me, to go and do work in Uganda, is Uganda a Member of the World Bank? For that matter, let World Bank guarantee you to the tune of US$ 150 million.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can follow-up on that debate later; if he is lying, you can go to their committee and solve that.

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. This is a guarantee. It is like when you go to National Insurance Corporation and you get a contract, and they are not sure that you are going to do the contract; so they get a performance guarantee from National Insurance Corporation. But if something goes wrong, you can run to the World Bank and get your money.

Then, from there, I would like to state that this contract is not worth Shs 1 billion. This contract is worth Shs 560 billion EPC. What people are doing is counting even the 115, and the money put aside during construction and so on. But if you check for the EPC value, it is US$ 560 million.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I think I have handled the mini hydros. On the petroleum agreement, we have given it to the committee, but I will cheerfully give another copy –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, the minister is alluding that the committee to which I belong – we have constantly demanded to have a look at that sharing agreement and it has never been produced in the committee. And it was clearly stated in the papers recently that the Minister of Energy, Hon. Hilary Onek said that disclosure of that agreement is a security issue. 

So, is the minister in order to lie to this august House that the committee received the sharing agreement, yet we have been demanding for it and it has never been given?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to hear from the chair of the committee; I am not a Member of your committee. Please, let us know whether the agreement came or not.

MS MASIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is on record that we had a retreat in Entebbe with all members of the committee and we were taken through the agreement clause by clause. We studied them and asked questions; what we did not handle is where the signatures were put. What we did not get in that meeting are the individual agreements to the different companies, which had been passed to hon. Dombo’s group; they told us it had some confidentiality clause. So, we did not see any reason to handle it.
 
MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, as I said, I know that this agreement was given to the National Resource Committee when hon. Dombo was chairperson, and I will cheerfully give a copy to the current chairperson. 

It has not been reported here that these are sensitive things; indeed they are sensitive, but we think the honourable members are also sensitive, that is why we want to give these agreements to the committee. 

Finally, I also promised that there would be a workshop for all Members to benefit – (Interjections)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the procedure in this House is for a document to be laid on Table, and it is the prerogative of the Speaker now to decide whether to give it to a few Members like the chairperson of the committee. Is the minister in order to say that because of the sensitivity, he cannot lay this on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, give that document to me via the Table; I will see what to do with it –(Interjections)- I have asked him to bring the agreement; you are making me part of your committee problems. 

7.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, there is one thing that the Minister for Energy has not commented on, and that was the information given by the hon. Member of Parliament for Arua. 

Madam Speaker, it is on record that since WENRECO left Arua, the Ministry of Finance has been financing the fuelling of the station in Arua and that is why there has been power in the whole of West Nile. 

Also, in the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President did make it categorically clear that the government would ensure that Nyagak project is implemented, including using Government funds. And the Ministry of Finance with the Ministry of Energy are ready to finance this project so long as the legal implications are finalised by the Ministry of Energy. So, I wanted this to be on record. The way we operate as ministers has nothing to do with the particular regions we come from; as ministers, we operate as people dealing with the whole country. 

Madam Speaker, you said that we should say something about the ban on buveera. As you are aware, this is an issue which is going to be debated as we handle the Finance Bill. Our stand is that there will be a total ban as it is happening in Rwanda. The details will come as we debate the Finance Bill. I ask for your indulgence. I thank you.

7.22
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for having given good guidance in this report. I also want to thank my shadow minister for the observations made, but I beg to submit that I will endeavour to internalise the recommendations. As for the last statement, I think I will handle it with the rest of the observations on kaveera.  

As I said before, the observations made by the committee are appreciated. 

Observation one talked about kaveera: “The committee, therefore, recommends that the government should come up with a policy of enforcement and alternatives to the banned polyethylene.” Honourable members, this is the collective wisdom of two arms of Government, both Cabinet and the Legislature. I have no objection to that. That is the beauty of democracy.

Recommendation No.2, 3 and 4 are okay but on 5, “The committee recommends that the government comes up with a plan to protect these water points as a source of tourism potential.” I would like to say that we shall have to work with the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Agriculture. I want to state that already, efforts by Agriculture and the Ministry of Water in regard to water for production are in full gear, but this recommendation - I hope my colleague in the Ministry of Tourism will be able to pick it up so that we work it out together. 

Recommendation No.7: “The committee recommends that Government provides an armed enforcement unit to enforce environmental policies and regulations. The committee further recommends that Government institutions should work together on enforcement of environmental policies and regulations.” 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that this is something that we have been trying to work on, and I remember that in your observation, you wanted me to let you know how far we have gone with environment police. We prepared a Cabinet paper, submitted it, partially discussed it and we were requested to enrich it, which we are doing now, and we are about to re-submit it. We are also working on the environmental court because apart from getting environment police, we need our special courts to try the offenders fast. Otherwise, if they join the backlog of the current courts, I think we will not succeed. 

Recommendation No.8: “The committee recommends that Government desists from leasing wetlands. The committee further recommends that Government desists from interfering in the process of reclamation of wetlands and that it puts in place a strategy to ensure that wetlands are not haphazardly opened up especially in issues of rice growing and settlement.” 

This is quite loaded. On reclamation of wetlands, I want to say that Government has not encouraged reclamation of wetlands, that is, taking over the wetlands, but we have individuals, especially in the LC systems, who have gone ahead to allocate and even sell part of the wetlands. 

I moved with the Committee of Natural Resources in some of the wetlands when we were inspecting sites for sanitation, and what we found on the ground was quite alarming. I have already written to the Chair of the Committee on Natural Resources, to help me move with the Members, for a start, to all the wetlands in Kampala, so that we can hold barazas and explain to the people what exactly it means to reclaim wetlands. We are waiting for completion of the budget so that Members can move around. In the process, we shall find those culprits - these people selling land. Do they have land titles? Aand how do we handle them? Maybe at the end of the exercise, we will be able to confiscate these titles in the wetland. 

Recommendation No.11: “It was observed that the Ministry of Water and Environment, and other Government departments, do not have a comprehensive approach towards sanitation.” 

My comment is that the issue of sanitation is still a problem, in that it is not managed by one ministry. The Ministry of Water and Environment manages sanitation in urban centres where we put water supply systems. And when we do that, we always have a component of teaching people how to handle their sanitation. 

There was another concern that came in that where we put water supply, we do not provide boreholes. That is not true. Wherever we put water supplies, especially outside towns, we normally put boreholes for fringe communities that do not benefit from running water. 

Going back to sanitation, I would like to say that while my ministry is responsible for water in urban centres, the Ministry of Education is responsible for water in schools and the Ministry of Health is responsible for sanitation in the rural areas. Unfortunately, I am not saying this for the first time. Normally the budget line for this component of sanitation is at times negligible or non-existent but I want to say that in my ministry, we are now at a unit but we are working towards creating a separate department for sanitation, to give it visibility.

I think those were the recommendations and now I want to go to the questions raised by Members. First is the issue of kaveera. I have conceded that this is government wisdom for both Parliament and Cabinet and I support it. If it ever comes up again, it will be somebody else.

Hon. Guma talked about the issue of the environment, the bare river banks and lake shores. Of course we have tried our best to sensitise and I was surprised when hon. Wacha came out to say that Government is not doing anything and is not having a voice. On every Wetland Day, we send messages and even hold functions in various districts to make sure that people are sensitised. Every 5th of June, which is Environment Day, we hold functions and tell people in various regions - I was surprised because on 5th June 2007, we held the Environment Day in Kumi and I had about 15 Members of Parliament from this House, mainly from the East and North and I remember calling them one by one to make a commitment - including the Chairman LC V. We planted trees in Kumi including in the compound of the LC V Chairman. Go there now and there is not even a single tree standing. If we leaders are not prepared to plant trees and look after the environment, I think it is an uphill task to tell people down there to do it. We have got to live by example.

Planting trees on road reserves - I have already made a request to the ministry concerned and I am waiting for communication. The same request has been extended to schools to make sure that we work with them to plant trees around there. I have also communicated to all LC V chairmen asking them to identify bare hills as stipulated in our manifesto so that we can plant trees on those bare hills but as I said before, so far only two districts have responded and that is Isingiro and Rakai.

Hon. Kagwera raised the issue of the kaveera ban. It is conceded that NEMA has to do more. I think we have expressed this and we want to make sure that NEMA is staffed more because I think the work of looking after the environment is more than what we expected.

Hon. Katongole talked about the under performance of water for production. The under performance of water for production is because of late releases of money. Secondly, this is because these are contracts and you cannot pay until the contract is through. So we hold money and pay according to schedule. You may find that money is committed but not paid out and that is reflected as under performance.

Hon. Katongole also talked about the Kyegegwa water supply. Yes, we designed this water supply in 2004 but since that time the local government authorities there have not availed us land to put a reservoir. So we cannot move. We do not have money in our budget to buy that land and as such, the project is on paper until the local authorities sort out that problem.

He also talked about rehabilitation of dams and was wondering which dams. I would like to request the honourable member to pay me a visit. If I cannot guarantee a cup of tea, I will at least guarantee that he gets the right information. I would also like his input in what priority he has in his area.

Hon. Byanyima talked about Isingiro. Yes, I have been to Isingiro and I know what they are going through. It is just like Rakai and Kooki in particular but there we have been able to construct four dams, two of which are in the constituency of hon. Byanyima and these are Bwenjerero valley tank and Kagango valley dam. These two are at 80 percent construction. It has taken more time than we anticipated but the work is still ongoing. Others are Kagamba and Rwenjubu -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, the area Member of Parliament for Isingiro stood up and gave us a report that the said dams, which are being talked about in the report of the Minister of Water and Environment are not on the ground and he was lamenting having mentioned those dams in his constituency while the truth of the matter is that there is nothing in his constituency. Is the honourable minister therefore in order to continue lying to this august House instead of explaining or apologising for supplying air dams? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know which ones are where but I know that in your absence, the Minister of Agriculture was talking about the dam in Rwenjubu, which the lady member for Isingiro talked about. I do not know which ones are not where.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I hope my shadow will have the patience. I can give her a guided tour to Isingiro so that she can witness and come back to Parliament to make a statement. Otherwise, I know that work is going on. It has taken time and has got to be improved upon but work is going on and it is going to be completed.

When it comes to water supply for ordinary people, I know it is a problem and we are working on it. In fact, I think of late we have supplied just minimally ten crestanks to help out but the policy now is to make sure that we can construct water harvesting facilities at household level and we are requesting the districts to prioritise water harvesting as a component within their money allocations.  

Also, apart from those initiatives, we have collaborated with the Ministry of Energy to construct Kitagata Dam, which will serve both energy and water purposes. That is the directive that we are carrying out with the two ministries and we hope it will help to alleviate the problem. Once we get that water we can pump it with one of the high steels and then we shall reticulate and people will get water both for production and consumption. 

Hon. Nsubuga was thankful for opening the boundaries but as you may be aware, it has not been very easy and only this year, we have lost six people in the process. But we shall continue and make sure that all the boundaries are opened. Of course NEMA has at times used excessive force but we are prevailing on them and the fact that we have now the support of the Police - and I want to thank my colleague, the minister, for having responded to my request even though it took some time. But I am now happy that we have some police officers and I think NEMA will be controlled and they will work with discipline. 

Hon. Sematiko talked about water in Mityana. We have got water in Mityana but we have not been able to expand beyond the project that we started with because of lack of funds. But we are negotiating with the African Development Bank which funded this very project, to see whether we can expand it. So far, the talks seem fruitful. 

On the issue of the high tariffs, it is true that we have a problem with tariffs because we are required by our financiers to try as much as possible to recover the costs involved but this is a subject of negotiation because once we complete a project, we pass it on to the local authorities. So, it is Mityana town council to sit down and see whether they can subsidise or whether they need to come to us for that but we cannot dictate to them. Mityana town council is the authority on water in Mityana District. 

You talked about pit latrines contributing to the contamination of borehole water and this reminds me of a write-up that I saw in the newspapers yesterday saying that 80 percent of water in Kampala is full of –(Interjections)- that word. Yes, latrines can contaminate water but for the case of Kampala, let me correct the record that it is not the National Water and Sewerage Corporation water that is full of pupu. It is the water that the people fetch from the so-called protected springs and we know it. This is not the first time such is being reported; I have personally walked around Kawempe and you may find a protected spring at the bottom with a toilet on top of it. 

This is something that we have talked about with the local authorities within and around Kampala and we have requested them to sensitise the communities. We have expanded or extended the pro-poor water supply even with prepaid metres so that they can access water cheaply from the taps but unfortunately, some of our people are lazy; they prefer to stay at home and get people to carry water on their bicycles for them and these people will get water from anywhere because it is cheap and they do not want to pay. So, that is the problem. 

The honourable member for Ibanda talked about the Shs 1 billion given to NFA not being commensurate with the activities. This is the first time that the NFA is getting a development fund and we have planned that this money is going to serve community management. We want to engage the communities in tree planting. We are going to start on this before the end of this month and we will do it in every district. So, maybe at the end of the exercise we will be able to evaluate whether the money has been put to proper use. 

Hon. Tubwita talked about bulk water transfer and she talked about Rakai in particular but those of you who have been to Rakai and Kooki in particular know that Kooki is the most water stressed place in this country and its connection is long overdue. I did not influence it as my shadow minister put it but Kooki really deserved it and it has come a bit late because it may cost some of us our votes if it does not take off. 

The design of Migyera - there is a request to connect Migyera to Nakasongola but the long distance requires a lot of money. What I know is that Migyera town water supply has been rectified and I would like hon. Tubwita to visit the area this week or before the end of the week so that she can give me an independent report. 

Hon. Santos talked about water for agriculture and the wrangles therein. The wrangles are imaginary because I have never imagined that I, as a minister of water, or my sisters could have a wrangle with any minister or minister of state in the Ministry of Agriculture. I have never seen the Ministry of Agriculture asking for money from my ministry or my ministry asking for money from them. Each ministry makes its own budget and the budget is approved and we work accordingly. So, I would like Parliament to dispel this so-called wrangle because we do not have it and instead, we have got collaboration. We are actually working together on irrigation schemes because I have got engineers of water in my ministry and the Ministry of Agriculture have got their agriculturalists and in order to put water for production in place, we need both of them. I have already talked about the environment schedule mandate. 

Hon. Kiryapawo talked about the need for piped water from Kamonkoli to Budaka and my technical people have captured that. We shall look at the designs and maybe we shall come back with a proposal -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have noticed that a Member comes in and talks and goes away. Is it procedurally right for a minister to answer a question which was relevant to a person that has disappeared? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Minister, 23 members have contributed and if you go Member by Member, we shall be here the whole night. You answer thematically. 

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Let me answer hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s question because he had one and the fact that he has come back, he deserves an answer. He talked about the farm income enhancement project and the money that we borrowed from the bank. Yes, that money is there and a number of districts that have participated are available and I think those papers have been laid here more than once. But I have no problem providing more information to the Committee on Natural Resources or even bringing the papers here. I will do that as soon as possible. 

Otherwise, I think it has been a very good debate because -(Interjections)- hon. Odit, you talked about boreholes and shallow wells and rusty pipes. The problem we have is that originally, when we were planning for water, we had to go with the cheapest technology. The cheapest technology is protection of springs. So, from the protection of springs you move to boreholes, then gravity flow, surface water and deep pumping. That is the order. 

So, where you find that we have boreholes that are no longer functioning, of course when we started planning, the deepest you could go at that time was about 60 or 80 but with the lowering of the water table because of climate change and all that, you find that most of our boreholes are not functioning. So, we are reviewing now. If we are going to have boreholes, we may have to go over 200 metres deep. I think that will solve the problem.

As for the rusty pipes, we have decided to change from steel pipes to PVCs. 

Hon. Baba Diri commented about the water in Koboko. Colleagues I want to tell you that we have tried Koboko. When you get to Koboko town you feel you have to do something. I have been there twice and I think I tried to do something. The first time, Koboko itself came up with a project that was sent to the Japan Government which notified us. They allocated US$ 140 million but the district refused to work with us and for 12 months they kept that money because they did not have capacity until the Japanese Ambassador wrote to me telling me that they were withdrawing the money. I tried to mitigate but Japan took back the money.

But now, because at the ministry we know what is happening in Koboko, we have moved in. The project is almost complete. It is actually complete and it is being tested. The water is flowing but it is not yet ready for the public because we are still testing. I believe before the end of this year, Koboko will have a piped water system.

I thank the Members for contributing and I beg that we pass this budget for my ministry. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can find the minister in her office and you can talk to her. You can even meet her in the corridors.

I want to caution both sides of the House that in the past, the budget process was taken seriously. Travelling was embargoed both for the ministers and for the backbenchers but nowadays I see letters in my office informing me that people have gone. They are not even asking for permission; they are just telling me that they have gone. The Cabinet and backbenchers disappear without even informing me. So I am warning you. If tomorrow and Wednesday this House is not full, you forget your budgets –(Interjections)- yes. It is not fair that the work of passing the budget for this whole country should be left to about 60 people. So I am cautioning both sides of the House that on Wednesday, things are going to be very serious because that will be the day we will deal with the Committee of Supply.

I put the question that this House adopts the report of the committee of Natural Resources. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is adjourned to 10 O’clock tomorrow to handle the Foreign Affairs and Finance committees. 

(The House rose at 7.09 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 September 2009 at 10.00 a.m.)


