Thursday, 7 September 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo,in the Chair.

MOTION

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT ON SECURITY AND LEGAL AFFAIRS

MR BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Mr Chairman, I beg to present to the Council for the consideration and approval, the report of Standing Sectoral Committee of this Council on Legal and Security Affairs, covering the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defence.  Mr Chairman, before I make these remarks on my report, my attention was drawn to a newspaper report of 30th August 1995; that is The New Vision, where my hon. Friend Dr Tiberondwa is quoted as having said this in reference to what His Excellency said when giving a Press Interview, that by November this year, the NRA would have attained the capacity to deal with rebellion and external aggression.  Now, this is what hon. Tiberondwa said and I quote; he said, “I am concerned that our leaders boast of acquiring more weapons of human destruction; instead of boasting about more social services.”  He goes on, “he urged that, although the NRA had been more disciplined than past armies in Uganda, it has failed to protect the people of Northern Ugandan.”  

Mr Chairman, he is an hon. Member who is derived in the idea of equipping our army to deal with aggression especially rebellion in the North; and he goes on to say that; to accuse the NRM Government of not protecting the people of the North.  Did he expect people to fight with sticks and pangas? I viewed this with concern in my capacity as chairman concerned with this aspect, and I think there is a limit to politicking.  If this was said by an ordinary man, we would have dismissed the remarks; but this was made by no other person, than somebody who is aspiring to be a president. (Laughter) 

So I thought it is high time some people who are hoping for such posts, to begin to behave like presidential material. (Applause) Now, since the Members have got the report, I am only going to make some few remarks on it. Beginning with the Ministry of Justice.  Last year when the Committee was considering the Budget Proposals for the Ministry of Justice, among other things we stressed the fact that, there is a need to train RCs; since the RCs are acting as courts and they are administering the laws of the country; they should have some training at least in procedures of court system.  But the Minister of Justice and Attorney General correctly pointed out the problem associated with the training of RCs.  Because these are transitory - they are not permanent.  As personnel are not permanent, they change as elections come.  So, we train them today, tomorrow they are thrown out.  There is that problem, therefore.  But the committee felt that, nevertheless, seminars should be mounted.  And the Minister promised that, he is going to carry out this.  Another thing we have noted regarding the Ministry of Justice which is a health trend.  Regarding - making available all those people who are administering law, some basic law books.  We have now been informed that, a book known as a gray book which contains basic laws which are in ordinary use, will now be ready for use. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please. (Laughter)

MR BUTAGIRA: Another issue which concerns the committee was congestion in prisons.  There are so many people on remand, the prisons are fully; and we were wondering where there cannot be a method whereby an alternative sentence to imprisonment can be explored.  Now we are informed that the Law Reform Commission is working out a proposal for providing institutional - what they call Non-Custodial sentences to ease the congestion in prisons.  

I would like to commend the Minister of Justice and Attorney for coming out with a proposal of appointing lay prosecutors and graduate prosecutors.  Prosecutions, especially in lower courts are conducted by Police.  But policemen are subject to transfers.  So, he may have a trained Police Prosecutor, next day he is transferred to another assignment.  Then you have a problem of keeping well-trained people as prosecutors.  So, the Minister of Justice now, has come out with the proposal of recruiting lay graduates.  Graduates to be appointed as prosecutors and they will be under the direct control of the Director of Public Prosecution.  We feel this will go along way towards improving  the prosecutions and also quickening the disposal of cases.  The Report on Violation of Human Rights was presented to the Minister.  But we felt that, this important report should be led before this House. (Applause) 

That is to highlight the importance of Human rights and also the issue of Gender matters.  Recently, I attended a seminar designed to look into means of improving the efficiency of Parliament.  And one of the issues we discussed was the setting up of a committee of this type in various parliaments.  And I am glad that, we are recommending the same to be done.  The committee also noted with regard to judiciary that, there are - especially with regard to High Court sessions; the High Court Sessions because of lack of funds are not held frequently.  It is with that, that many people stay on remand for a long time.  Currently, there are some judges who were appointed, and posted upcountry as resident judges.  Now, we felt that, if the strength is increased at those Regional Levels, we have about a bench of three judges say in Mbale, in Jinja, in Mbarara; this would cut down the idea of judges moving from the centre going on circuit.   And when they are there for one week, money is finished, they will come back.  So, if we have these resident judges; say about three, they would sit there, disposal of the cases quickly and cut on these cases.  So we are recommending this set up of strengthening Resident State Judges. (Applause) 

I now want to move to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  As a general observation, the committee was very happy and satisfied with the work done by the Ministry of Internal Affairs; especially the Police who have worked very hard to contain cases of robbery and related cases.  The committee observed however as a general observation that, much there is a handicap as regards transport.  The transport available to the Police, the communication system leaves a lot to be desired.  So, we have recommended as you see attached to this report a strong supplementary to at least alleviate this issue of lack of transport and Police communication.  The Committee noted also the cooperation by the public inheriting the police to do their duty and commended this effort to continue.  

An issue was raised regarding identity cards.  You will recall that, last year we raised this issue of Nationals having identification cards.  But we discovered that, there is a need to bring a law here; to bring a Bill here, in order to put in place the issue of identification; of identity cards.  So, the Committee had recommended that, the Minister put the machinery in place or bring the necessary Bill in this House, on that particular issue.  

I want to comment on the issue of LDUs. LDUs - vigilante home guards.  Perhaps I should explain here the law behind this institution.  There are LDUs who fall under Army Reserve and they are governed by Army Regulations. Then we passed a law here the Police Act; under which the Inspector General of Police is empowered to appoint special constables. Using that law, the Inspector General has appointed quite a number of LDUs especially in Central Region and Western Region to deal with issues relating to internal security.  The Committee was very happy to note that, the deployment of these LDUs was contained very swiftly with the budding rebellion in the country.  So, the LDUs as I said, have been involved under the Police Act, and also as Army Reserve.   Now, when you come to homeguards, these are, especially most in Kitgum area. They are just like LDUs, but there they are called homeguards.  Now they are mainly under the army. Now, they are mainly deployed under the army or sort help issues.  Then we have the vigilantes.  These are especially deployed in Karamoja.  They are called the vigilantes, but if they were in Kitgum they would be called may be homeguards.  Now all these names, we felt they are really confusing. We should not have all these different designations.  And the committee recommended that, the Minister should liaise with counterparts and come out with may be one name replacing all these various designations. Which gives an impression of an coordinated activity.  

Still on the issue of security.  The Minister of who ministry now, has come out with a proposal of creating an Anti Stock Safety Unit.  This issue is mentioned in page 13.  This is mainly for Karamoja.  In order to stabilize Karimojong, and neighbouring countries, a special unit of about 3,000 officers and men need to be formed from all corners of Uganda to form a branch under the Police, but to be known as Anti Stock Safety Unit to stabilize the Karimojong.  The aim being of course to provide security and stability within Karamoja itself and also to protect cattle rustling to be neighbouring areas. So, this is a new unit in the sense.  A new Unit in the sense that it has not been there, but it has to be drawn from the existing Police Force, especially to deal with that issue in Karamoja.  The Ministry has also acquired two launches to patrol our lakes since early 70s.  In early 70s, the Police was mobile in water, but since then, there was nothing.  So, the issue of patrolling our lakes has been a problem but a beginning now has been made by acquisition of those two Police launches which will now be patrolling our lakes.  

Still on Police, the Committee noted with concern the issue concerning retiring age of Civil Servants to 60 years.  But for the Police it is 55 years.  So there has been this means about this apparent discrimination.  So, we recommended that, the Minister looks very seriously into this issue which would eventually need of course coming here to amend the law, if the age has to be put to 60 years.  But, we are informed now that, the Police Authority is taking up this matter and will soon report to be Minister. The committee also noted the concern which has been raised about too many people coming to this country sometimes without permit. And we thought an explanation how the Immigration Department allow or has not drawn its attention in this issue of immigrants.  Under the law we passed on the Investment Statute, would be investors applying and they are issued with investing licences. Sometimes people have to get investment licences, they come.  And there have been a problem of relating investment licences to the issue of working permit. 

So, the Committee felt that, there must be coordination between the Investment Authority and the Immigration Department.  But there may be a necessity to amend the investment statute if this has to be dealt with properly.  Some of the people they see you come here, were told may be dependants of Ugandans which is Uganda Asian Extraction who are coming back.  Those are the right palms.  So, may be if you see some of the Indians in the streets, some of them are legally entitled to be here under that category.  But others fluked their way in. So, we really feel that, something must be done; if the law has to be amended, it should be amended so that, we really tighten our policy on immigration. We noted with satisfaction that, the Ministry has moved shiftily to deal with issues of passports, and we are informed that, enough passports have been imported in that last five years.  

We are also informed that, centres are to be opened in some of our Embassies abroad who will be empowered to issue passports.  So we feel that, this is a health trend.  Because as you know a passport really is a right and it should not be regarded as a privilege.  The Ministry is also strengthening our border patrol by establishing 22 entry points along our borders.  And I am informed the Ministry of Finance has now approved an increase with a number of officers in the department of Immigration. This is how it can be deployed in those centres.  

Regarding the prison Department, the problems the usual ones of lack of money have hampered this particular department.  But an improvement to that order has been made in feeding of prisoners; they now have a meal of posho and beans, although they are entitled also to have meat and other vegetables.  But at least an improvement in versions, have been made.  Now the prisons as you know they usually have the prison farms, which were taken over by army, and they are still in the army.  We expect a concern that, soon these farms should be handed over and capitalised. Because, they can be self sufficient if really they are capitalised and meant to run on commercial basis. 

I want to conclude on this Ministry, by drawing the attention to page 26 of the Report.  Page 17 sorry of the Report.  This contains a recommendation for a strong supplementary with regard to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Police and Prisons Department.  

We will note that, we are only urging a strong supplementary.  It is up to the Ministry of Defence and then of Finance to take up this matter.  So, let us not be misunderstood as increasing the Budgetary Provision. We are only recommending strong supplementary in view of the problems we have high lighted.  And for this matter, we have recommended a supplementary of 23,640,305,000 it is on page 19.  As I talk now, I am informed some of our recommendations have been acceptable.  That the Ministry of Finance who will may be when they are presenting that ministry’s budget, come out with appropriate amendment.

Now, Ministry of Defence. For the Ministry of Defence, we want to make some few observations.  I will begin with an issue which was raised last year regarding deployment of our forces outside the country.  The Committee felt that, for any commitment of our forces outside this country, a Parliamentary approval should be sought. (Applause) I am glad to report that, the Ministry of Defence has welcomed this and has now made a firm commitment that, any future deployment will not be undertaken without Parliamentary approval.  While on this, the Committee was happy to note that, our forces which were sent on peace keeping nation to Liberia performed very well -(Applause)- in terms of discipline, and also work.  So, this is really commendable. 

We had also stressed the issue of observance of Human Rights and Administration of Justice within the Army.  The Committee was informed that, a streamlining of the system of Army Courts within the Army the court martial and other tribunals.  The matter now has been streamlined, and if you look at page 22 of the Report, paragraph 7, states what has been done.  Setting out of Unit Disciplinary Committees; division court martials, the court martial of appeal; all these have been set up with a view strengthening the administration of justice within the army and to make sure that, there are speedy trials.  This is a welcome move.  

We have also been informed that, seminars have been held within the army to sensitize them on the issue of Human Rights and treatment of prisoners of war.  These have taken place; the army has also sent some on staff training as lawyers at Makerere, with a view that, after finishing, they will be deployed back and help in the administration of justice within the army.  Last year we recommended that, our army should also be a productive army.  Currently, there are some parastatals under the army, they are listed on page 24 of my Report: Are the Luweero Industries, NEC Pharmaceutical, NEC Farm Katonga, NEC Works Limited and NEC Lime Mbura.  

The committee has been honest to visit most of these industries.  And we were impressed by steps being taken to make them viable.  For instance, the pharmaceutical which is in Industrial Area.  We were informed that soon, maybe by the end of this month, that factory will be operational.  And it is expected that, it will supply 30 percent of our pharmaceutical needs of this country.  (Applause)  I think this is really very great achievement as regards our army, in a good light as being a productive army. NEC Lime Mbura produces lime.  If well capitalised would be able - almost supply our needs of line in this country.  So, the committee has felt that, these are really very positive trends as far as our army is concerned.  

We also visited NEC Farm Katonga.  Now, that ranch is really under utilised.  It is a big farm, but the cattle there are almost nothing compared to the acreage of about 28 square miles; these cows are about 1,005.  Now, the good thing with the farm is that, if really money is found to inject in this farm by the way of restocking, it would in no time really be very productive.  But at the moment, it seems really to be a bit neglected that we are told, it is financing, and may be we are looking for joint ventures and possibly investors, to improve that particular farm. We noted that, the issue of insurgency in the North has intensified, and it is raising concern. And the insurgency has assumed another aspect and that is of external involvement.  There is, therefore, a strong need to strengthen the capability of our armed forces to deal with external aggression. It is a modern warfare, and we have to meet it appropriately.  

So, in view of this continuing threat, we have recommended very strongly for supplementary to enable our army buy the appropriate equipment to strengthen itself to deal with aggression either internally or externally. And this is at the end of this report, amounts about 7.2 billion; we are recommending as a supplementary in order to equip our army.  

We are informed that, all efforts have been made to have a dialogue and promote reconciliation.  But the rebels are not reforming, instead they are equipping themselves with assistance from a certain power and therefore, we cannot sit idle by, when your enemy is re-equipping himself to deal with you.  So, we have also to prepare ourselves.  So we feel that, much as the Budget for the army should be kept within a reasonable limit if one is faced with external aggression, then something must be done.  Unless our recommendation for this strong supplementary to have our army well equipped.  

With those few remarks; I beg to move that report of the Standing Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security Affairs as presented, be approved, Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of procedure. I thank you, Mr Chairman.  Usually when reports are presented to this august House, comments are usually made - said for the approval of the report. I, therefore, seek your guidance whether we shall continue to see the Sectoral Report as it has been delivered.  The reason why I say so is because we get a bit concerned when the Lord’s Army has been persistent.  And not only that, but we would rather could advise.

THE CHAIRMAN: Go straight to the point.  Do you think that, I am not in order?

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I get concerned when this problem in the North has been going on.  And I believe that, all good Ugandans who want peace to prevail within our borders, would want to see this problem solved.  What I would counsel, you know Earnestness, is that if we have to buy or persuade some people to come, or to return home, and some of the people I can see my brother and the Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs, he had his own group. He was persuaded to join the government.  Is there anyway, whereby our government could talk to the Lord’s Resistance Army so that, we get them back home.  Because we have been paying some people money for those people to return home.  Is there something that we can do? Indeed if it is possible to send there a Select Committee of just a few people of this Parliament to discuss with them. So, I would like to know what the Minister of Defence has done in this respect? And if nothing thus has been done without revealing national issues or secrets, what he intends to do unless it is highly secret?  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I think in all times, I should respond to the remarks made by the chairman of the Sectoral committee; hon. Butagira at the beginning of his speech.  You may recall that prior to the recent Cabinet reshuffle, hon. Butagira made consistent attacks on some of us.  Unfortunately, he was not included in the recent Cabinet Reshuffle. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Hon. Tiberondwa, go straight to the point, please.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, you have not allowed me to finish this point - but I would not like him to really become more Catholic than the Pope. Hon. Amama Mbabazi recently in search peace, talked about the possibility of taking canoes, and hon. Butagira is talking about buying more guns.  I think with regard to the Ministry of Defence, we should aim more at talking peace than fight.  I really have said this and I want to repeat it.  It is better to talk than to fight. (Applause) 

I would like to start by thanking the Minister of Internal Affairs for - because last year we complained about uniforms for prisoners.  Now, to the places where I have been prisoners are well dressed, and I think that is a very good point, for which government must be complimented.  

I would like to use this opportunity to hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs as to why Government has not established a report of the commission of inquiry into the murder of the two Makerere Students, which occurred at the Campus in 1990.  We have been waiting for this report, you know the Commission of Inquiry was appointed but we have not seen the report.  I think in all fairness, the country would be interested to get a report on this matter.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is raising a very important point.  I remember I was appointed to serve on that committee of Judicial Commission or Inquiry.  And I would like through you to inform him and the Member of the House that the Commission’s Report was out and there was even Government White Paper on that Report.  So if it is not circulated, it is not true that, it was not presented.  And already Members are saying both were circulated.  So, I do not know whether - so normally, when a report is presented, and a Government White Paper has come out, that which remains is the action which should be taken.

DR TIBERONDWA: I would like to thank the hon. Member for that information; and to continue to request government because recently, there have been a lot of reports in both the local and in the international press about the circumstance in which journalist Mr Njuki who dies in the hands of the Police. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, in all fairness, it would be in the interest of this country for some Commission of Inquiry or an inquest to be set up into this death because if you do not do that, it damages the name of the government.  Early this year, I reported to the Minister of Internal Affairs that the Police raised my house twice in Bushenyi. I would like to report again that, last Sunday in my way to Fort portal, Police raided my room in a hotel and searched it.  I have again told the Minister, and I think if these things continue, it will not be very good for the stability of this country. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Try to wind up, please.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, on the army; I want to comment on the Reserve Force which has been raised in the Report. We were told that, Gen. Salim Saleh is in charge of this Reserve Force.  But the public does not know how people are recruited into this Reserve Force, how many they are and how they are paid?  At the moment they are involved in an exercise of collecting the waterweed from Lake Victoria.  This is a very good thing.  But we also have reports in the press to the effect that, this is a contract between the government and some company.  We do not know whether that company is the Ministry of Defence or whether it is Salim Saleh and other people?  But the army, the Reserve Force is involved in clearing the waterweed.  

As we move into this last part of this Government, I would really like to appeal to the government and especially the Security Forces to continue the spirit of tolerance.  Because if people who do not agree with certain persons are harassed, the Policemen raid their homes they raid their rooms in hotels, it will not be very good for some of us. They are saying, I was not killed.  I hope I will remain alive. (Laughter) Because if this harassment of people who hold different political views continue, it will not be good for the future stability of this country.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SSERUNJOGI (Kawempe Division, Kawempe): Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Butagira for the Report.  I have an observation to make regarding the prisoners in Luzira.  I was once in Luzira and I know the situation in Prison. We have Ugandans who were arrested as far back as 1979. These people were tried and they were convicted in a court of law.  They appealed to the High Court, and their appeal dismissed.  They had to make possibly a petition to the President.  I give an example of Abdalla Nassur.  I was with him in 1979.  This man has been there since 1979.  I am sure, he must have made some petitions to the President. But I want to find out from this House, when is the President supposed to go through all these petitions?  Because I would like this man to be given a fair treatment. If the case was dismissed in the High Court, then even it was not dismissed; the case should be revisited and possibly get a fair treatment.  But keeping a man in prison for over 16 years is very unfair.  Number one; is how often does the president go through all these petitions.  It is up to the Ministry of Justice - I am appealing to the Ministry of Justice to advise the president, to go through his petitions so that these people are actually given fair treatment while in prison.  If it is a political case, if the president thinks that this is a political case, then these people should be released and out of prison.  

Number two; Internal Affairs.  A few weeks ago, I witnessed a case in my division.  LDUs are now being used to arrest DPT defaulters; or poll tax defaulters, graduated tax defaulters.  I do not know whether this is the way for now police was actually supposed to use them? I am asking the Minister of Internal Affairs, to find out the proper way of utilising these people.  If Local Government is in position of utilising them, then we should be informed.  That they have been removed from keeping the peace in villages to come and arrest poll tax defaulters. 

As regards Police; the former Minister for Internal Affairs visited police stations with a view of carrying out exactly what is required in the police.  But as I talk now Mr Chairman, the police people are very much congested in houses.  They have no proper accommodation and they have no transport.  And I am asking the Minister for Internal Affairs, if they cannot accommodate all the number they have at the station, then they should hire some private accommodation somewhere and give them proper and adequate accommodation.  

As regards defence, I am glad that there is some improvement in defence but I want him to examine the Vote in connection with transport because I know we lose a lot of money on transport alone.  You find a lorry carrying charcoal from Nakasongola to Bwaise and I am sure the money collected from that kind of trip is not accounted for.  So, Mr Minister, I want you to be very, very careful with the Vote for transport as far as army is concerned.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Those are my observations.

MRS DHUGIRA OPOT (Women Representative, Nebbi):  Thank you Mr Chairman, I would like to join the others to thank hon. Butagira and the committee on defence and security. I want to clarify issues.  I note some support the recommendation gave about the immigration department.  The immigration department is one of the departments in this country which earns quite a lot of money and which is put in the consolidated fund. Because for everybody at least who comes with a certain class of even Class D and is registered to settle in Uganda, he pays not less than 1,000 dollars.  But this is one of the poorest departments in government if I may say.  The department has not got transport, the department has never been given enough money to tour its immigration board and I am happy to hear that at least there is provision to open more immigration centres in the borders of the country.  But I hope it will not just stop to opening those entry points but also much more should be done because this is a department which has realised it is not being supported by government so much.  I beg the Minister for Finance at least to help and release them money to provide transport for the staff in the department and most important, I think they should be given money to buy computers for their offices. Many of these offices - some which do not need computers, are furnished.  There are so many offices where secretaries are now using computers just to type but in the immigration department where there is a lot of record keeping and record analysis, they are only dealing with files which are subject to getting misplaced and many times they are lost and as a result, you find this is a board which will be receiving a lot of attack from every person including even from the President’s Office that they are not performing, that they are frustrating investors and so many other things.  So I would really beg Finance to help that they get their records right by giving them computers to help their work of keeping records.  

Along this line also, I would like to thank the committee for recommending an amendment to the Uganda Investment Authority Statute.  Many times, the immigration department has been abused for having allowed the influx of foreigners in this country.  Hon. Butagira explained so well why these people come and settle because they cannot be given investment licence and instead they have temporary working permits.  But as soon as they get the temporary permits, they go to Investment Authority, they make declarations which are completely unreasonable, many of them, not all at least.  You find a person calling himself an investor when he has only about 30 or 40 thousand dollars to come and invest in Uganda.  For sure, the immigration board cannot allow a settler with that amount of money in Uganda because they are Ugandans with a capacity to start such small-scale business.  Many of these people who are rejected come to do general trade and when the immigration board says no, then they run to other offices, then the Commissioner is receiving phones to explain why a person has been rejected.  So the law should be amended and we have moved one step at least.  At least the Commissioner for Immigration now sits on the Investment Authority Board which has helped to bring down such issues but a lot still remains to be done.  In addition to that, the department also needs to be strengthened.

MR KAIJUKA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give is to verify the statements of my Colleague. Actually Uganda Investment Authority is not following the regulations as laid down. They have been recommending some dukawalas who are not actually investors.  A case today for example, we handled a case which we rejected today of a person  - this is an Indian - of a company, Sakabro which is a dukawala.  It had been recommended for an entry permit and have an investment licence.  Yet when we examine the investment is below the required standard.  So we rejected the case Mr Chairman.

MRS OPOT:  Thank you for that information.  Mr Chairman that is only one of the few cases my Colleague is pointing out.  But sometimes in one meeting, they are able even to reject more than 30 such cases and you find the department being attacked for a thing like that.  But in a nut shell really, the department and the board should try to control the small Ugandan investors because it seems we at the political level are only looking at the foreign investors and not the local investors.  So something really needs to be done to coordinate the activities of the Investment Authority and that of the Immigration Department and Board. 

Another thing which we feel must also be done, recently, there was a case which was so interesting.  An Indian came and started some business here and when the board realised that it was not worth it, he was rejected and he was told to leave the country and that was after he had been tried for 24 months which is two years.  Then this man transferred and changed the name of the company and even changed the wording of his names and applies again.  Now, when the board realised and rejected that case and at least the department managed to make sure he boarded the plane to leave the country but the man did not go far.  He went into one of our embassies, I am not going to mention -(Interjection)- no, he went to one of our embassies, got letters from the ambassador and in no time, the commissioners were put on answering line, from a hot line which was not from within and instead of such people first of all inquiring from the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs who will in turn inquire from the commissioner why a case like that has come up, you find these people are being attacked from left to right.  So, we feel this is a very important department which must be guarded if we are to look after the interests of Ugandans and if we are to avoid the flooding of our country by foreigners and above all, I have a feeling that for the next immigration control board, that government should consider making that department autonomous of the central government.  Thank you.

MR MWANDAH (Bugweri County, Iganga): Mr Chairman, I wish to get clarification from the Minister for Internal Affairs. Passenger vehicles are involved in fatal accidents on our roads almost on a daily basis.  Those who survive become permanently disabled.  I wonder whether the Minister through the Police has any plan of actually controlling or containing the rate of fatal accidents on our roads.  These taxis are ever running at a very, very high speed all the time and one wonders whether the police is incapable of doing something about it.  Now, even the buses that have come of late, you see Kashari Express, you see Gateway, you see all these other buses -(Laughter)- Bulangiti, I think government and I think the Minister for Internal Affairs through the police should really take decisive action over this matter otherwise more people are getting disabled as a result of road accidents.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MRS RHODA KALEMA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I also want to stand on the point of the Prisons welfare and the police. I know these matters have been mentioned by other Members.  But it seems to me that the Prisons Department is somewhat marginalised.  If Members look on page 12, the welfare of prisoners, it reads that the feeding of prisoners was not good but only improved after some supplementary provision was given.  Now fortunately the prisoners can eat better. But at the bottom, it shows that they cannot buy blankets, they cannot provide blankets, mats and uniforms unless there is supplementary provision.  

For some of us who have been in the inside of prison and have been prisoners, it is very difficult to sleep in the night when you do not have a blanket to cover yourself, if you do not have a mat to lie on and no uniform.  I was lucky enough that I stayed in my one dress for the six weeks but unfortunately just before Red Cross brought in the blankets I was discharged.  But it is very important that we recommend the supplement to increase the budget of the Prisons so that blankets may be bought.  

The other point is the accommodation of the Police and the welfare of the Police.  The welfare of the Police is another matter that seems to get very little attention and I would like to urge this House that we recommend supplementary estimates for the Prisons welfare and Police welfare.  The Police are sleeping in very bad condition, they get very little welfare and salary here we see they get very little and they get less than the army and yet a police force is so crucial in any country because this is the force that takes care of law and order.  Law and order is so essential but when we are in peace as we are now, we tend to forget it.  But these men and women are on duty all the time day and night.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Can I endorse more information the Member on the Floor is giving about the condition and welfare of the Police both men and women.  An example I have in mind is the police post at Ntinda.  The houses are leaking -(Laughter)- the roofs are leaking; I am being asked how I got to know the houses, but I had gone to report the loss of an identity card and it happened to rain while I was seated in the temporary shed -(Laughter)- whatever the case, these houses are terrible.  At least let them provide them with polythene bags that they are using to roof their houses.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MRS RHODA KALEMA: Mr Chairman, I am very grateful for that information and I will just add to what she has said by giving the example of Kiboga Police Station.  This Kiboga Police Station was originally built in 1969 as a temporary police post in order to create a police post there because there was no police post whatsoever between Busunju and Hoima for those people who are acquainted with Hoima road. 

So my late husband noted it and advised the Minister of Internal Affairs and this post was built in temporary structures.  Today it has become a police station because Kiboga is a district but any time now, these structures will be killing our policemen  because it is so full of cracks and it is about to break down.  So the point I am just emphasizing is the welfare of the police.  It is so crucial Mr Chairman, we must consider before we end this report that supplementary funds are given to the police for their welfare and to improve on their conditions.  

Now, one more point; one may ask how are we to get the funds? On page 16 and I will ask Members to look at it at the bottom, Prison farms and Industries.  It is a great pity that this has been neglected.  We read and hear that the problem of capitalization has not been solved although the matter was approved by Cabinet two years ago.  Up to now the Ministry of Finance has not been able to provide funds.  There is a way the Ministry of Finance seems to consider their own priorities, and they forget the real priorities which makes a lot of difference to life.  When prison farms and industries were working, they used to create revenue for the prisons and so the prisons could take care of themselves. I will give you an example.  

In 1967, I visited a prison industry exhibition in Luzira.  I remember the late John Babiiha who was Vice President of the country was the chief guest and that was the evening if some of you may remember when there was an attempt on his life as he was driving towards Silver Spring.  We drove behind him just ten minutes and I still have a coffee table in my house today which I bought in 1967 from that prison industries and when people come they ask me where I had it made.  These people can do very good work and they can create their own revenue.  In fact, it also helps to give prisoners skills. Those who did not have skills learn skills there; those who have the skills improve on their skills. Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Minister to wind up.

THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I would also like to start by thanking hon. chairman of the Sectoral Committee for presenting our case very eloquently and comprehensively.  Judging from the questions that have come on the Floor, I get the feeling that the Members are very supportive of this sector and will continue giving it support.  Now if I can go to the specific questions, hon. Wanendeya is of the view that discussions with rebels particularly the LRA in the north could solve our problem in that part of the country.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, you are aware that the Presidential amnesty still stands and indeed as hon. Wanendeya did not take many of our brothers and sisters have taken advantage of this amnesty and returned home.  But I think it would be simplistic if we thought discussion alone would solve these issues.  If that were the case, there would be no Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs in the world.  Our brothers in the north, the Lord Resistance Army are not continuing war for lack of Amnesty.  They are aware that if they gave themselves up, they would be forgiven like anybody else and I think the right thing to do in a situation like that is to ensure that we effectively prepare for the alternative, that is effective war against those who are not ready to surrender peacefully.  

Hon. Tiberondwa raised a question of the late Njuki one of the Ugandan journalists who died recently.  This was a case that was covered very well and accurately in the Press.  It is true that following some publications by Mr Njuki, the police wanted to bring a case against him but when they tried to arrest him, they found him in a very poor condition and did not actually take him to prison but helped him to go to a clinic where he was admitted and what the police did was to keep guard at the clinic while the doctors went ahead with their work. Njuki was never tortured, Njuki was never beaten and the hospital reports indicate that Njuki died of anaemia and heart failure.  Now hon. Tiberondwa thinks that for any case raised we should go into inquiry.  I think this would not be like government.  You have to take things as they come.  This is a situation that is explainable, this man, even the relatives have made a statement that he was never in prison, they have made a statement that he died of a natural disease. I think if we hope to get into government and we hope to handle government like this that every time people quarrel we are going to have a commission of inquiry, then we are going to get the country into trouble.  

It is true that the home of hon. Adonia Tiberondwa was visited by the police sometime back; the police in Bushenyi, and this was really in line with the law.  As we all know, we pass laws here and part of the police law is that the Inspector General of Police should he fell that some meeting is likely to disturb the peace, he has the authority to disperse that meeting.  Now on this particular occasion, hon. Tiberondwa had invited a number of people from all over the country to hold a UPC meeting, a political party meeting in his house and we all recall that we sat here as a political organ and decided that high profile political activities should cease and parties should only maintain their headquarters and papers.  So clearly what hon. Tiberondwa was doing, he violated political understanding, which was reached here.  Secondly, it was the impression of the district police commander in Bushenyi that this meeting was likely to lead to the disturbance of the peace and therefore, he did the correct thing to disperse this particular meeting.  Now regarding the issue of hon. Tiberondwa being visited by the police in a hotel in Kasese, hon. Tiberondwa has verbally reported this to me and I have also asked the Inspector General of Police -(Interruption)

MRS IKOTE:  Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister holding the Floor  who we know his side because he is on the Movement side and Tiberondwa on the partisan side, to decide that Tiberondwa held a political meeting when it could even be a meeting of the Movement?  How can the Minister decide a political meeting and a movement meeting?  Is it in order for the hon. Minister to understand citizens of this country when they hold political meetings like that they hold political meetings? 

THE CHAIRMAN: He is quite in order. (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman, for your protection.  As I said, hon. Tiberondwa has reported to me that he was woken up in the middle of the night in hotel room in Kasese and I have requested the Inspector General of Police to let me know under what circumstances this was done and when I get the response, I will let the House and hon. Tiberondwa know. Hon. Tiberondwa has also raised the issue of a reserve force for the NRA.  I think once again we need to be just reminded that we passed a law here that governs the army and in that law is a provision for a reserve force.  So, when hon. Tiberondwa says public do not know, I do not know what the means.  It would be more helpful if he says they have violated the law that should put up the reserve force.  So, there is nothing wrong the government is doing in creating a reserve force because this is implementing a law that this hon. House passed.  Hon. Haji Serunjogi did raise the issue of Abdallah Nassur who is in prison in Luzira.  Abdallah Nassur is in prison following court conviction.  He is not under detention without trial.  He is in prison following court conviction.  So in my view, he has been given fair treatment in the sense that he has gone through the due process of law.  This addition where the President may use his mercy to forgive any convict is really not a matter of right and I do not think that the President should be hurried into doing this.  There is no law being broken. 

Hon. Serunjogi also makes reference to LDUs being used to arrest tax defaulters. As the chairman of the Sectoral Committee did indicate, the LDUs at the moment, some of them are under the army, some under the police and some under the RCs themselves, like the LDUs you see in Kampala until recently this was a force maintained by the City Council for their own purposes which are known to government.  Part of this is to patrol security at night but I do believe that the City Council where it finds it necessary, they may use them to apprehend people who have not paid their tax.  I think what would be correct is to ask whether they are doing this properly.  If they are arresting people and violating their rights, that is a different issue.  But if these people have not paid tax and we provide that if you do not pay tax, you should be arrested, I do not see the problem. These are LDUs under the City Council and the City Council deploys them as they see fit.  

A lot of comments have been made by a number of hon. Members regarding the conditions; the welfare of the police, of the prisons.  I would like first to thank hon. Members for highlighting this situation which also the sectoral committee has done and also government from time to time has indicated the difficulty of improving the conditions in these areas.  So I can only promise that government will take into account the concerns of the House and raise the police and prisons upwards on the scale of priorities within priorities.  But the points which have been made are also clearly spelt out in the chairman’s report on the sector.  

Regarding immigration, hon. Opot has made a case that we need to facilitate them so that they can be more efficient and this is the defection that we intend to move subject to availability of resources of funds.   Hon. Mwandha did raise the question of the police and the high carnage on our roads, which is a regrettable situation that we are losing people through presentable means.  

Now, as far as the traffic is concerned, there are two aspects.  There is a question of implementation and enforcement by the police.  Then there is a question of the law. Government has found that the law is weak, the law on traffic is very weak and my Colleague the hon. Minister for Transport and Communications will soon come back here to seek amendment.  Some of the weaknesses in the law is that for some of these cases you see, someone overspending, if you take him to court, the prescription as to what he should pay is just peanut and he is able to do that and just get away.  So, the hon. Minister for Transport and Communications will be coming here to seek strengthening of the law on traffic.  

Now, on implementation, a number of measures have been taken; they are still inadequate I accept.  One of them has been to establish quick courts.  The Ministry of Justice has helped us, some of these traffic offenders are immediately taken to a court and judgement is delivered there and then.  This has helped in some cases.  But the police also in order to be effective requires some facilities.  It is not enough for a police officer to go to court and say this vehicle was overspending. He has to prove to the magistrate that actually there was overspending.  It is not enough for the police officer to say so.  And in order to help this, we need ourselves to give them more equipments which is a scientific way can measure the speed so that when the police officer goes to court when he is challenged, he can prove his case scientifically.  But the police also have been trying much as we still have this carnage on the roads.  We have noticed in today’s Press that a number of buses were apprehended precisely in reaction to this situation.  But I would like to promise on behalf of government that we would continue to make every effort to ensure that this carnage on the roads is stopped. Really in summary, I think those were the points raised and briefly that is the response.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.

CONSIDERATION OF ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND SECURITY AFFAIRS

Vote 007

Programme 01 - Ministry of Justice

Programme 04

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister for Justice to tell us how this department of public prosecutions could do more in order to bring culprits to book.  A lot of money is usually misappropriated.  For instance, Uganda Revenue Authority would get things confiscated but those things usually go into individual pockets and put to use.  As an example hon. Members, there is a saga which was in the Monitor Newspaper of Friday first to 4th September this year whereby a Mr Sam Kahabwa Katagisa took somebody’s things and after taking them - I will pass this over to you Mr Chairman. 

You find that this officer through the URA anti-smuggling unit took fish which was worth a lot of money and as far as I am aware of nobody has been apprehended because this is the way we get revenue lost to government and yet our taxation is verified.  So I would want to know measures which will be put in place by the Ministry of Justice especially director of public prosecutions to get some of these people to be prosecuted in courts of law so that we get money to run our government.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE (Mr Ekemu): Thank you Mr Chairman.  The directorate of public prosecutions undertakes prosecution and it is trying to put into place several measures to improve upon its performance.  One of them is what has been mentioned in the report by the chairman about the creation and the establishment of private lay prosecutors.  This if you want to notice is an innovation in that we want to expand the services of this department almost to the grassroots.  So this is one step but the other one is that even at the moment the few manpower that we have on the ground, we are taking stock of all possible situations.  As you have been informed, we are giving due attention to speed in prosecuting some matters of some special nature.  For example, embezzlement, we have empowered our attorneys who are now resident in some of the local courts and they are ready to prosecute very speedily embezzlers. So every process or step is being taken but what is important about what hon. Wanendeya is saying is that he seems to think that public prosecution should go out on a hunt for crime.  This is not the case.  When a crime is committed, you as a citizen, you are supposed to report and the reporting point is other authorities especially the police. Prosecution comes in at the time of prosecution.

Vote 05

DR BYARUHANGA: I thank you very much Mr Chairman.  This provision is grossly inadequate, sub-programme 30, 30, that is material supplies and manufactured goods UShs 900,000 in a whole year and this is an office which caters for management of estimates, widows, widowers.  There is gross mishandling of affairs under this office.  The Vote is simply inadequate.  People move upcountry, stay in Kampala for weeks without being attended to. So, this programme 05, either we support adequately or we erase it completely from this budget provision.  Thank you.
 
THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.3,737,145,000 under Vote 07 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

HEAD 107 - MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs115, 400,000 under Head 107 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 011

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 3,783,431,000 under Vote 011 of Judiciary be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 111 - JUDICIARY

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr Chairman, under the Judiciary Department on page D 66 I wish to get assurance from the Minister for Justice or the Minister for Finance that there is a provision under this programme to rehabilitate the Buganda Road Court because at the moment we have only our courts in Mengo where we have the supreme court, we have the high court and the court on Buganda Road has been closed for a long time.  There is congestion you go to Mengo, you need somebody to guide you.  Everything is in confusion.  At least it is high time we renovated Buganda Road Court.  I want that assurance that there will be money to renovate that Buganda Court in this budget.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, following in the foot steps of my Colleague here, I also want to seek an assurance from the Minister responsible that steps are being taken to ensure that we have adequate physical structures to house the high court building in Mbarara. This building was destroyed in the 1979 war and since then, the high court has been depending on adhoc arrangement.  At one time they borrowed a departed Asian property which got dilapidated so much that at one time a resident judge came to me as a Member of Parliament from the area complaining that any time that building was going to collapse on his head and I think since then there have not been any adequate facilities.  Sometimes the judge borrows my Municipal Council buildings which facilities are not really commensurate with the requirement for a high court judge.  In view of the fact that this building was destroyed more than 15 years ago, could the Minister responsible assure the House that serious steps are being taken to ensure that high court is properly housed in Mbarara.  Thank you.

MR EKEMU:  Mr Chairman, as for assurance for renovation of Buganda Road Court -(Interjection)- yes, I would like to assure the hon. Member that Buganda Road Court will be renovated. The question of high court building in Mbarara, does not arise. Really Mbarara has never had high court building as such.  What we have in Mbarara is the sort of thing we have in other districts.  Even if we have posted a resident high court judge now there, but that resident high court judge is actually using facilities which are not of the high court but of the magistrate’s court there.  But this is going to be taken care of under of under similar arrangements.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 310,000,000 under Head 111 for Judiciary be provided.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 021 - MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Programme 01

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, sometime back, this House passed a resolution of returning some of the properties which had been grabbed from the traditional rulers more particularly Buganda.  It was further agreed that those properties which were found being used by Defence be on a rental basis, that is Defence paying the traditional rulers.  These properties include Lubiri Barracks, Basiima house under the Ministry of Defence, High Court at Mengo under Justice and Butikiro.  Recently, the Katikiro of Buganda issued a statement saying that Buganda is facing financial crisis because the government has failed to pay the rent.  The question is, may I, therefore, know from the Ministers concerned whether Vote on this programme is enough to meet the payment require, to raise the rent.  Secondly, I want to know when and what arrangement has the government to surrender these properties to the owners as it was stated.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you Mr Chairman. It is true that that is the arrangement and it is true that the Ministry of Defence has not been paying because they did not have the money in the budget previously.  But in contact with the office of the cultural leader of Buganda, we have already made the first payment or installment and we are going to pay that we owe for the buildings for which we agreed to pay rent in this coming financial year.  Thank you.

Programme 02

HAJI SERUNJOGI: Mr Chairman, I would like to find out from the Minister where are we to consider demobilised soldiers, those who have not been paid.  Are we going to pay them under allowances and salaries under sub-article 1040 because we still have them who have not been paid since being demobilised.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, as the House may recollect, demobilised soldiers are not handled by Ministry of Defence but by the Prime Minister’s Office.  UVAB falls under the Prime Minister’s Office.  So the amount of money that goes to pay demobilised soldiers should be reflected under the Vote of the Prime Minister’s Office.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 98,084,440,000 under Vote 021 - Ministry of Defence be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 121 - MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

AN HON.MEMBER:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I have seen a letter from the Secretary of Defence saying that the current development expenditure provided for is not going to be adequate for this year and he asks for more funds.  I am saying this, especially because of war in the north.  The NRA are doing their level best to contain the situation and their morale is very high but the problem of transport and equipment is creating a problem especially when they are to be moved from one area to another and we need the land mine shooters.  I want to know if the Minister of Finance is making these funds available.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I have received communication belatedly from the authorities regarding some requests which have been put by different committees and I have not sorted out exactly which is which except for a few in police and Internal Affairs which I have to move.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, it is true that the level of funding for the Ministry of Defence is extremely inadequate but what we have here is what we discussed with the Ministry of Finance.  Really it was determined by our resource envelope.  We tried to keep our budget within the means available to government.  However, as the Minister has said, we have started a process of discussing with the Minister for Finance to see whether preparations can be made to provide extra funds for areas which make it extremely difficult for us to execute our mandate to defend this country and I am very hopeful that you will find an answer to that problem.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 5,200,000,000 under Head 121 - Ministry of Defence be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 022 - MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.1,012,786,000 under Vote 022 - Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 122 - MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs107,000,000 under Head 122 - Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 037 - LAW REFORM COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 528,516,000 under Vote 037 - Law Reform Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 137 - LAW REFORM COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 111,000,000- under Head 137 - Law Reform Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 038 - UGANDA POLICE FORCE

Programme 07

AN HON. MEMBER: Under Programme 07, that is 1010 I see staff salaries over five billion whereas I do not see anywhere where training is provided for and yet I know that all the LDUs to be, some of them are not trained e.g. the vigilantees they do not know any police work.  So I do not know; now that training is not provided for, does that mean we are not going to train LDUs this Financial Year or when will the training be?  Then two; if it is salaries alone, is it supposed to cater for - I need clarification whether it is to cater for all the salaries of vigilantees who are in Karamoja whom I am told the number is 8,000. Some are in Kapchorwa, all the LDUs in Buganda region and Western and all the 3000 anti stock safety unit.  Thank you.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  It is true that all the local defence units have to undergo some basic training so that they can execute their job properly and this training is carried out under both defence and police under the various provisions under general training.  So we do not provide it under local defence units as such.  They will also be trained under the Vote of Training for Police or the Army.  The second question, it is true that the provision here is going to cover all local defence units.  The chairman of the sectoral committee did indicate that we are using different terminology, local defence units vigilantees and home guards but all those are being covered here under local defence units, the vigilantees, the home guards and the LDUs.  This is the total vote that is going to provide for them Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 35,273,884,000 under vote 038 - Uganda Police Force be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 138 - UGANDA POLICE FORCE

MR J. NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, allow me to point out that as a Member of the Public Accounts Committee, I was privileged to visit some of the buildings in Naguru and Nsambya.  They were found to be in very dilapidated condition especially the barracks; that is one.  Two; every year when the estimates of development for Police are discussed, there is always or people always forget the fact that Mbarara Police Station was also destroyed during the war of 1979 and since then, it has been operating in uniports and what surprises me and my people is that, whereas government has put in place Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme (NURP) towns like Mbarara, Masaka and others which have been affected by the 1979 war are always overlooked.  Could we get an assurance that something can be done about this in the not too distant future.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

DR KIYONGA:  First Mr Chairman, hon. John Ntimba as Members have already observed that the conditions for accommodation in the Police are in a poor state and the sector chairman did indicate that the Ministry tried to get funds to improve accommodation for the police and the prisons but we were unable to obtain these funds because of the shortage of resources in government.  Otherwise, as soon as funds are provided all areas that do not have Police accommodation or police offices would be provided for including Mbarara.

Now, his more general question, assurance that other areas which were affected by wars in the past will receive funding for rehabilitation, I can only answer it in two ways.

First that there is some general rehabilitation going on in the areas mentioned; they may not be specific for the police, they may not be for the buildings which were destroyed, but for as long as generally the economy picks up there and revenue is collected, then rehabilitation will be done.  Although there is NURP in the North, we should not be under the impression that it is also repairing every broken piece of property there.  For example, in Lira the Prison is - I think it is the worst prison we have now. It could fall down any time and it is not provided for under NURP.  So, it would be wrong to think that NURP has solved all the problems in the North and other areas are the ones being left in the cold, Mr Chairman.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 2,500,000,000 under Head 138 - Uganda Police Force be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 039 - PRISON SERVICE 

Programme 01

REV. ANGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I see that under Programme 01, under operation and maintenance of vehicles, both administration operational, that some good money has been voted for, but all I see - because I happen to be residing somewhere on the corridor of that place between criminals and lunatics, that these people have got only one very old Leyland Bus which I see bringing those that are coming to court around 9.00 a.m. and then it takes them back around 2.00 p.m. or 3.00 p.m. So, I do not know whether it is proper that we continue maintaining this one vehicle as opposed to getting other vehicles, which would facilitate these people in bringing these people to court and then taking them back, because as I said, these people have no vehicles.  Outside this, I normally see move a very old Volkswagen Van.  So, I think if this money is just going for maintenance of such old vehicles, then it is as good as useless, Mr Chairman.

DR KIYONGA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I appreciate the comment of concern from hon. Rev. Atwai, but I would like to call his attention to page 18 of the chairman’s report of the Sectoral Committee chairman.  The Ministry has convinced the Sectoral Committee that there is need to provide more vehicles to the prison service, we had hoped we could get an additional eight lorries and four Pick Ups and five cars which would have referred UShs 600 million and I do believe that the Minister of Finance with the voice of NRC will look at this recommendation favourably.  But in addition, it is still necessary that we continue maintaining whatever we have, otherwise, we come to s stand still last year, under Supplementary provisions, we managed to buy one bus and one pick up which also will need fuel and maintenance.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

Programme 02

Programme 03

MR RWAKAKOKO:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister under that programme, there is money UShs 646,896,000 which is similar to the one in programme 23030 this is purchase of materials.  These two units, the Prison Industries and Firms, used to contribute substantially to the revenue of this Vote and in fact, they used to even fund their population in aid from them  - used to fund even other ministries.  Can the Minister give the information as to the status of these production units.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  What hon. Rwakakooko is saying is true, that in the past, these firms and Industries used to contribute substantially to the needs of Government and the Prisons Services.  But the report of the chairman did clearly indicate that over the years, the Prison industries and firms required capitalization, because the assets they used to use before have ground almost to a halt.  But because of shortage of resources within Government, the capitalization has not been provided and therefore, the production is almost making no contribution to the needs of the prison.

Programme 04

Programme 05

Programme 06

Programme 07

Programme 08

Programme 09

Programme 10

Programme 11

Programme 12

Programme 13

Programme 14

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 7,549,854,000 under Vote 039 - Uganda Prisons Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 139 - PRISONS SERVICES

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 350,000,000 under Head 139 - Uganda Prisons Services be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Council of the whole House do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Votes 007, 011, 021, 022, 037, 038, 039 and Head 107,111 121, 122, 137, 138, and 139 and has passed them without Amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY


THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman,I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Reports adopted and Estimates passed; and with that, we have come to the end of today’s Session and we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday, 12 September 1995)

