Friday, 1 September 2006

Parliament met at 10.17 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I have received a letter, I hope you will get your copies, but I think I should read it. The letter is from an organisation called Junior Chamber International (JCI), Uganda. It is addressed to me and to Members of Parliament. 

The subject is: “Give a shoe to the IDPs in Northern Uganda. 
The purpose of this proposal is to formulate strategies between Members of Parliament and Junior Chamber International, Uganda Chapter to enable people living in IDP camps in Northern Uganda to improve their day-to-day living by providing them with shoes. 

Junior Chamber International, Uganda Chapter is a worldwide federation of young leaders and entrepreneurs. This federation was incorporated in 1955 as a non-profit organisation, with a purpose of contributing to the advancement of the global community by providing the opportunity for young people to develop their leadership skills, social responsibility, fellowship and entrepreneurship necessary to create positive change, furthering JCI’s training development and growth.  

Since its establishment, more than 60,000 members, friends and corporate sponsors for more than 140 countries, including Uganda, have joined the federation. 

The donations have all well surpassed  $6.5 million. Such contributions not only ensure just financial viability, but also guarantee that many valuable international projects are conducted each year. The federation has funded numerous international projects that provide assistance in training and development around the world. Each year the federation Uganda chapter runs projects to assist the needy. This year, however, the people living in displaced camps in Northern Uganda were taken as a priority in September.

Mechanisms of this partnership will propose that Members of Parliament and JCI utilise their different competences to provide shoes to the people living in IDP camps in Northern Uganda to improve their day-to-day living. We, therefore, kindly request that Members of Parliament sponsor the project of giving Shs 10,000 each and donate second hand shoes in kind from their homes to people in IDP camps as one way of saying, ‘We are with you for good or for worse.’

JCI here collects packs and delivers the shoes to the people in displaced camps. ‘Give a shoe to the IDPs’ is one of the projects JCI has fronted to the Ugandan corporate companies in turn. Therefore, Members of Parliament will benefit from this project when it is successfully done.”  

It is a long letter but this entire exercise will run for four weeks where JCI shall run adverts on the radio and TV asking individual persons in and around Kampala to donate shoes to the people in IDP camps. At the climax end of the four weeks, JCI will conduct a charity match along the streets of Kampala flagged by JCI Patron, Dr Maggie Kigozi, of Uganda Investment Authority and other ministers in Government.  

Members of Parliament will be sent a programme for the day and will match along with guests of honour with their banners up. We shall thereafter converge for a press conference at Kampala Constitutional Square where the Kampalians will register their contributions to the people displaced by war in Northern Uganda. They are appealing to you to participate in this programme whose aim is to provide shoes in IDP camps. 

I personally think it is a noble appeal, which we should support. But the organisers have informed me that they are sending individual letters to Members who will read and then see how best to participate in this exercise.

This will not be the first time for Parliament of Uganda to show solidarity with people in these camps. You remember in the other Parliament we collected money and certain items were sent and people in IPD camps appreciated. So, I think the Eighth Parliament should emulate the Seventh Parliament and support this appeal. I thank you. 

10.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As a person who comes from the war affected areas, I would like on behalf of our colleagues to thank the initiative of the youths who have written to you and also really, we would like to register our appreciation and thanks to Parliament although the activities that took place last time were in the Seventh Parliament. It was still the Parliament of Uganda that showed absolute solidarity with the cause of the suffering people in Northern Uganda.

And we are glad to say that the appeal of Parliament that time that the peace process be perused has reached a stage where we can comfortably say that there is light at the end of the tunnel.  We pledge our commitment and support to Parliament and to all those Ugandans because the challenges after the silencing of the guns are going to be so enormous. It will take our individual generosity and humanity for the people to return home and regain their normal lives. We shall be available for anything that Parliament thinks we should do to help this process. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, honourable members, yesterday I invoked the provisions in the Budget Act and extended the period of 31st to today. Unfortunately, it seems I do not see the chairman of the committee – oh! You are here. But I do not see the minister. Maybe the technical staff of the ministry may take notice and the minister may come later so that we proceed with this report. But I have to register my appreciation to you, honourable members, who have been able to come on time. I hope others will come but I am really appreciative of your attitude to work. 

It was the diligence, which had been exhibited in the past that caused me to invoke the discretion under 22 to extend because it was not your fault; it was a fault of power; it was a fault of being new in Parliament. That is why I extended and, therefore, it was encouraging to see that you have been able to come and hope others will come. Let us proceed; others will join us.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY FOR THE BUDGET PROPOSALS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/07

10.28
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Rose Munyira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am going to present a report for the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I am stepping in for my chairperson, hon. Ahabwe Pereza, who has travelled on official duty.  I am stepping in as the vice-chairperson of that committee.

Mr Speaker, before I proceed, allow me to lay on Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee, while considering the policy statement and budget estimates for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the financial year 2006/07. The report of the committee is also herein included.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee considered the budget estimates for the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry for the financial year 2006/07 and we are presenting it in accordance with Article 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, the committee reviewed and examined the policy statement of the ministry. We reviewed the progress of its recommendations to the Budget Committee on the macro-economic plan and indicative budget framework for the ministry. We examined the draft estimates of the revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2006/07. We reviewed the observations and recommendations made on the ministry’s budget estimates for the last financial year 2005/06. We held discussions with the sector ministers and technical staff as well as heads of statutory institutions within the ministry’s jurisdiction and we received and examined the views of the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda. 

I would like to take this opportunity, honourable Speaker, to thank all those stakeholders and the staff of Parliament for the contributions that enabled the committee to compile this report. The committee made the following general observations:

The committee appreciates the efforts taken by the ministry to increase support staff after the function analysis that was carried out. However, there is need to fast track the process of recruitment to address areas of concern to the business sector. Tourism, Trade and Industry sector contributes about 22 per cent of Uganda’s GDP with tourism being one of the biggest foreign exchange earners for Uganda. However, the budgetary allocations to the ministry of about 0.028 per cent of GDP do not depict that fact. 

Despite the committee’s recommendations in the May 2006 MTEF report to the budget committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: For us to be able to follow, since you are summarising, maybe you indicate the page at which you are.

MS MUNYIRA: Okay. I hope it will match because I had not marked out the pages on the main report.  This is page 2, which is still matching with the main report. So, despite the committee’s recommendations in the May 2006 MTEF report to the Budget Committee that the “Jua kali” sector should remain under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, where it is best suited, the funding for this sector has been transferred to the Ministry of Local Government.

The impending merger for Uganda Investment Authority, Uganda Export Promotion Board and Uganda Tourist Board and the untold silence on the part of Government has left these organisations in the state of uncertainty for many years. This has reduced their productive capacity. Despite several committee recommendations to abandon the merger, the official Government position is still unknown.

Mr Speaker, the ministry plans to carry out various ICT programmes in its departments. The committee notes that there is a new ministry in charge of ICT whose input would help to streamline and modernise the level and usage of information, communication technology in the ministry.

Uganda is still in arrears on its annual membership contributions to almost all international organisations with whom the country is associated and in the report we indicated the amounts that are owed to the various international organisations. I think that is page 3.  

In some cases, like with the World Tourism Organisation, the country has been suspended from enjoying membership rights and benefits due to the long outstanding arrears. 

The committee was informed that the ministry receives only Shs 150 million to cater for the international obligations. The committee noted that the organisations to which the country is indebted are flexible and have asked for payment schedules in order for us to pay in instalments, but the Ministry of Finance could not meet even this.

There is a weak linkage between the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and that of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  Considering the roles of the two ministries, it should be noted that the weak forward and backward linkages between these two separate but inter-dependent sectors impacts negatively on the mandates of both ministries and overall performance of the national economy.

Another observation was that Kigumba Cooperative College is supposed to offer specialised training for cooperative workers. However, since it was put under the Ministry of Education and Sports, it is in a sorry state.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee in the same vein made associated recommendations as follows:

The ministry should fast track the process of recruitment and provide an explicit structure of its capacity to address the key areas of concern to the business sector, such as, trade development, policies and strategies for promoting Uganda’s industry and tourism development, which are notably absent.

If indeed we believe what we preach that the sustainable economy, anchor and hope for prosperity for the country is trade and industrialisation, then it is high time this gospel was reflected in reasonable budgetary allocations for the sectors.  Government should increase budgetary allocations to the sector of trade plus the other sectors within the ministry.  

The funding for the “Jua kali” sector should revert back to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry where it is best suited, and then Government should abandon the long standing proposed merger between UIA, UTB and Uganda Export Promotion Board since it appears that it is no longer viable. The three institutions are better off as separate entities and should be left to operate in that way.

The ministry should link up with the new ICT Ministry to implement its ICT initiatives. This will provide a more focussed approach and more benefits. 

The Ministry of Finance should provide funds to reduce the arrears in membership to the international organisations and the Members felt that this fund should be provided specifically for that purpose to the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and cushioned against unforeseeable budget reductions.  

The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should establish conspicuous and practical linkages, which will enable them to benefit from each other and lead the development process towards Prosperity for All. 

The policy on restructuring should be reviewed so that institutions previously under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, and transferred to the Ministry of Education and Sports, to the Ministry of Finance and to the President’s Office, are returned to their mother ministry where they will best be coordinated.

Mr Speaker, let me highlight a few observations on the many planned activities of the ministry for which money is being requested:

Under the trade sector, the national trade policy is not yet in place. The committee was informed that it has been prepared and is ready for submission to Cabinet. 

Although there has been a steady increase in export earnings from 2003 to 2006, there has also been an increase in the trade deficit of up to 15.8 per cent. This is in spite of the efforts to support and promote national non-traditional exports through diversification.  

The ministry’s spending activities include: pushing for the consideration of a Cabinet memorandum on Uganda joining the COMESA free trade area. The committee, however, observes that this position is contradictory to the resolution made by the summit held by the three heads of state of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, where it is stated that Uganda and Kenya pull out of COMESA by December 2006 and Tanzania out of SADC to fulfil the World Trade Organisation conditions required to belong to one union.  

THE SPEAKER: What we can do is, for instance, when you come to page 5, “Key planned programmes and activities for financial year 2005/06”; this is the year which actually has ended because we are now in 2006/07. It is possible to just say, “What had been planned for the past year can be found on page 5 to page 6 and for achievements you can look on page 7”. Then you concentrate – because we are really dealing with financial year 2006/07 and eventually we shall come and debate the policies after the budget. I think it will be faster that way if you can do that.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the problem we are facing is the fact that the shadow minister for this sector served the committee with his report and the chairperson is making a presentation as if she is responding to the issues, which were raised. That confuses us because I have tried to follow this report and I do not know where she is. I wish she could really restrict herself to this written report so that those issues can be responded to at the appropriate time and then in that way we will be able to have a flow of the report. Thank you.  

MS MUNYIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. But as I had said, I had come up with a summary of the report and I was focusing mainly on the observations and the recommendations that we came up with as a committee. Nonetheless, for the benefit of the Members so that we move together, maybe I revert back to the full report so that we can move as a team.

THE SPEAKER: Just highlight the recommendations.

MS MUNYIRA: So, I was looking at the achievements and the recommendations that the committee came up with under the trade sector and when we get to page 7, I think we can see some of the achievements that were made in the last financial year. The sector came up with some of the issues that had been covered, for example, as I said, the trade policy that is greatly required for the sector to operate very well has not been put in place. But they informed us that it is in place now and they are ready to put it before the House.

On page 8, we came up with some of the pending or ongoing activities and programmes within the sector, for example, market access and trade negotiations, contributions to international organisations – I think I commented on that one. 

Then also in the area of research, training and sensitisation - I also mentioned what Cabinet is thinking of carrying out or implementing, for example, the department will continue to push for consideration of various memoranda now before Cabinet, including finalisation of the process of enacting the competitive law, the Cabinet memo on the principles for consumer protection legislation and the rest as you can see.  

I talked about ratification of COMESA protocol, which the Members felt was not in line with the World Trade Organisation requirement. If Uganda now belongs to the East African Community, then it is a requirement that maybe we move out of the other regional organisations. 

The new policies and programmes, participation in trade by the poor and the disadvantaged, the marketing information system will be established in all the districts of Uganda. In addition, the department will support emerging small-scale enterprises and build capacity of current and potential exporters through export trade training and skills training in all the districts. This is in a bid to assist promote small-scale trade. 

The committee came up with some recommendations also in this one as you can see on page 11. The ministry should expedite the process of having national trade policy in place. I think you have talked about that one.

Under the sector of tourism and wildlife, on performance of the previous year’s budget, the committee noted that some of the planned activities and programmes were carried out like workshops with key stakeholders, mobilisation, sensitisation and involvement of more communities in management of income generating activities; participation in decision making and implementation processes of the East African Community. 

There are further planned activities on page 13. During that very financial year, under wildlife, the final draft orders for the domestication of the convention on international trade in endangered species or wild fauna and flora and Lusaka Agreement on cooperative enforcement, among others.

Tourism

They published and distributed national reports on the consolidated low and high season expenditure and motivation survey, accommodation establishments and employment surveys, 2002; non-accommodation business establishments and related employment surveys.

The committee made some observations concerning this sector as you can see on page 16. We noted that the department has done a good job in promoting Uganda’s tourism but is affected by the negative travel advisories about Uganda whenever there is an isolated incident, for example, of insecurity. Then this puts off some of the would-be tourists who would come to this country and promote this sector.

The committee also was informed that more visitors are now coming to the country under the sector of tourism. 

Then also the committee noted that there is an increase in construction of hotels and we observed that there is lack or poor recording of our local tourism performance. So, some of the recommendations that we came up with are in line with the observations that I have just mentioned as you can see on page 17. That the ministry does whatever is possible to curb the negative travel advisories and also to liase with Uganda Hotel Owners Association to see that the training of employees for the hotels is up-to-date, especially now that we are going to host CHOGM.

The ministry should also ensure that hotels are classified according to the international standards because this one is very necessary as we intend to get visitors to utilise these facilities.

Under the sector of industry and technology, we were also availed with the information that the performance of the ministry is as follows: They had achieved some of their key planned activities as we can see on pages 17 to 18: Implementation of the national industrialization policy; training and upgrading industry and technology staff in policy development, analysis and implementation; building more linkages for small and medium enterprises with domestic, regional and global players.

Achievements for the sector during the financial year 2005/06 are also indicated on pages 18 and 19. They presented before the committee also their planned activities for 2006/07. As I had mentioned earlier, implementation of the national industrialisation policy; training and upgrading industry and technology staff in the policy development, analysis and implementation; building more linkages for small and medium enterprises with domestic, regional and global players; constructing common facilities centre for “Jua Kali” (Jua Kali Park) at Luzira industrial park; assist them also carryout exhibitions at a regional level; import inspection; facilitation of UNBS statistics to fully participate in international and regional standard setting; rehabilitate the existing infrastructure for technology development.

The committee made observations as we can see on page 20 and we also recommended that: 

•	The ministry should expedite the formulation of industrialisation policy and have it in place before the end of this financial year.

•	Government should provide the private sector with incentives to substitute their energy needs and boost the current stagnating level of production. 

Cooperatives

The committee noted that the department of cooperative development is mandated to ensure that a vibrant cooperative movement is developed and that the benefits accruing to their members from such cooperative action are realised. We observed that despite the fact that this department realised achievements in the last financial year, it still needs to be strengthened in order to effectively perform its functions.

For the previous financial year, the sub-sector also had some achievements, for example, registration of cooperatives had gone up; financial services had been overhauled and over 4,500 tonnes of commodities between July 2005 and April 2006 had been realised. They further generated a savings turnover of Shs 85 billion and loans worth Shs 75 billion during the financial year. 

Area cooperative enterprises: Two area cooperative enterprises were also registered, bringing the total to 25. About 92 per cent of the area cooperative enterprises are rural based while eight per cent are in the urban areas.

Another achievement was under the warehouse receipt system. This was put in place and a law was passed here in order to facilitate the marketing of agricultural produce. The department pursued the further development of the warehouse receipt system. The Bill was passed by Parliament during the last financial year; the passing of this Bill has the effect of increased farmers’ confidence and interest in the system.

They also had some achievements in inspections and investigations. The department inspected the following cooperatives as stated on page 21. Audits and annual returns were also carried out by the department on primary cooperative societies and some district and national cooperative unions. The cooperatives that were audited can be found on page 22. 

They also resolved some disputes. Under ongoing policies and programmes under that sector, the committee noted the following: 

Strengthening the cooperative movement. All efforts are being taken to rebuild and revitalise the cooperative movement in order to ensure self-reliance, equity, cost effectiveness and mass participation in the development of the country. You will agree with me that this area has been of interest to most of us in ensuring that cooperatives are supported at the grass roots.

Promotion of savings and credit cooperatives

Promotion of value addition especially on the agricultural products.
 
The Warehouse Receipt and Uganda Commodity Exchange. These two programmes will be strengthened further as a means of facilitating agriculture commodity trading, improving the financing options for agriculture and ensuring that the farmers earn premium process for their produce.

The sector also had some new policies and programmes. These include:
 
Model sub-county development programme. They hope to put these in place once their budget is passed. This is a component of the country’s rural development strategy aiming at eradicating poverty at household level. This will comprise of the following components: cooperatives, marketing, value addition and micro-finance.
 
New cooperatives, which will include produce cooperatives, workers cooperatives, health cooperatives and housing cooperatives. The idea is to mobilise society especially the youth with specific skills into productive and gainful employment, improve the living conditions and healthcare provision to the people. 

The committee observed the following: 
The producer aspect of cooperatives has been ignored and much emphasis put on the savings and credit aspect. 

A lot of money is going into Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOS) yet the users and cooperative officers are not yet trained in auditing and book keeping. 

In that vein, the committee recommended the following: 

•	A link should be created between the SACCOS and producer cooperatives at parish level, with the view of strengthening the linkage between production, processing and marketing.

•	Managers of SACCOS should be trained in auditing and book keeping to ensure proper handling of public funds.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as regards the Museums and Monuments Department, the committee noted that in order to relate to its functions and in accordance with the recommendations of the functional analysis of the ministry, its name has changed from that of Antiquities and Museums to that of Museums and Monuments. 

The department is responsible for the preservation, conservation, promotion, presentation and protection of the national cultural and natural heritage. It is also responsible for identification, documentation, gazetting and protection of sites. 

This department had some achievements in the last financial year. A national register of sites in most parts of the country was carried out and a data bank developed for this sector. 

They also had ongoing activities and programmes for 2005/06 and they included the following: 

•	Development of the Fort Portal Cultural Heritage. 
•	Construction of Kabale Culture Centre and Museum.
•	Development of Bigobyamugenyi and Ntuusi Archaeological sites.
•	Development of the Moroto Cultural Museum.
•	Fencing of the Uganda Museum.  

The committee observed the following: 

The sense of awareness about our cultural heritage in Uganda is low. As a result, we are not able to attract tourists to various cultural sites around the country. 

Uganda does not have a cultural village that shows the lifestyle of its different tribes within Uganda, which could form a tourist attraction.

The Members recommended the following: 

•	The Museum and Monuments Department should create awareness so as to promote internal tourism and attract tourists from outside.

•	The department should set up a cultural village. This would be a good idea so that tourists who are not able to move around the whole country can at least have a glimpse of the various cultures of Uganda from this cultural village.

We also examined the performance of statutory institutions that are under the jurisdiction of the ministry. The following institutions fall under this ministry: Uganda Export Promotion Board, Uganda National Bureau of Standards, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, Management Training and Advisory Centre, Uganda Wildlife Authority, Uganda Tourist Board and the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre. We listened to their presentations, the performance of the above institutions was analysed and this is within the report. 

Mr Speaker, it is important to mention that Uganda Export Promotion Board still has arrears relating to their former staff that includes Pay As You Earn, National Social Security Fund and staff gratuity. The amount continues to grow at the rate of Shs 4.9 million per month, which annually will amount to Shs 58.8 million. As a result of this, NSSF has sued the management of UEPB.

The committee was concerned that UEPB operates under a very constrained and limited budget mainly catering for wages of their staff. The committee however appreciates that despite that, the sector has been able to use its initiative to start and accomplish various programmes.

Members recommended as follows: 

•	The Ministry of Finance should clear the arrears owed to former staff of UEPB.
	 
•	More funds should also be availed for this sector.

Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA)

Uganda Wildlife Authority was established in 1996 by the Uganda Wildlife Statute, now Wildlife Act 2000 Cap 200 through a merger of the former Uganda National Parks (a parastatal) and the Game Department. 

UWA is mandated to conserve the country’s wildlife and protect and maintain the nation’s network of wildlife protected areas and other critical wildlife habitants. The committee noted that UWA is responsible for the management of ten national parks, 12 wildlife reserves and seven wildlife sanctuaries. 

The Members observed that: 

There are still a number of areas, which have wrangles on land adjustment. We were informed that a detailed paper has already been submitted to the ministry with proposals to sort out the land adjustment issues in Pian-Upe, Mt Elgon especially Benet area, Bwindi, Katonga, Ajai and Karuma.

The marking of international boundaries that are also Protected Area Boundaries has not been done in some areas. The Members noted that UWA can only survey and mark boundaries within the country. It is the mandate of the Ministry responsible for Lands and Surveys to collaborate with Ministry of Foreign Affairs to get this done.

There were various observations made concerning the statute to be reviewed, and I just want to say something about that because it needs urgent attention. The statute is yet to be reviewed to make UWA more effective. The committee was informed that UWA has already submitted its input for the required amendments. 

As a paramilitary agency that uses and carries arms, UWA is yet to be legally gazetted as required by the law. However, this has been pending since 1996. The staff requests that they be exempted from PAYE on the basis of being an armed force like their counter-parts in the police force, UPDF and prisons.

The committee was informed that there are Hima Cement quarries in Dura in Queen Elizabeth National Park and that a lease to these lime quarries was given out without the authority and benefit of UWA. UWA has requested the ministry to liase with the Ministry of Lands to correct this anomaly.

Members noted that the old tourism concessions signed for Mweya, Paraa, Chobe and Sambiya have a 25-mile radius exclusion zone, thus limiting any further tourism investments in these areas. This is yet to be re-negotiated as spelt out by the ministerial concessions review committee.

Concerning roads that run through or up to UWA areas, the committee was informed that UWA is responsible for maintaining and managing the roads within the protected area but the public roads that run through the reserves or up to that area have to be maintained by the local or central Government. That is why they have not been attended to. 

Members came up with some recommendations concerning UWA. These are: 

•	That the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should collaborate and follow up the Ministry responsible for Lands and Surveys and that of Foreign Affairs to ensure that the international boundaries that are also Protected Area Boundaries are clearly marked.

•	The ministry should expedite the consideration and implementation of the proposals by UWA for areas, which have wrangles on land adjustments.

•	The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should speed up the process of the review of the wildlife statute.

•	UWA should be legally gazetted as required by the law in its capacity as a paramilitary urgency as they have put in their request.

•	The ministry should liase with the Ministry of Lands to revert the authority and benefits of the lease for the Hima Cement quarries in Dura, Queen Elizabeth National Park to UWA. 

•	The old tourism concessions signed for Mweya, Paraa, Chobe and Sambiya, which are limiting the expansion of UWA and its operations, should be re-negotiated as spelt out by the ministerial concessions review committee.

•	The Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry should link up with the Ministry of Local Government and maintain public roads in that area.  

For the financial year 2005/06, UWA’s annual budget was Shs 32.1 billion. The budget for the sector for this financial year, 2006/07, is Shs 31.8 billion. The committee noted that a large proportion of this budget comes from donors mainly the World Bank.

Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC)

Mr Speaker, Uganda Wildlife Education Centre was also examined and we listened to their proposals. The committee came up with the following observations concerning this centre: 

•	We observed that most facilities of this kind worldwide are supported by grants and legacies from the government and public since the nature of services they provide is that of public good.
	  
•	We further observed that the World Bank funding for the centre ends in 2007.

•	UWEC has been carrying out its mandate as a trustee but has no legal instrument to back it up. 

The Members of the committee recommended the following: 

•	That Government should plan for the end of the World Bank funding which we have said comes to an end in 2007 otherwise, the centre will have no funds to carry out their activities.

•	A legal instrument should be formulated for UWEC so that it can carry out its mandate as required.

Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS)

Mr Speaker and honourable members, on page 31, we also examined the budget proposals and planned activities for the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. 

The bureau is mandated to develop and promote standardisation, quality assurance, laboratory testing and meteorology, to enhance the competitiveness of local industry and to strengthen Uganda’s economy and promote quality, safety and fair trade. 

The budget for the sector for the previous financial year was Shs 3.84 billion. For this financial year their budget still stands at the same figure. However, UNBS has requested that its budget be increased to Shs 12.4 billion with Shs 7.1 billion as recurrent budget and Shs 5.3 billion as development budget due to the increased demand and the scope of services that it provides.  

The Members observed the following: 

•	UNBS lacks a home of its own. It still has to rent space from the Uganda Industrial Research Institute and yet has a number of sensitive laboratories and equipment that ought to be located in permanent premises. 

•	Private sector growth requires the active involvement of UNBS. However, due consideration is not given to the same in allocating the available funds to the bureau of standards. 

•	The outdated legal framework hampers UNBS from the effective control of counterfeits flooding Ugandan markets thereby reducing opportunities of increasing domestic revenue from the sale of locally manufactured products.

•	The public is not well sensitised about consumption of counterfeits and expired products, which is a problem. Unless people are sensitised, the country continues being flooded with these expired products that are a problem to people’s health. Furthermore, this does not create confidence in whatever people have purchased in the market.

In consideration of those observations, the Members came up with the following recommendations on page 32: 

•	That Government should as soon as possible set up a permanent home for UNBS. 

•	Government should increase its budgetary allocations to UNBS to enable it carry out its expected mandate and speed up the growth of the private sector.  

•	While UNBS has made an effort to fight the problem of counterfeits, the process of amending the existing counterfeit laws to enforce regulations against illegal and substandard products should be expedited. 

•	Although it is financially constrained, UNBS should increase surveillance around the country to curb counterfeiting. 

•	UNBS should invest in sensitisation programmes on the dangers of consumption and use of counterfeit products. 

Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI)

Mr Speaker, we also examined Uganda Industrial Research Institute. This sector is of critical relevance regarding poverty eradication by virtue of its mandate. It aims at encouraging self-employment through the distribution of technology to qualified entrepreneurs to produce high quality product output in disseminated industrial units and to meet capacity demands even for export markets. 

The Members observed the following:

•	UIRI is set to metamorphose into a Government science unit and a technology development sector in order to improve its service delivery. The committee welcomes this development and notes that it is necessary for UIRI to be restructured and resourced to play its new mandate.

•	UIRI requires a budget of Shs 16.74 billion to cater for its transformation. However, only Shs 3.03 billion has been provided for all the institute’s operations for the financial year 2006/07.  

•	UIRI needs to recruit new and specialized staff to suit its new role. However, funds have not been availed for the purpose.  

The committee recommended that the sector be availed funds for restructuring and re-sourcing to enable it fulfil its new mandate.
 
Management Training and Advisory Centre

Mr Speaker, we also examined Management Training and Advisory Centre. The mission of this sector is to improve managerial performance through the provision of needs-based quality management training, consultancy and research services. The values of MTAC include customer focus, quality service, professionalism and environmental sustainability.  

The Members observed that foreigners occupy most of the managerial positions and middle managerial positions in corporate companies in Uganda. 

The committee recommended that MTAC be funded to carry out a survey to establish the reasons for failure of majority of Ugandans to acquire top managerial positions in corporate companies and how this can be improved. 
 
Uganda Tourist Board (UTB)

On page 34, we also examined Uganda Tourist Board. The board’s mandate is to promote and popularise Uganda as a viable holiday destination both locally and internationally in order to - 
•	increase the contribution of tourism earnings and gross domestic product.

•	improve Uganda’s competitiveness as an international tourism destination.

•	increase Uganda’s share of Africa’s and World tourism market.  

•	The Members however observed that: 
	 
•	UTB branded itself as “Tourism Uganda” in order to revamp its image with a view to promote Uganda’s tourism more effectively and efficiently.
	 
•	The board is part and parcel of the branding of Uganda as, “Gifted by Nature.”

•	The committee learnt that the cost-benefit analysis of the promotional programme, “Gifted by Nature” had been carried out for future reference. An evaluation report of this programme was provided to the committee.  

The committee recommended that: 

•	UTB should spearhead and create more ways of promoting Uganda as a tourist destination both locally and internationally.  

•	On page 35, we have a report on recommendations of the programmes and activities made by the Budget Committee in the May 2006 report. The first recommendation –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think this is not part of your report but a report of a different committee. I think that should have been added as an annex for reference so that the House notes that earlier there was another committee that made this report. You could then ask us to note the recommendations of that committee. I think you should proceed with the budget proposals.

MS MUNYIRA: Honourable members, I have been advised to bring to your attention the recommendations of the committee on page 35 and part of page 36. 

As regards the budgetary proposals, the committee recommends the following amounts for approval of Vote 015 for Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry for the financial year 2006/07. 

•	Recurrent expenditure    	Shs 4,736,002,000  
•	Development expenditure Shs 33,060,004,000 
•	Total                       		Shs 37,796,006,000  

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee for this report, which has been presented.  

11.21
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Baptist Kawanga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson of our committee for the presentation and I want to state that I actively participated in the deliberations. I am only responding out of political good manners. 

The problems of this ministry are not exposed in the report and I think it is absolutely necessary that Government know that this is a neglected sector in spite of its importance in the economy. I cannot blame the chairperson for his good political manners, that is how he is and I think it is my role to do the opposite. 

Mr Speaker, this ministry takes charge of very vital sectors of the nation’s economy like tourism, trade and industry. In addition, the ministry also handles cooperative development. Originally, commerce and industry was a ministry in its own right, so was marketing and cooperatives. Presently, tourism qualifies to be a separate ministry but in spite of this Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry has over the years been virtually ignored. It has been characterized by vital statutory bodies and the absence of funding for all vital functions in the ministry. 

Year in and out Government has not responded to the cries of the officials of the ministry and has even ignored recommendations made by Parliament through reports of the sessional committee. The policy statement for the year 2005/06 gave as one of its constraints low budgetary allocations. It was stated there that although the budget outturn for both recurrent and development looked impressive because it was 95 percent, these were achieved against the background of low budgetary allocations which are insufficient in terms of funding the ministry’s mandate.  As a result some of the activities are partly done while others have been left out.

The 2005/2006 policy statement provides for the analysis of the components of Uganda’s GDP, which reveals that various sub sectors under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry account for about 22 percent of the GDP. 

On the expenditure side, the resources offered to the ministry are estimated at 0.028 percent of GDP.  This is a classic example of milking a cow without feeding it.  The policy statement of 2006 sums up this decimal picture.  

Wage constitutes 75 percent of the ministry’s budget. Out of the Ugshs 2.8 billion available for non-wage, Ugshs 2.2 billion is for wage salvation and utilities take Ugshs 0.13 billion that is five percent. This leaves the ministry with Ugshs 0.48 billion that is 21 percent for its operations.  Obviously this is grossly inadequate.  

Now let us look at trade. The performance review paints a very unsatisfactory picture. It indicates a steady increase in export earnings from 2003 to 2006. The exports during 2005 grew substantially to 24.1 percent that is $ 810.9 million from $ 653.5 in 2004. 

However, analysis of the data indicated that Uganda has so far failed to make sustained progress towards the elimination of its structural trade deficit, which stands at 15.8 percent.  

The highest deficit of $ 381.1 million was registered in 2005. Therefore, we have a problem of handling our deficit. In other words, the total deficit has been increasing over the years and we have not handled this aspect.  

Uganda has no trade policy. Over the years we have been demanding that this Government gets a trade policy. Even this year the statement states that: “The draft trade policy has been prepared and is ready for submission to Cabinet. It is therefore hoped that during this financial year it will be passed and implemented”. This is the policy statement saying that it is hoped... Therefore, we have no guarantee that even this year we may get a trade policy for this country. Surely this cannot be good news.

Promotion of exports is a function of the Uganda Export Promotion Board but this body cannot function properly because it too has a host of problems. The first of course is the shameful perennial lack of funds: The policy states that the budget allocation for the financial year 2005/2006 remained at the same level as the 2004/2005 allocations.  The situation remains the same this year. 

Indeed, this year the allocations from Government are stated to be just 11 percent of the total UEPB requirement. Consequently, the planned performance of the board is expected to lie heavily on the support of international trade development partners.

The Executive Director complained to us and she put it this way. “Although a board maintains good ties with her development partners and has attracted a moderate number of donor funded projects, institutional uncertainty and inadequate Government of Uganda counterpart funding have negatively impacted on these relationships”. Government apparently does not care to fund the board nor has it made up its mind on whether the board should be merged with the Uganda investment Authority and the Uganda Tourist Board.  

Parliament in the past has advised against the merger but the government has for several reasons failed to take a decision on the matter. Consequently, Netherlands CBI has had to withdraw and divert funding support of $ 5 million to a sister country in the region.  It has also limited the financial and technical support they used to extend to the board due to this institutional uncertainty. 

The report recommends that something be done. I would rather urge that Government takes a final decision in this matter. There is no reason why Export Promotion Board should be merged with any other board because it performs a completely different function.

As pointed out in this report, the Uganda Export Promotion Board is saddled with accumulated arrears of Ugshs 578 million relating to PAYE. We urge that Government immediately ascertains these domestic arrears and arranges to clear them this financial year. The report has made the same recommendation in much softer words.

Let us move to tourism. Uganda’s tourism industry is one of the fastest growing sectors of the economy. According to the Bank of Uganda, in 2004, there was a 75.15 percent increase in foreign exchange earnings compared to 2003.  This was the largest proportion of the service export receipts excluding remittance from abroad, which accounted for 64.1 percent of foreign exchange earnings.  But what is being done for tourism?  

In fact the assessment of the World Tourism and Travel Council had predicted that Uganda would generate $ 839.9 million of economic activity from tourism alone in 2005.  During this time tourism was expected to account for 9.2 percent of the nations GDP and that it would generate 42,064 jobs totaling to 7.3 percent of the employment of this country. However, the statement does not state how much of this has been achieved. This was a target that was expected but we do not know how much of this was achieved.  

The minister in the same statement complains that funding for the Tourism and Wildlife Sector has for some time not been considered a core priority area though the department experienced an increase of 135 percent of the recurrent budget.  

What do you expect when even tourism is apparently not supported? We urge that tourism be given priority for funding and that funds also be made available in the mean time to ensure effective and strategic planning. This means that the Uganda Tourist Board should be revitalized and allowed to operate on its own. 

To sum up the predicament of the Uganda Tourist Board, we shall quote what they said about Government funding. They said, “UTB continues to operate on a meagre budget from Government which after deducting salaries and rent leaves the equivalent of the price of one new four wheel drive in Uganda prices”. The Government should do much more in this regard.

Mr Speaker, tourism as a sector is of vital importance to the economy. Its contribution to GDP warrants that it be specifically nurtured. Indeed, it is high time that it became a separate ministry. Consequently, the Uganda Tourist Board should remain a separate statutory body and Government should immediately abandon the idea of merging it with the Uganda Investment Authority and the Uganda Export Promotions Board.  The functions of these three bodies are so distinct that there is no good reason why they should be merged into one.

As if that is not good enough, the report reveals that we are in arrears in our contribution to the World Tourism Organisation.  Consequently we have been suspended from that organisation.  We have accumulated arrears amounting to US $ 260,000 the equivalent of Ugshs 481 million.  So we should be able to make that contribution. 

The repercussions for not doing that are very serious. The Permanent Secretary stated them here. We have already missed out on training advisories and all other potential member advantages because we are under sanctions. We cannot even send a minister to their committees.  This surely is serious for a very profitable sector of the economy. 

Industry

The state of the industry and technology sector is even more pathetic and depressing.  The ministerial policy statement clearly acknowledges the importance of the sector. Overall, it states that the industrial sector constitutes about 20 percent of the national GDP with formal manufacturing at 7 percent.  But when you look at what has been stated as its achievements, they are laughable.  

The draft estimates give the recurrent expenditure as a mere Ugshs 277,115,000 this year.  Surely, what can be done with this kind of funding?  But on top of that we have no industrial policy. The 2006/07 policy statement brings this out very clearly.  It states, Government with the support of UNIDO is to conduct and undertake a competitiveness survey and analysis of the industrial sector highlighting gross potentials and investment opportunities.  

It is envisaged that the findings of the survey shall be used to formulate a realistic integrated industrial policy. There are no time frames! Perhaps if UNIDO was not supporting us, we would not even be in the process of working out an industrial policy for this country. That statement was slightly similar to the one, which was put in the other year. This year 2006, the ministry informs the committee that the draft industrialisation policy is expected to be ready by June 2007. Let us hope something will be achieved by that time.

Now the report also talked about the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, which would have been useful in this regard but it too is not properly facilitated. The director said there is lack of appropriate policies, which hinders its work.  In fact he informed the committee that although the institute has developed some technologies on agro-processing, there is a weak link between the Ministry of Agriculture and the ministry because of weak policies.  The report has brought it out. 

As far as I am concerned, if there is no industrial policy surely how can this body be able to do anything meaningful? If there are no linkages between the two vital ministries, how can anything move in that regard?

The Uganda Wild Life Authority

The Wild Life Authority too complains. The Wild Life Authority’s major limitation is its inability to generate enough funds to meet the operation costs, which results in heavy dependency on donors. There is need for Government to increase support to UWA, for example, UWA has never received direct equipment support from Government and only relies on donors who often give with some restrictions.

Now for the financial year 2006/7 the approved budget is Ugshs 31.8 billion. A large proportion of this comes from donors mainly the World Bank, whose PMCU project ends in 2007.  There are no plans as to what will happen when that donor support ends. Of course, funding is one of the main challenges of Uganda Wildlife Education Centre as has been indicated, and that is something this Parliament should do something about.

The Cooperatives Department

The most depressing department in the ministry is the cooperatives department.  We do not need to be reminded that once upon a time this country had a vibrant cooperatives movement, which covered every part of this country.  The grower cooperatives were responsible for producing various commodities, marketing them and also preparing them for export.  

The cooperatives were well connected to well established marketing boards, which had an elaborate infrastructure to market them abroad. Government dismantled all this, and did not provide an alternative.  This will remain one of the greatest economic blunders of this country. Currently this country has no marketing infrastructure for its products and no marketing strategy. I do not even know whether we have a marketing policy.  The attempt to correct the mistake is a sad commentary on the seriousness of those in authority.

Currently the cooperatives department has three members of staff to cover the whole country.  It is hoped that the number will be increased to 11 this year.  So, 11 people are supposed to handle the cooperatives movement of this country!  Cooperatives at the grass roots are the only viable basis of organised production in the villages. Government should encourage the formation of growers and producer cooperative societies everywhere in this country.  It is only then that we can ensure quality in the products and be able to meaningfully support the real producers.  

Instead of encouraging producer cooperatives, Government has shifted emphasis on savings cooperatives. How can one save when one has not produced? How can one save when one has not earned?  How can one earn when one has not marketed what he has produced? And how can the people get to know what products have markets here and abroad when Government is not prepared to give advice and assistance on this matter?

The reasons are very simple, the policy of bonna bagaggawale has given the public the impression that there is big money in Government. All you have to do is to form a circle and Government money will trickle down from the top to your circle. That is a terrible impression, and that is the impression that the policy is creating.  It is necessary to impress it upon people that they should be producers before they can be given credit.  If this is not emphasised, I am afraid bonna bagaggawale may end up like the entandikwa policy.

Savings and credit cooperatives have continued to be the most popular type of cooperatives over the last financial year and it was the largest number registered when you go through the achievements of the department.  But Government has no clear policy on how it is to assist in the management of these savings cooperatives.  We know that these are private institutions. But how can they be depended upon for national development when those who run them have no training whatsoever?  And who is going to oversee public funds that will be sent to these private organisations?  Who will audit them and where will he base his advice and the authority to oversee the use of the money given to them?

The biggest constraint in the economic development of Ugandans is failure to produce goods for export to the international market.  Government gives no guidance whatsoever as to what people should produce for export nor does it find markets for what is produced.  It even has no mechanism to ensure that what is produced by Ugandans meets the standards for the export market.  

In short, a Ugandan producer has simply nothing to take to the international market.  So he goes and produces vanilla today, Moringa the following day and beans the other day, with no guidance whatsoever, and when the market fails, he just closes shop.  Now an attempt has been made to do something about warehouse marketing, and this has been the Warehouse Receipt System Act, which was passed recently.  The system can, however, work best when we have got good producer and marketing cooperatives.  

The producers and cooperators themselves require training on how the system works.  How can then that thin staff of 11 people be able to take this all over the country?  Currently only 15 districts have ever heard about the Warehouse Receipt System Act and this is only in respect of coffee and beans. Even in my own district, Masaka where we produce a lot of coffee, this Warehouse Receipt System has never been introduced.  So where is it and where is it functioning effectively?

At the moment, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is totally marginalised.  Its importance in the economy is not adequately recognised.  Government does not care to fund it to play its rightful role.  The country has no trade policy and has no industrial development policy.  Even the tourism policy, which is in place is not known to Ugandans, nor is it being followed and implemented.

The revival of the Cooperative Movement is just talked about.  It is high time we took up all these matters to make sure that this ministry performs its functions.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Honourable members, now it is time for you to make contributions though limited because we have about an hour to complete this-

 11.46
MR FRANCIS MUGARRA  (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee for this presentation, although I was concerned that there was no mention at all about unions and the Cooperative Bank, yet these are the institutions that affect the significant population of our country.

Mr Speaker, unions have been crying for the last 20 years or so.  They lost colossal sums of money to the extent of Ugshs 15 billion to Government through stocks that were found in store, vehicles and very many other things.  But these unions have never recovered and maybe if they had been paid, they would still be active and assisting our rural peasants in marketing and production.  

So, I would like to know from the minister concerned why these cooperatives are not being paid?  These unions belong to the ordinary peasants because they are the ones that put the stocks of coffee, cotton and whatever. All properties belonging to unions belong to the ordinary producers.  So, I really wonder because even some producers still have receipts of coffee and cotton they delivered to their unions those days.   It is only fair to have our unions paid because currently banks are liquidating their properties at give away rates because of loans.  

Recently I was informed that Banyankole Kweterana lost a very big commercial building in the middle of Mbarara town, which was liquidated at only Ugshs 300 million, yet the market rate could have even been either Ugshs 500 million or more.  So, I think Government has not been fair in not paying unions their debts.  

Another point I would like to comment on, Mr Speaker, is the Cooperative Bank.  Over five years, there has been no report to the shareholders and creditors about the process of liquidation of the Cooperative Bank.  Assets are being liquidated at give away prices.  Could either the Ministry of Finance or the ministry concerned inform us what the fate of the Cooperative Bank is?  

The Uganda Cooperative Alliance is the umbrella organization that caters for the interest of the Cooperative Movement, and indeed this Cooperative Alliance has contributed a lot to empowering rural producers to be more organised in their production.  But this organisation solely depends on funding from development partners.  

I would like to appeal to the government that we could support such an organisation that is really doing a very good job on the ground to even accomplish those projects that fail mid-way because donors cannot continue giving them support.  If we can get support from the International Community, why not our own Government to support an organisation that is really doing a lot towards poverty alleviation in our rural communities.

Mr Speaker, it is also important, although in our prosperity for all programme, we emphasised “prosperity for all”.  I have even noted here on the report on page 24, a drive for circles is very healthy.  We can have many circles, we can have circles per sub-county, but if there is no framework to supervise, regulate and audit them, then we are going to frustrate our producers. Because they will collect money into these organizations, but there will be no mechanism to monitor the use of this money and at the end of the day, they may lose out.   So, it is important for the ministry concerned to put in place a regulatory mechanism so that when people collect their money, they are sure it is safe, it can be accessed and it will benefit them.  –(Interruptions).

MR PENYTOO OCENG:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I will take from where you started yesterday.  In your ruling there was a connotation that the current NRM Party Government takes the liabilities and successes of the previous 20 years.  That was the implications of your ruling.  So, Mr Speaker, the-  

THE SPEAKER: There was no ruling.  What I said is this- let us be clear some people are talking about failures that have occurred in the last 20 years, they hip them on the present Government.  But when it comes to successes of the present Government, they say, “”it was our Government.”  So it is double standards.  You should own the failures and successes but do not own the successes and hip the failures on the present Government.  This is what I said. Whether it was a ruling, I do not know.  

MR OCENG: I am obliged.  Mr Speaker, for a Government to care for the lowly people, the naked ones in Karamoja; the thirsty ones in Kinkiizi; those suffering in the IDP camps in the Northern and Eastern Uganda, there is need for actions to have taken place a long time ago.  The NRM Government came into power –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you stood to give information.  What is the information you are giving?

MR OCENG: Yes, I am coming - the information is clear.  The cooperative societies were operating seriously before the coming of Museveni’s government - let me call it like this, of which my brother is one of the serious supporters.  Mr Speaker, when I was young the cooperative unions were operating very well, but now they are all gone and there is no serious measure being –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If you want to contribute, I will give you the opportunity to contribute.  But when you stand to give information, it should be information.  If you do not have information, do not stand on a point of information.  

MR MUGARRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank my colleague for the contribution.  My other comment was on Kigumba Cooperative College.  It was observed in this report that Kigumba Cooperative College was neglected and yet we can use it as a very useful resource centre to boost our rural economic development if it is catered for.  

Cooperatives policy

This report talks only about the trade policy.  In the last three years or so, efforts were initiated to formulate a cooperatives policy.  I would like to be informed by the ministry concerned as to what really befell that policy because if we formulated a policy - and I would like to support the recommendation of this committee that we can promote the formation of producer cooperatives at parish level.  

The biggest challenge in rural development is causing our people to be organized.  We may not easily deliver our people out of poverty if they remain disorganised in their methods of production.  The best way to organise our producers is to have cooperatives at every parish.  We can have this incorporated in our cooperatives policy. We promote and support - Government is supporting the private sector, I know cooperatives belong to the private sector.  But much as Government has supported the private sector elsewhere, if we supported cooperatives as part of the private sector, we would be supporting a wider sector that would boost production and income generation of our rural peasants.

Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) 

This is my last point, Mr Speaker.  I appreciate that Uganda Wildlife Authority is contributing a lot towards our economy, but it is also very important for UWA to cultivate a culture of peaceful coexistence with its neighbours because in some areas UWA is at war with its neighbours.  

In my own constituency we have Semliki Wildlife Reserve, but there is always a conflict. The UWA staff are using their boundaries to extort money from our people because now every animal that is found, even animals that may be within the vicinity of the game reserve, will be driven into the game reserve, put into a kraal so that money is collected from them.  

Every other day they are raising the rates, now from Ugshs 400 they have raised it to Ugshs 5000 per animal. So if any 20 animals were found straying in the neighbourhood of the game reserve, you would be charged Ugshs 100,000.  It is like for every 20 animals they will sell one, and this is threatening my constituents because they depend on livestock. So the existence of their livestock is under threat because of that conflicting coexistence with UWA.  

I would like to appeal to UWA to harmonise and have a peaceful coexistence with their neighbours so that they support you instead of looking at Uganda Wildlife Authority as a threat to their livelihood.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

11.55
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the presenter of this report and I also thank the presenter from the opposition side.  

Mr Speaker, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards is charged with the responsibility of standardising goods going out of this country and those coming in.  There is a lot of pirating of sub-standard goods coming into this country.  The Uganda National Bureau of Standards has failed to control the pirating of these sub-standard goods coming to this country.  As a result, many people- the consumers, who are receiving these goods, have been suffering.  Uganda has turned into a dumping ground for sub-standard goods.  

Mr Speaker, Uganda National Bureau of Standards has not lived to its expectations.  In my own village, it has never reached even in my hometown.  You find that people are using plastic mugs for weighing their produce like simsim.  As a result, farmers are being cheated.  Uganda National Bureau of Standards does not check on weighing scales in this country.  

I therefore fully support that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards be strengthened and given more money so that they can build their own home to enable them ensure that there is quality control in this country.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much my brother, for giving way.  I would like to inform you that even the absence of a standardised weighing system is noticed more in the field of pork scales.  I know the hon. Minister is a Hajat, but the truth of the matter is that in the countryside no standardised measurement units are used for weighing pork.  There is what is generally known as “Katwe product - Made in Katwe” being used, which at the end of the day disadvantages those of us who partake pork.  (Laughter)

MR PIRO: Thank you for your information. On the issue of the Uganda Investment Authority, the Uganda Export Promotion Board and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, I support the committee to keep the three as separate entities. The problem of non-performance of these sectors is not because of management; it is because of ill funding.  Therefore, the entities should maintain their status quo so that they can perform in their various areas.

My last point is on convention on international trade in endangered species of wildlife, fauna and flora.  Mr Speaker, I think Members could have read that 220 tortoises were arrested at Kenyatta International Airport in Nairobi last week. This is because of lack of proper licensing for exporters at the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry so that they can export these things without any problems, with certificates from Uganda here.  This kind of smuggling actually ashames our country, in fact, it endangers our people who are exporting to earn foreign exchange for this country. 

These animals are of less value to us at the moment.  For example, many cultures - many tribes in Uganda do not eat tortoises, snakes, butterflies and lizards.  So, the Ministry of tourism, Trade and Industry should ensure proper licensing for the exporters of these endangered species and their sites so that Uganda earns good foreign exchange out of them.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

11.58
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the committee chairperson for presenting a very good report.  My first observation is on inter-ministerial collaboration. This is the first committee, which has tried to point out the inter-ministerial linkages.  For instance I was very impressed to note on page 3 that the ministry plans to carryout various ICT programmes in its departments in collaboration with the Ministry of ICT.  

We noted with concern that the Ministry of ICT should be exploited by all ministries and I am very happy to note that the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry is already championing this. I hope that through ICT collaboration, so many websites will be opened up so that our investment and tourism potential plus our natural resources etcetera can be exposed to the whole world in order to attract more investment and tourists. 

I am also happy to note that the ministry is planning to post officers to missions abroad. As a Member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, one of the disturbing things is to learn that when potential investors or donors are identified, there is no proper communication system to inform the relevant ministries to make follow-ups.  So, I am very happy that the ministry is planning to post officers to our missions abroad.  

Mr Speaker, I am a bit disappointed, on page 4 where they say there is a weak linkage between the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and that of Agriculture.  This is very dangerous and I would like to appeal to the Minister in charge of Tourism, Trade and Industry –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, as I entered this House I found the hon. Member for Adjumani talking very tough. I am wondering about his dress code. Is he really in order to address the august House in such attire as if he is going back to Adjumani for the weekend?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I thought that that is a Kaunda suit - sort of - the colour is the same from top to down. 

MR PIRO: Thank you for your ruling, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, for instance, you can see the honourable Imam - he is acceptable. 

MR KALIBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I was on a point on page 4 of the report where the committee points out that there is a weak linkage between the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and that of Agriculture.  I am appealing to the ministers in charge to ensure that that weakness is removed because these two ministries need a lot of collaboration more especially with the Ministry of Micro -Finance, which is going to put in a lot of money in the agricultural productivity.  Our peasants are going to produce a lot and really we need to see a marketing and agro processing strategy between the two ministries so that they can benefit from this.  

On Kigumba Cooperatives College, on page 4 again this is a very useful college, which offers specialised training for cooperative workers and we need these people to serve at low levels at sub-county and parish especially when our circles become very active.  So, if the Ministry of Education cannot support this Cooperative college, maybe it can be taken back to its mother ministry.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague from the opposition, hon. Kawanga for realising that the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry is big and suggesting for the creation of a separate “Ministry of Trade” to increase political supervision.  

Yesterday hon. Susan Lukyamuzi was also agitating for the creation of a new ministry. I do not know, but I may need some clarification from the Leader of the Opposition whether this does not contradict their position of reducing on the number of ministries.  They are now saying we create new ministries: “Ministry of Trade,” and “ Ministry of Youth, Tourism.” I need some clarification from the Leader of the Opposition.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

12.07
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thanks a lot, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament.  I would like to bring out two points:  One is about the cooperatives. We have a very big firm in Mbale called BCU (Bugishu Cooperative Union).  That department is almost at the collapse. My appeal to the minister concerned is that the pertaining wrangles in Bugishu Cooperative Union need your quick attention.  The leadership in that organisation has misappropriated the funds of the cooperators, their land has been disposed of and the assets are being sold. 

As I talk now, the European who rented the milling machine is almost taking it. This has led to the primary societies behind there to be dormant. So, in order to re-activate these movements, Government should come up and help. Farmers are now frustrated with Arabica coffee in Mbale. They have even cut down the coffee trees. The minister concerned, come up and rescue the situation. 

My second point is in regard to Mt. Elgon National Park and Namatala Forest Reserve. I am very happy that the suggestion in the report is that something is going to be done. My appeal to the minister concerned is that when you are going to do the final demarcation, Members of Parliament within the region should be taken into consideration. When we go down there, we can mobilize the communities so that the demarcation is done once for all. That will end this crisis.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we have got Namatala Forest Reserve; the neighbours to that reserve have always had wrangles with the administration of that same reserve. The minister concerned should also take action so that people do not always have wrangles. 

Just to inquire from the minister, how will those people who donated that forest reserve benefit from Government? To have a reserve is something loved by the owner but they are benefiting nothing. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleagues from the opposition. 

12.12
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for a wonderful report and my colleague from Masaka for the position of the opposition.

I am going to make a few comments. One of them is that I would like to thank the ministry for incorporating ICT. When I read the report, it said that they are going to incorporate ICT. I hope by incorporating ICT you will be able to improve the market because we have a problem of markets. We encourage people to produce and they do not have where to sell their products. 

Women of this country have been engaging in craft making; so many of them are engaged in that kind of business. We thought as a strategy of empowering the women economically, especially the rural women of Uganda, market would be got for these handicrafts so as to improve the income of the women. I hope the ministry will come up with a strategy to market this produce. 

On tourism, we tend to think that tourism is supposed to be for people outside Uganda, the whites especially. I would like to inform this House that the ministry should design a strategy for encouraging promotion of local tourism. I find it a little difficult when I see Ugandans, especially in Kampala, every evening at some joints somewhere spending money, drinking and eating pork. I really wonder! 

If the ministry can target these people, the middle class, so that instead of them taking a lot of time at the pork joints and the drinking joints, they could spare some of that money and put it into tourism by visiting the local tourist sites. 

I would also like to say that in Uganda, Mr Speaker, we have –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Don’t they help to enhance the revenue collection?  

MS NAJJEMBA: Yes, Mr Speaker, they do, but now we are talking about improving the tourism sector. They can spare part of that money and visit these sites, like Lake Bunyonyi and all those places, and at least we improve the tourism sector.

The other issue, Mr Speaker and honourable members, is that the ministry tends to look at the traditional sites - the national parks, the forest reserves - but I must tell you that there are so many areas where tourism can be promoted. We have the cultural sites in the rural areas. They can also go there and look at the culture of the people and the activities that they do. 

We have the Luwero Triangle area. In Mpenja sub county in Luwero Triangle and we have a place called Kasoli w’egomba where there are so many skeletons of people who died in the previous Government, of course the other Government where people were killed. There was a man called Sokolo who used to kill so many of them. They were all buried in Kasoliwegomba. That place can be developed into a tourist site. Let us not look at these traditional sites - national parks, game reserves - let us also look at other –(Interjection)- I have the information, hon. Member. (Interruption) 

MS ALASO: I am seeking clarification from you, hon. Member. I would like to know from my colleague what her understanding of tourism would be if we pride in showing dead bodies to our visitors. Wouldn’t they be terribly scared? 

I would like to know whether she knows that it is not only in that part of the country where we have many mass graves. We have mass graves in Mukura, Barlonyo, in Acak, wherever you wish, in Abia, in Kasese, everywhere in this country. Would we pride in showing these as tourist attractions? 

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you very much. On 3rd June so many people come to Uganda and go to Namugongo to see what? People who died! Some Ugandans go to Israel to see where Jesus was born and was crucified, and where he was buried and rose. Why do they go to see that? We are not going to put our history behind. History should remain. If people were killed during that Government, it is –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA LATIF: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to compare our saviour Jesus Christ to others who have died? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what the honourable member was trying to do is to illustrate why it is necessary to visit such sites even where people have died. For religious purposes, people go to Israel to see where Jesus Christ was crucified, where Adam and Eve ate that thing -(Laughter)- the forbidden fruit. Now she is saying it is better for people to see the history of the country by visiting such a site. 

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you for your ruling, Mr Speaker. By looking at the mass graves, it does not mean we are promoting them. We are actually discouraging this. We are saying, “If you do not conform to the principles of democracy and good governance, we are likely to go back to the same thing”. When I talk about Mpigi District, it is because I was sent here to talk for the people of Gomba. It does not mean that I would not promote the other side.  

On page 16, you say that the ministry has developed up-to-date tourism data for Masaka and Kayunga. I was wondering why Masaka and Kayunga; where is Mpigi? Has it got up-to-date data? What about other districts? I suggest that the ministry tells us why they chose Kayunga, Masaka and not Mpigi and other districts, and whether they have any plan to do that.  

Lastly, I would like to appeal to my friends in the Opposition. At times some of you go out there and paint Uganda black and red. You show that everything here is bad –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Is the honourable member on the Floor in order to allege that we in the Opposition paint Uganda black, without naming, substantiating or putting to this House the real person who paints Uganda black? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, I was distracted, can you repeat?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the honourable colleague on the Floor says we in the Opposition go out and paint Uganda black. I can speak for myself, I have travelled with you, I have travelled with many other people, and I have spoken the best about this country. I have spoken in the best interests of this nation, even closing my eyes to the evils that go around in this country. Is she in order to generalise, to ignore the procedures of this House that demand that she substantiates by telling us the name of the person in the Opposition who paints Uganda black? Is she in order to proceed in that way?

THE SPEAKER: Was it intended to mean one of the people sitting on this side, or you are talking about negative talk? What was it?

MS NAJJEMBA: I think I was very clear and the leader of the Opposition was looking straight in my eyes. I said “sometimes” and “some of them”. I am not saying any of these, but I know that there were people in the Opposition who went out and decampaigned CHOGM, for instance. I know that there are people in this country who have –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you say you know, can you substantiate? That will be enough if you can substantiate. If you cannot, then withdraw.

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you very much, at a later date, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  No, no, let me handle it. At the moment you cannot substantiate, and therefore, you withdraw.

MS NAJJEMBA: It is difficult to withdraw, but I withdraw. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

12.23
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report and I also want to thank the Opposition for their report. I have just two issues to raise. One issue is on tourism. I have read the report carefully. I have been reading this report for the last five years; some names keep coming up in those reports every year. 

So many areas in this country deserve to be promoted as tourist attraction sites. I will give an example of Bundibugyo District, which has good geographical features and people. If you want to learn geography, you go to Bundibugyo, you will get real geography. You will appreciate how God had the wisdom to create the world by going to Bundibugyo. I get surprised, however, because I have not seen much in the report on how tourism is being promoted in our district. 

We have national parks, we even have the pygmies, and like the Minister of Energy said, they climb trees. If that is what they do, I think it would be a good tourism attraction for them to go and see this. We have two hot springs, a female and male. The two big hot springs in the world are found in Bundibugyo. We have a road, which meanders like River Semliki, which winds together with its river. What a wonderful area! So, when I hear people talking of some areas, I just get surprised.

Mr Speaker, I want the ministry to tell me about the co-existence, which my Member of Parliament for Ntoroko had already mentioned. How can our people co-exist with the animals? We want these animals, but like it has been said in the report, we also want to protect the fauna and flora. If animals like the buffaloes, the wild pigs and others cross over, they cross over to their neighbours and destroy crops, houses and all these things, so people continue hunting them. How are they going to safeguard their co-existence? Is there any mechanism the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife has put in place maybe even to try and compensate those whose property has been destroyed?  

One time I was in the district and a herd of buffaloes crossed over and destroyed crops. The game rangers told me that they had no law and there was nothing they could do. They said, “Maybe Members of Parliament could tell the ministry to try and put this in a Bill, which is coming”. I have just read that you are preparing a Bill, but do not forget to consider the co-existence of the people and animals. 

In Bundibugyo District, in Kasitu sub-county, after the banana wilt, most of the Gonja and the bananas have been destroyed. The wild pigs have now come to eat the potatoes and yams. So, there is now a problem of food. What should they now do with such a problem? They cannot grow bananas, they cannot also grow potatoes and so they are just there. The other day I was trying to get the World Food Programme to try and help them because the whole of this sub-county, Kasitu, has got a problem right now. What can we do? Thank you very much.

12.28
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West-Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity from yesterday. I wish to thank the committee and its chairman for having presented this report to the House. 

Like in the last report, we would like to concentrate on the district commercial offices. I have read in this report that way back in 2005 or 2006, there were plans to strengthen district commercial offices. They were supposed to help the districts to collect and disseminate information, supposedly on trade matters. I wish to state here very categorically that the people running these offices are poorly facilitated up to now, even if the plans were for the last financial year. It is difficult to get these people in the field. Whether they sit in the offices or not, we do not know. We have found a situation, especially in Tororo District, whereby these people are not helping at all in disseminating trade information, industry information and the kind of duties that people perform. 

We are going through the East African Community integration process and being a border district, there is a lot that these commercial officers, if they are there, would do to guide our people on trade issues across the borders. As you know, however, there is still smuggling going on. People are being chased across the borders because they do not know what to do about trading across the borders. As a result, they have been operating very ruthlessly in these places. 

We are talking now about circles. These district commercial officers or offices were supposed to give guidance on the development of these circles. People have been cheated. Somebody just comes up and says, “I am collecting 5,000 from each of you, and I am going to bring in the Minister of State for Micro Finance to give you a lot more money than this under the bonna bagaggawale programme.” These officers are keeping quiet. They do not know what they should do in guiding all these people about formation and operationalization of these circles.  

We have heard something being said here about the issue of the development of tourism. There are many tourist sites in places like Tororo District, which have never been identified and they have not been developed. I thought these would be the duty of these commercial officers as well -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Okecho, for giving way.  You are talking about promotion of tourism and in my mind the hotel industry is an integral component of tourism. I am reliably informed that you, hon. William Okecho, were for some time in the privatisation sector and you decided, in your own wisdom, to do away with all Uganda Government hotels. If tourists came to Tororo, where will you keep them? Can you please clarify on that?

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much Chief Whip of the Opposition. I wish to inform you that in Tororo we have over ten hotels, which are suitable for accommodating tourists. As you know, there is Rock Classic Hotel in Tororo, which is a first class hotel. It is doing very well, accommodating tourists crossing from Kenya and also from Uganda.  

Having participated in the privatisation exercise in this country was actually a blessing in disguise for this country. I may tell you that the programme has made a fundamental change to this country. I am very proud of having participated in it, thank you very much.

Before I was interrupted by the Chief Whip, I wanted to continue requesting the commercial officers to try very hard to guide our traders. In many commercial activities that need to be developed within the districts, there are people grouping for information. Some of us who have got commercial training are now really commercial officers of some sort in the districts. They come and ask us what to do and we tell them how they should register their companies, how they should seek bank loans and all this kind of information. 

I would also request the ministry, if they can enlarge the mandate of these commercial officers, let the officers integrate with the Ministry of Agriculture officers in the district because at one point or the other they are working for the same purpose, trying to uplift the standard of living of our people in the district. It is important that they work together. There has been some statement on that issue here in the report, but I think this should be taken more seriously. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.35
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have four brief points. One, the ministry has talked about the national trade policy on page 5. I would like to ask the honourable minister, at what stage will the Members of Parliament be involved? The national trade policy is of paramount importance if we are to achieve the bonna bagaggawale programme. Short of that, this may mean bonna baavuwale or “poverty for all”. 

My greatest concern, when it comes to this national trade policy, is to have a clear distinction between the chain of distribution of goods and services. In that chain we have the producers, the wholesalers, retailers and then the consumers. Right now, you find the producer is the wholesaler, the retailer; so many of our people down there miss out on business because someone is doing all the functions that would have been done by so many people and thus creating employment for our Ugandans.  

Secondly, on page 9 the report talks about posting officers. Mr Speaker, you are aware that almost 90 percent of Ugandans who import goods from abroad have a serious connection with the United Arab Emirates, that is, Dubai. The outcry by the business people there is that they do not have any consulate in Dubai. The consulate they have is in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. This is very difficult. It really gives them a very big problem and yet we know that they are importing so many goods to this country. It is their wish that the ministry liaises with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that we have a consulate in Dubai, to make it easy for our brothers and sisters importing goods from that country.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on the Jinja training school. As the President was opening the state of the art conference centre at Hotel Africana, the Uganda Hotel Owners’ Association complained about the poor training they are getting from that institute. It is my wish and prayer that the ministry liaises with the Ministry of Education to ensure that we have people who are trained professionally, so that our hotel industry is really taken seriously. They complained that the students are half-baked, they do not know what they are supposed to do and yet we are preparing to host CHOGM.

On page 17, the report has talked about hotels to be classified according to international standards so that by CHOGM time, we are through. I wonder how the ministry has helped the hotel owners. How are they liaising with them? According to the Uganda Hotel Owners’ Association, the beds that we have right now are far below the beds we need to host CHOGM. We cannot have all the accommodation by the time of CHOGM. That is why people are now building hotels at a very terrible speed, and yet it is threatening the security and safety of the people who are going to reside in them. So, I request the ministry, if we could liaise with landlords here in Kampala, there are some people with good houses that could be used to accommodate our guests, so that we do not build hotels on a crash programme, which will cause serious problems.

On page 24 they talk about the Museum/Monument Department. The ministry has the mandate of looking after our historical monuments, and museum, but to my disappointment the Fort Lugard monument has been abandoned and neglected by the Ministry of Trade and Tourism. When we go to Old Kampala, there is a beautiful scene coming up, a new mosque, but when you move around you see an abandoned Fort Lugard monument. When we talked to the leaders of the Uganda Moslem Supreme Council, they did their work and relocated as requested by the President. In fact, they handed over that monument to the ministry but to our disappointment and surprise, the ministry has completely abandoned it. If you pass by, you see a bush coming up at that historical site. 

It is my humble request that the ministry tells the leaders at Uganda Moslem Supreme Council that they have abandoned it and they have officially handed that piece of land back to be looked after by the Uganda Moslem Supreme Council. Maybe it could be one of the houses for the Imam of the Old Kampala mosque.  

Lastly, I will comment on the National Bureau of Standards. Madam Minister, the National Bureau of Standards is causing problems. There is a need to step up supervision and monitoring. As we talk right now, for many of us who use diesel vehicles, diesel is mixed with paraffin at many petrol stations here in Kampala, let alone the cement. Our engines are going to be removed from our vehicles because most of the petrol stations here in Kampala have a very big percentage of paraffin and they mix it with diesel so that they can earn their profits. 

This is the mandate of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry under their department of the National Bureau of Standards. We are actually trying to rename it so that it can become national bureau of sub-standards.  

12.43
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto South, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and our Shadow Minister for the good report they have given this House and indeed for coming out and criticizing where necessary.

Part of the mandate of the ministry, mentioned on page 2, is to formulate and support strategies, plans and programmes that promote and ensure expansion and diversification of tourism, trade, co-operatives, environmental sustainable industrialisation, and appropriate technology. In the media today I read that His Excellency the President has yet again given another three forests to BIDCO. I would like to find out from the Minister in charge of Tourism, Trade and Industry whether his continued giving of these forests to BIDCO is one of their mandates of environmentally sustainable industrialisation? 

In the district I come from, Masaka, when they gave out these forests from Kalangala and they cut the trees, it resulted in the prolonged drought that we have, which has affected the district very badly. Another three forests have been given to BIDCO, so I want the minister to give us clarification on that.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to comment on the issue –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why should the Minister of Trade give you an explanation on the giving out of forests, which are under the control of another ministry?

MR BIREKERAAWO: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to do so because among their mandate is environmental sustainability, to see if the industries they are putting up are – she should have an input when they are putting up an industry, as the Minister of Trade.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but for instance, when you are talking about those forests – I heard a radio announcement that the district of Kalangala gave the forest away, and now you are talking about the President!  What I know is that these things belong to certain constitutional bodies: there is the Uganda Land Commission, and the district land boards. When you give away something, the recipient does not acquire ownership until the transfers are signed, and these bodies must sign them as well. Therefore, this is a matter that needs more investigation. But certainly, the Minister of Trade should not answer questions that are directed to the Ministry of Water and Environment. 

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was on the co-operative movement and indeed as my shadow minister said, and as we all know, the co-operative movements were the engine of this economy. In fact when you see what the co-operative movements did, for example the Masaka Co-operative Union, the Bugisu Co-operative Union, the Lango Co-operative Union and Banyankore Kweterana; during their time you could see the economy moving. So I beg Government to put more emphasis on the co-operative movements.  

Mr Speaker, let me talk about the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. When I read the Budget I noticed that they are requesting for Shs 3.84 billion, which they were given in the last financial year. However, they had requested for Shs 12.4 billion. Probably the Minister of Finance will tell us more on that because you have heard complaints from the public. In fact the counterfeit goods have flooded this country. 

Furthermore, if you are an exporter, you look at the standard of goods being exported without being supervised; I think this sector must be given more money and the Minister should tell us why he reduced their money yet he knows that the importation business has now increased in this country. 

Again when you look in the report, the ministry says that they have established 12 horticulture sector profiles. I would like the Minister to tell me more on this because as an exporter I am interested in knowing whether the ministry came up with a report or programme regarding the use of DDT. If this country is going to use DDT, and you spray in the house, there will be air pollution. That will affect these crops and when you take these crops to Europe they are going to tell you that, “DDT was banned in this country”. So I would like the Minister also to tell us whether he has put in consideration the use of DDT.

Lastly, is about the museums and monuments department. I would also support the report on establishing a village. That would in fact instil a sense of cultural ties and heritage. Those of you who have travelled to Kenya may have seen a place there where all the tribes in Kenya go to represent their traditions or cultures. So, I indeed support the establishment of a cultural village. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

12.50
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me a chance to contribute. I must thank the committee for coming up with this report, but I was in this committee for two years and every year we would come up with very good reports but all ended with no action. So I am not going to be surprised when out of this report again there will be no action taken. 

When the President was giving the State of the Nation Address, I noticed that he emphasised the issue of markets for our products. I really thought all that the President talked about would be transformed into the budgetary requirements for the ministry. But if you look at the total money allocated to the ministry, it is only Shs 37 billion! You wonder whether that aspect of expanding our markets can be realised, 

I think this is a very serious concern that the Minister must take seriously because when you are talking about markets, you are talking about market research, and as you are aware, market research is not a cheap thing; it is very expensive. The ministry staff should be empowered to carry out market research so that our products can access good markets as well. 

As I am talking now, our traders are subject to escalating competition in marketing. Right now if you go to our area in Bweyale, there is a boom of maize business because of the sale in southern Sudan. But after some time, it may not be there. Our farmers have suffered so much because of lack of proper research in marketing. In fact at one time there was a boom of Moringa and shortly after, hon. Omach suffered a loss. He went all round promoting Moringa as a product that could alleviate poverty but at the end of it all, he almost lost the constituency because of that. 

Now if an honourable minister can fail to get good markets for his constituency, how about the common man and yet we have got personnel in the ministries to do that but they are not given facilitation to do it on our behalf? Mr Speaker, this should be looked into very seriously.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the activities of the Uganda Wildlife Authority. I support the activities of Uganda Wildlife Authority but at times they go over board. As I talk now, in my constituency the Uganda Wildlife Authority are moving to the villages putting mark stones that they want to re-gazette that part of our constituency, which used to be the former Aswa Lorim hunting ground. About three weeks ago there was a meeting in a sub-county called Amuru, and they want to re-gazette it.  

When it comes to re-gazetting parts of our land, it becomes a very sensitive matter because in that part of the country, as you know, all our people are in camps. The animals moved from the game reserve and they have gone to those areas because the people are not there, they are living in the camps, and animals have occupied the land.

MR OYET: The information I want to give is in relation to the activities of the Uganda Wildlife Authority in relation to the neighbouring community. I want to inform the august House that the relationship between the Uganda Wildlife Authority and its neighbouring community is totally poor, and it is partly because of the penalties given to the communities found poaching in game reserves.

Mr Speaker, I know that under normal circumstance the normal legal procedures state that when a person is arrested, he has to be taken to the courts of law, to be proved guilty or not guilty. But the situation in Murchison Falls National Game Park is contrary to these provisions. In most cases when people are found poaching, even before being proved guilty or not, they are shot dead, and the situation is terrible. 

If we are to go by statistics, on average we are losing two people per month; multiply that by 12. That means that every year we are losing a total of 24 people and that is a very great loss to this country. To make it worse, these are young people who are very active in economic activities. I want to inform this House that the community is worried about such activities. They are very hopeful that peace may come tomorrow if the Sudan peace meeting hits its goal. But their biggest worry is about their relationship with the Uganda Wildlife Authority. Thank you.

MR NYEKO: Thank you, my brother, for that information. Actually I think it is a problem everywhere. Wherever the Wildlife Authority is operating, I think at times they go over board. But what I am emphasising is that the Wildlife Authority can bring to Parliament the gazetted part of Uganda, which is to become a park. But for the case of Northern Uganda, what looks like free land where animals can move, is actually land that belongs to people, but the people are living in camps. 

I am advising that when you are moving to gazette those areas, you wait until people have gone back to their homes, then from there you can see where the homes were and where the Wildlife Authority can operate. I thank you so much.

12.57
MR WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to debate this report. I would like to thank the presenter of the report of the committee, and I would like also to thank the Shadow Minister for his report. I have very few observations to make.  

The first one is on page 3; actually it starts from page 2. I would like to quote the general observation of the committee: observation No.4: “The impending merger of UIA, UEPB and UTB - what I would like to emphasise is – “… the untold silence on the part of Government has left these organizations in a state of uncertainty for many years. This has reduced the productive capacity as well as morale.” 

The implication of this is that there is a general laxity on the ministry’s initiative. The ministry initiated the merger, yet the ministry has sat on this merger for many years, which has negatively affected the three organizations. Maybe the Minister may want to explain to this House this laxity because it is negative!

The second observation I would like to make is on our cultural heritage, page 25. I entirely agree with the observation that the sense of awareness about our cultural heritage in Uganda is low. If I may pose a simple question: “Why is it low yet the ministry concerned is there?” The people of Uganda take everything as it comes. I am trying to say that there has never been sensitisation of the people of this country about their cultural heritage, and I wonder whether the ministry has any mechanism in place to sensitise the people. 

I have not heard any mention of our traditional healing system. This is one of the facets of our cultural heritage. It is a very important one, by the way, and I would like to see the ministry bring this on board so that we can work on it. I think at a later date I will have to explain to this august House the difference between our traditional healing system and witchcraft practices. The two are different.

Mr Speaker, the promotion of local tourism is again to be blamed on the ministry concerned because our people are not aware that tourism is actually a way of learning about our country. Therefore, I would suggest that the ministry takes up the responsibility of sensitising the people of Uganda about the various areas of attraction in the country so that local tourism is promoted.  

One point, Mr Speaker, you see we talk of the sites of our culture; the people know these sites and as I said, they take them for granted just because they are there. One typical example is a rock in Bujje sub-county, Maruzi County. This rock contains footmarks of a pre-historic being with his or her cattle, dogs, goats and this would be a place for attraction for tourists. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

1.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had earlier planned a substantive contribution to the debate on the report of the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry, but since we are short of time I would like to take this opportunity - this being the last policy statement that we are to debate - let me thank Parliament generally and you particularly, Mr Speaker, for the conduct of the debate on policy statements. 

We recognize the time, resource and material constraints that the committee members and the chairs are faced with. However, these were the same constraints that we in the Opposition faced and, therefore, while we have a role to play, we may not have played our role to the best of the expectations of the country, and we ask that the country bears with us. We are very sure that at the next cycle of the Budget debate, we will truly perform.  

We would like, nevertheless, to thank the chairpersons and members of the various committees, and the ministers whose ministerial policy statements we debated. I also would like to formally thank my colleagues in the Opposition, the shadow ministers and all who helped to present the alternative view. 

We would like to assure our colleagues on your right side that it is truly our responsibility to say those things that are difficult to say by them, and so when we say them they should appreciate, no matter how hard they are. We all mean well for this country, but we also pray that when we play our responsibilities and our roles, it should be appreciated that it is a difficult role to play and not looked at negatively.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we would like to thank you. As Leader of the Opposition, I have the advantage that I could, in the middle of the debate, jump up and disappear to my office and have a cup of tea or water, but you have shown that the responsibility of chairing this Parliament right from the morning to evening everyday is tough and we can only register our appreciation. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I am sorry I have been receiving notes about this time being for Juma prayers and so forth, but the minister will try to wind up and then you can go for Juma.

1.06
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and my colleague, the Shadow Minister, hon. Kawanga, for his submission.  

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, mine will be a simple job since the four of us in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry are new arrivals. But luckily, we had listened to the concerns of both the Opposition and the NRM side and I want to assure you that after meeting the committee, we decided that the best way to move in next year’s budget would be to create something like a sector-wide working committee, because we trade what is being produced, but we also facilitate processing.  

We can indicate markets through market research, but the production must be organised in order to produce in bulk to sustain the market. So that means that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry must link up with the Ministry of Agriculture, and interface with the Ministry of Works in order for the Ministry of Works to facilitate the areas of tourism, the export villages and so on. 

So we agreed with the Ministry of Finance that before the starting of the next budget circular call, we should have a retreat of these ministries to see the inter-linkages and how we can strengthen them. And I must tell you that I am convinced that it will work because when I was Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, plus my previous experience on the Bench; you could accuse the judge or the magistrate of not performing, but if prison does not present the accused and the prosecutors are not there, what can the judge do? So in this case I am entitled to export, but if there is nothing to export then I will be hanged for no reason. So I think it is important that we meet and agree on the way forward, and I think after that retreat, we will put our monies where they actually should go.  

Having said that, I want to respond only to two issues; the others we have noted and we shall work on them accordingly. I shared these two issues with my colleague, the shadow minister. He was interested in knowing, and many members were working on that; the question was that if our exports are increasing, why the trade deficit? I think I can answer that in one single line without boring you. Exports are growing in coffee, but we have sold the same coffee without adding value - we have continued to sell cotton without adding value. So the volume may increase, but the price at the end of the day, is small. So when I reflect an increase in export, the returns on that export will still be low.  

What is Government doing? Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, before I joined the ministry we found out three studies that were made to try to address the issue of exporting raw cotton. How can Uganda have the best, integrated textile manufacturing industry? Because we have been ginning and some have been weaving at different levels, but with all those efforts combined, we still export raw cotton. But we shall come back to this House and report how we are going to address that problem. 

There was also another question that, “what are the re-exports that you are referring to and is there any value to them?”  Allow me, Mr Speaker, to say that the re-exports are goods, which are brought into Uganda from foreign markets and then exported without any additional processing. They include finished plastic products, building materials, vehicles and vehicle parts, industrial machinery, merchandise, used clothing and footwear, electrical equipment and parts, chemicals, instruments’ parts and accessories, digital processing equipment, petroleum and its products, rubber and rubber products and glassware, among others.  

The other question from my colleague was, “where do they originate?” Most of these products originate from South East Asia, Japan, Thailand, Hong Kong and China. A few of the high end, sophisticated industrial machinery and parts originate from mainly the European Union and the United States of America. 

The third question was, “do we benefit from re-exports?” Yes, Uganda benefits from re-exports. How? The income arising from price differentials for the imports and re-exports is an added advantage. The tax revenue on imports, the auxiliary services along the supply chain is also an added advantage.  

Then there was the concern from a member who wanted to know – I think I read in his statement that he was concerned that we prohibit exporting endangered species, which is not the fact. The case she quoted was under the International Trade in Endangered Species, SITE. For this particular item, the problem was suspected interference with the certificate. So it wasn’t, “do not export,” it was “export legally”. But the certificate was tampered with, that was the problem.  

Mr Speaker, I want also to request that my budget should be amended; I do not know whether you are going to give the Chairperson an opportunity because two of my budget items were left out because these are new items –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not think it is necessary for the chairperson to do that because what we are doing today is to compile section 9 of the Budget Act, which we are doing now by completing the consideration of this report –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: But for the record –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do not worry. After this I will put the question to the motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply. Then sometime in future, maybe next week, we shall be sitting to consider these figures, plus the corrigendum, which he wants to add. All corrections are going to be made then – it is the Committee of Supply, which will go through the figures to approve them, report to the House, then we shall pass the Budget. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. With those few comments, I want to thank everybody for supporting my ministry and it is good that the Minister of Finance has heard that he should not milk the cow without feeding it. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, honourable members. The report has been debated; now I put the question that we adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: This completes the compliance to section 9 of the Budget Act. But all this was done to have a structured debate because we have been dealing with sector per sector rather than having a general debate on this and the other. When we did not have the reports, we debated with some information missing; that is why we have changed from the old system to this new system. But this was under a motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply. I think I should put that question to that motion as well.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We will not go into the Committee of Supply now, but next time we will be here we will be sitting as a Committee of Supply to go through all these votes and it is necessary that those who are preparing those documents, which the Chair reads, be given time to go so that we do not have – because sometimes we have these contradictions as somebody put it the other day that the figures appearing here were different from what is appearing there. So, I think we shall have sometime, perhaps by Wednesday you will have finished checking through and preparing the necessary document that we will use to go through the Committee of Supply. Honourable minister, you have anything to say?

1.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to thank the members for the commitment and the devotion they have shown during the debates of the Budget Speech and the committee presentations and also the ministerial policy statements.  

We are left with two Bills to present: there is the Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2006, which is now under print and this is in conformity with section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. There is also the Appropriations Bill, 2006, which is also under print and with your guidance I think by Wednesday this would have already been finalized with the Committee of Budget of this Parliament. If we need a little more time we shall let you know, but we think that by Wednesday all these should be in place. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I also want to remind you, honourable members that during the budget process, a number of Bills were presented including the Finance Bill and the VAT (Amendment) Bill. I remember just a few, but there were a number of them. These Bills must be passed as soon as possible because they are the ones to back up the Budget. For instance, the Finance Bill is the collection of revenue to use to meet the obligations. I hope the committee will have processed these Bills between now and next week so that we can deal with them and be done by mid this month with all that we are supposed to do. 

This also takes care of a number of documents, which were laid here on the Table for loans, grants and so forth. These also need to be processed because I think they are intended to support the Budget. I want to advise that even if you are not a member of a particular committee but have a strong position, say you think that the threshold should be reduced, then I would rather you go and attend the committee sitting and help the committee to process that Bill so that when it comes here, it would have your input and, therefore, we could easily deal with it.  

Again I want to thank you for the diligence you have exhibited at this stage of considering the report and for sitting for long hours. I am really happy with that and again I want to thank you. 

With this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Wednesday, at 2.00 p.m.  

(The House rose at 1.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 06 September 2006, at 2.00 p.m.)


