Tuesday, 6 September, 2011

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are welcome. I am aware that the Budget Committee is meeting to deal with the matters that we referred to them and I am informed that they are making good progress. We hope that by tomorrow they will be done and we proceed with the rest of the business. Thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE (NO.2) AMENDMENT BILL, 2011

2.16
MRS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Mr Speaker, looking at the front bench, you realise that the Executive is not represented here. I do not even see the chairman of the committee on finance, or the minister of finance. Are we procedurally right to continue with business, when we do not have the people around – the ones who are supposed to present the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, let the bell be rung, House suspended for 20 minutes.  

(The House was suspended at 2.17 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 2.51 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding­_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are some matters that we have to deal with before we start on the Order Paper business. Yes, hon. Beatrice Anywar. 

2.52
MS BEATRICE ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I stand to make a very important communication, which is also very informative. As a Member of this august House, I would like a situation where I can move with my colleagues on issues of national importance.

Last Sunday, 04 September 2011, the Save Mabira Crusade, an umbrella organisation comprising of environmental activists from all walks of life and the civil society, politicians, academicians and others, were happy to have a meeting with His Excellency the President of Uganda, to dialogue over the Mabira issue, which has become a matter of national concern.

In that regard, I am glad to let Parliament know that we had a cordial meeting between the President –(Applause)– and the group –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I would not like a situation that will let words be put in my mouth. 

As I was saying, the meeting was cordial, unlike what had been reported in the press that the battle lines had been drawn with guns coming out for war. The President was able to listen to us and we were able to read out our statement to him. This statement highlighted the effects of cutting down part of or the entire Mabira Forest. We also did a cost benefit analysis on what the country would miss when Mabira Forest is given away. 

We further made some proposals on how the country can benefit, without necessarily cutting down Mabira Forest.

The other issues that were highlighted included that Mabira Forest is a unique forest with unique birds, plants and insects. We also told the President that the forest is located at a place where agriculture can be easily done – Lugazi, Kampala and Mukono and that the cutting down of this forest would impact negatively on the agricultural activities of people around those areas.

We further told the President that Uganda is already a signatory to a number of international instruments that relate to the environment and that it would not be wise for us to be seen breaking the provisions of those instruments. 

The Crusade also informed the President that Mabira Forest is a catchment area to many water bodies, including Lake Victoria and River Nile. 

Later, Mr Speaker, we also gave the President some proposals. One of the proposals that we made, and which I am very passionate about, was that we can use the ecosystem to do eco-tourism in Mabira. In our presentation we informed the President that such a business would earn us a lot of revenue in addition to creating job opportunities in Uganda.

Another proposal was that we could use Mabira Forest to do bee keeping. This was owing to the fact that bee hives are all over in that forest with a lot of honey being harvested. So, if a factory is placed nearby, you can imagine how much we would earn.

In conclusion, the President made a statement. First of all, we had had a meeting with the interested party, Mehta, who reaffirmed that what had been reported in the press that he had given up on the Mabira Forest land, was not true. He told us that he had never addressed any press conference about the Mabira issue. He also told us that he had never talked to the Indian community in Uganda as the press had reported. In other words, he reaffirmed that he still has interest in that Mabira Forest land.

When we talked to the President, he said he would seek the legal opinion of the Attorney-General in regard to the international environmental instruments to which Uganda is a signatory and get to understand what it means. 

Secondly, he said he would follow the process adding that it will be the institution of Parliament, where I am privileged to be, to make the final decision on this matter. So, as an interested party in saving Mabira Forest, as a “mother” to those trees and a colleague to you Members of Parliament, I am here to request you to passionately move with me when time for making such a decision comes. You know that I rely on you and I hope this time round, we shall be above self. For God and my country! I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Anywar. I congratulate you on the effort and what you have been able to achieve in your consultations with the President.

Although this matter is of national importance, we need to understand the fact that at an appropriate time, this House will be moved to take some decisions on it. I had already ruled that before we get a substantial motion, we cannot begin engaging ourselves in any debate in anticipation. So, thank you for that report. There will be no debate on this matter because there is nothing to debate. 

3.01
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I keep wondering whether the deaths of people due to road accidents do not cause concern in our country. Page 2 of the New Vision of today has a story on a road accident involving a bus along Kampala-Gulu Road that caused many deaths.

I stand to raise concern on the keenness and work of our traffic police officers on our roads in taking care of the people who travel in these buses. I got concerned to raise this issue because I keep wondering about the role that these men and women play on our roads. On the 3rd of this month, at around 1.00 a.m., there was a road accident on the Gulu-Kampala Road at Bweyale, where a bus knocked a truck that was heading to Sudan and killed a number of people. On the same day, I was travelling early that morning in one car. My wife and the rest of my family were in another car but ahead of me. We witnessed, at a bend in Wobulenzi, a bus belonging to Link Bus Company, registration No. UAM 492D parked at the bend in the road. There was a Gaga coach travelling at terrific speed and it narrowly missed hitting this bus. I called my wife to make sure that if she met traffic police ahead, she should inform them so that this driver is cautioned. Good enough, this happened in Matugga. I found them parked by the roadside and they had informed the traffic police who also had a vehicle there. The bus driver was also outside. When we tried to narrate our story to the traffic officer such that this driver is cautioned - these policemen, I think, are always suspicious. 

When he asked me who I was, I indeed introduced myself to him. I told him I am a Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido and I gave him my business card so that in case of anything, he could follow up.

As we were still narrating to him, the driver of the bus went back to his bus and wanted to drive away. I told the officer that if he did not caution this driver, I may seek the intervention of his superiors. To my disbelief, this police officer charged at me. He even threw my business card at me. He called me “useless”. This police officer’s name is Semakula, No. 3096. 

This is not the first time I am being harassed. I have ever been harassed by a traffic officer following a similar intervention in Nakawa. When I introduced myself to him and said we should move to the police station where we could solve this, he called me in the same manner, saying “Useless”.

About a month ago, hon. Ongalo and hon. Okello were also harassed by a traffic officer who even banged their car. Mr Speaker, I wonder what kind of instructions these police officers take. I am even now beginning to doubt the security of our VIPs who are in the hands of policemen. I am beginning to trust the army more than police officers. 

Many of these bus accidents occur early in the morning. I am now asking: who takes care of these people? In less than one week, there have been two road accidents on the same road and it causes no concern. My question is about the discipline of these traffic officers. 

Secondly, I have also witnessed minibuses plying the eastern and northern route moving obliquely on the road. When I sought the advice of my –(Interruption)

MRS BAKIREKE: I would like to seek clarification: is the matter the honourable colleague is raising an issue to do with accidents on our roads, involving buses or about the conduct of our police officers, especially those in the traffic department? 

DR OMONA: Thank you, hon. Nambooze. I am raising two issues: the conduct of these policemen and secondly, the safety of our people who travel on our roads. 

I will give an example. I have seen buses moving obliquely on the road and when I asked my honourable colleague, Eng. Kafeero, he told me it is as a result of a broken centre bolt and that such buses are very prone to accidents but they are on our roads. 

Two weeks ago, when I was going to the East, I drove beyond a point where there were traffic officers and watched what they would do to a bus that was moving like a stubborn monkey along the road. The bus was moving almost across the road. They watched and did not do anything. However, you see them stopping old trucks carrying charcoal and these same fellows –(Interruption)

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much for giving way. I would like to give you information that the conduct of our police officers, in one way or another, determines the carnage we have on our roads. You are right in raising these two issues because they relate to each other.

The other information I would like to give you is that the country seems to know that when we develop, we also develop other problems. For instance, on the road from Kampala to Mbarara and to Kabale, it is now a developed road but the carnage we have is too much. The reason is because the road is now very good. Traffic flow is not regulated and that is why the carnage is too much. I would like to bring it to the attention of this House that why, for heaven’s sake do we leave the question of driving permits to private individuals? Most of these drivers, especially bus drivers, get driving permits on the road. Why can’t we have a licensing body that regulates the source of driving permits? Thank you very much. 

MS ALASO: Thank you. The information I would like to give this House is to the effect that the road safety situation in Uganda, in very general terms, could be the worst in sub-Saharan Africa. What you are dealing with, hon. Omona, is just a small part of the problem. Actually, it is documented that in this country we lose over 3,000 people per year to those road accidents. 

A few months ago, probably at the beginning of this year, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution on road safety. That was the time hon. Nasasira was the works minister. We had hoped that we would have benefited from the commitment of the UN resolution on road safety. I hope that at the end of this, hon. Nasasira will comment because I see he is very busy discussing the welfare of teachers. 

Mr Speaker, we have sought opportunity on the Order Paper as the Parliamentarians Forum on Road Safety to bring to this House the UN resolution on road safety since Government has not done it, so that we, together, look at the pillars and the commitment that our Government is supposed to undertake. Hopefully, that will help us move in that direction. Therefore, I would like to inform Members that there is a Parliamentarians Forum on Road Safety and you are invited to join so that we discuss further, the matters of road safety in this country. Thank you.

DR OMONA: Finally, I just want to say that I seek for an answer about the conduct of the police officer of this character, Semakula No. 3096, who harasses a Member of Parliament who reports a case like this. And also, how safe are our people who travel on this road, especially in buses that ply this long route at night? Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the matters raised by the hon. Member for Kaberamaido are very important. Just like hon. Alaso has reiterated, this might need the appropriate committee to examine it in better detail and they give us a comprehensive overview of what should be done.
 
I do not think we shall have sufficient time to engage in this because we have four pages of the Order Paper to handle. I will just take this as information for now and then we move to the business of today -(Members rose_)- hon. Members, bear with me because I will not take any more debate on this matter, just like I have done with the previous one. I will use my prerogative under rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure on the determination of order of business to amend the Order Paper that is before us to allow the first reading of the Bill.
 
BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2011

3.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011”, be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the appropriate committee for action in the time frame allowed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE (NO.2) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

MRS KIWANUKA: I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance (No.2) (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the second time. 

The object of the Bill is to amend the Finance No. 2 Act, 2002, to increase the levy on export of raw hides and skins of animals, including export for onward processing and to provide for publication in the Uganda gazette, a practice notice issued by the Commissioner-General. I beg to move.

3.14
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker, allow me present a brief report of the committee on the Bill entitled, “The Finance no.2 (Amendment) Bill, 2011” which was committed under rules 113 and 161(c) of the Rules of Procedure for consideration in accordance with Article 9 of the Constitution.

The committee has considered the Bill in detail and now presents their report.

As our method of work, the committee held consultative discussions with the minister of finance and the Uganda Revenue Authority. Their submissions informed the contents of this report. 

As stated, the object of the Bill is to amend The Finance No. 2 Act of 2002 to increase the levy on the export of raw hides and skins of animals, including export for outward processing, and to provide it for publication of practice notice issued by the Commissioner-General in the Uganda gazette. 

Observations

The Government has been increasing the levy on the export of raw hides and skins as follows: in 2002 it was 15 percent of FOB; in 2005 it was 20 percent of FOB; in 2007 it was US $0.25 per kilogramme; in 2008 it was US $0.40 per kilogramme and now in 2011 it is US $0.8 per kilogramme, which is 100 percent increment. 

The committee, however, observes that these measures are yet to promote industrial processing and value addition in Uganda. The committee was informed that the leather tanning industries lack the capacity to manage waste from the processed hides and skins and consequently, release the waste into the lake in Jinja, creating a danger to fish, the lake and human beings.
 
The leather tanning industries have failed to absorb the supply of raw hides in the country. Consequently, people are now throwing away the hides as there is no sufficient export demand to cover the supply.

The tax measure has in turn acted as a disincentive to the exporters. Currently, there are few people exporting raw hides and skins. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should conduct a study into the effects of the tax on the supply and demand of hides and skins and the revenue patterns in this sector.

Publication of Practice Notes 

The committee welcomes the proposed publication of the Uganda Revenue Authority practice notes and notes that this is a fulfillment of Parliament’s earlier recommendation in the Eighth Parliament. I beg to report, and some amendments will come later.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a clear matter. I put the question that the committee report be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
COMMITTE STAGE

THE FINANCE (NO.2) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

3.18
Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TUMWEBAZE: We propose that we delete clause 2. The justification is that the increased tax overtime has acted as a disincentive to exporters, yet the leather tanning industry cannot consume the supply of raw hides in the country. Consequently, people are now throwing them away because there is no sufficient demand to cover the supply.

The companies are not adding value to the accepted standard, which is production of full leather products. The country has no capacity to manage waste from processed hides and skins. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, you have put us in a difficult situation because your amendment in essence would only leave the commencement clause of this Bill. If your amendment is supported and also carried, it means that there will be no Bill to even discuss. The motion you should have objected to is that of the Bill’s second reading.

MR TUMWEBAZE: There is another part of publication of practice notes on clause 2.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But that is part of clause 2 and you are moving that clause 2 be deleted. Are you saying that the first part of clause 2 be deleted? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Yes, we are deleting the first part of clause 2, which is about the levy. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing the deletion of the first part of clause 2, which says that there shall be a charge of US $0.8?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Clause 2, sub-section (1); it is not about conceding -  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We also have another technical problem with the Bill. That heading which is “Publication of agreements provided for tax benefits”, that is on the second page of the Bill should actually have been sub-clause (2). Maybe somebody could help us and start with that amendment. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to inform the chairperson and the House that what is true is that we increased a levy sometime back because there was connivance in the region. All hides and skins in the region were going through Uganda because we had not put a levy on them and they were going as rejects. We discovered that we were actually denying people employment here; we were not creating an enabling environment for investors to come here and we put a levy then but in the region, we are the lowest at the moment. I think in the spirit of creating employment and attracting investment here and value addition, it is important that we prohibit export of raw materials when we have an enabling environment for investment in the sector. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Now that the hon. Minister of State for Animal Industry, who is a senior stakeholder in this matter, is informing us that we are losing a lot of opportunities in terms of value addition and in terms of employment opportunities, I would like to request him to clarify on the issue of export of live animals. Here you are talking of raw materials but how many times do we see our cows being transported to Southern Sudan with all the hooves, the horns and the skins; which products by the way we could make use of? We could have a glue factory here from the horns and the hooves. So, is it just about the skins? Wouldn’t we be protected broadly by making sure that we export meat and therefore make use of all those other products here to generate employment for people to have value addition to those products rather than just limiting it to skins? I seek your clarification. 

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As we seek to help this company out, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister that this company is going to be compliant to saving our water bodies because in a report published by NEMA, they were listed among those polluting our water bodies and even here, the committee chairperson has highlighted that effect, that they are not even able to manage the waste process hence polluting the environment and the water bodies for that matter. I seek your clarification. Ally our fears that they are going to be good business partners to this country and be compliant and not pollute the water bodies. Thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like from the minister of agriculture is to the extent that he gives this House the dividends hitherto arising from that levy. If my memory serves me right, it must have been about 2002/2003 that Parliament first imposed that levy and the argument then, Mr Chairman, was that there would be value addition, more jobs would be created and issues like that. It is now close to seven years or so; or may be four since the levy was imposed. Can the minister tell us how many Ugandans have since benefited from the leather tanning industry? I am more inclined at this point to believe the report of the committee. It is no longer wise to pretend that the levy is helping us when actually people are throwing the hides and exporting the cow with the hooves and everything, as hon. Wadri said. So, if the hon. Minister would like me to oppose the committee position, he must first convince me that four years down the road since this levy has subsisted, we have benefitted. If it is as the committee has said, I am more inclined to go with the committee that this time round we let go, we delete it and we are able to get other people who can buy the hides, process them and employ people or export them.  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, thank you. I think what we should be talking about is to develop the leather tanning industry. When we talk about increasing the levy on raw hides and skins and yet we do not have internal capacity to process these hides and skins, then the result is that people will continue throwing away skins and hides. In fact the practice of eating them is not very common in this country. So, I think the minister should first of all have come to tell us how she intends to develop this industry before imposing a levy that will stop people from looking for the available markets. Remember that our people are desperate to sell and this levy is going to curtail their ability to market their leather in whatever form it is and yet you do not provide alternatives. For you to stop them from trading in these products, you should be able to tell them where they can be able to take them to earn money. This is not coming out in this Bill and I think it would be reasonable for us to support the position of the committee. I thank you. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. If I look at the clause we are talking about in the Finance Act, the tax rate has been there. If we look at the tax rate of 2010/2011, hides and skins, the nomenclature of it is classified under section (C), chapter 2. I think the object of the Bill is increasing the rate from US $0.4 to come to US $0.8 per kilogram. And what the honourable minister was saying was that we must be in tandem with the region - with the East African Customs Union which we assent to - so that there is value addition to prevent those people from exporting at the lowest price without anything. When you increase that rate, it means people who have been exporting hides and skins will be encouraged to establish some factories and they go into the tanning business. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. Hon. Wadri brought up a very good point that cows are going to South Sudan and they go with the skins. At least we are sure about the skins. Have we been taxing those live skins, which are going there? Okay. (Laughter)

Having said that, it is very important that Government is saying that they encourage people to invest in the leather tanning industries in Uganda but Government should have been the one to lead in this sector because this could be calling on a very big investment and for a big investment instead of people going to the bank, they would rather throw away the skins. So, Government should first tell us, where have they built their own leather tanning industry where they want people to take the skins? Failure to do that, I think this time I am not also agreeing with the minister of finance because you must show us what plans you have put in place. 

Hon. Bright Rwamirama was my chairman and you recall that the reason we did it in 2005 was because we were going to build a factory and that Government was going to invest. Since you are on the Front Bench, tell me how much you have invested in this area so that we can now support you that what you have invested can go further to do what you want.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank hon. Kassiano Wadri for the very good point he has brought about the export of live cows. That is the most unfortunate thing we are doing but we are doing so because we have no abattoirs to do it. But the good news is that we now have two investors and the Government is working with the farmers to establish an abattoir and so we are going to have three abattoirs. Once they are established, we shall not allow at all or even give permits for export of live cows. We will only give them out for breeding purposes. 

Hon. Beatrice Anywar, you are very right on pollution of the environment and the management of waste; but we should not shy away from doing the right thing for avoidance of facing the trouble of managing waste. I think the Ministry of Environment must make sure that these people who have invested here comply.

On the issue of how we have invested in this sector, we have the biggest tannery in East and Central Africa in Jinja. It is operating under capacity. Actually they are operating at 25 percent because all hides are going so these people who are buying hides and skins are motivated to make good money outside rather than -(Interruption)

MR BASAJJABALABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank you hon. Minister for giving way. I was reluctant to speak on this matter because I am a member of the committee. I disagree with the minister. It is not true that the tanneries in Jinja are operating below capacity. Their problem is that they lack the competitive prices that traders are looking for and a continuation by Government to put tax on traders is a disadvantage to this country. We are supporting one particular individual at the expense of the rest of the traders in hides and skins and it has continually happened and it will be clear and true that the minister puts it to this House to explain exactly what we have benefited for the last nine or eight years that this tax has been imposed. Mr Chairman, the insertion by the minister is not true that these tanneries are operating under capacity. I thank you. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, I think it is better to follow the procedure of the steps of development without jumping any because when you miss a step it is like when you put on the trousers and you want to put on the underpants later. (Laughter)

What should take precedence is creation of an environment for investment here and my friends who have been on the committee of finance for a long time remember that we visited these industries and even the one, which was owned by the Uganda Government which had been privatised was going under. The mzungu was packing because we have not empowered him. So, we must accept that taking raw materials out of here without adding value is wrong. I agree with hon. Kassiano and I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that this is the way to go. Now the onus is on Government to be seen to walk the talk. 

Mr Chairman, it is my considered opinion that the chairman of the committee concedes and can continue interacting with the ministry of finance to notice the progress. Our neighbours have left us behind. I beg -(Interjections)- now, hon. Alaso your concern was how do we plough back the benefits -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I ask the honourable chairman of the committee to say something?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, before I am pre-empted by conceding or not, I want to make the argument of the committee on this matter and then logic should inform us. 

One, the committee appreciates discouraging the export of raw materials but at the same time the committee was asking: why don’t we see this cutting across the board? Why a specific sector? 

And two, by increasing an export levy is it – yes, you know you were trying to discourage the business - then what happens to the industries that are already performing under capacity and they are not buying the hides that are there? Is it because of the exports? That is why the committee said: “The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should conduct a study into the effects of the tax on the supply and demand of hides and skins.” 

So, yes we want to protect the industry but if you double the tax to 100 percent, will that translate immediately to the processing of more hides? I need to be convinced on that.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, I want to inform the Chairman and the House that part of the reasons the hides were not being sold was because the cattle were slaughtered badly and the hides were cut. In this House we passed a loan on a project for NARUTIP. We trained all people operating in abattoirs to do this kind of thing. We have also built slaughter sheds across the country and we are planning another phase to do it.

In response to hon. Alaso and how much we are ploughing back to the - the fact that we fixed the levy for the first time because we were even sponsored to go to Nairobi and our committee and the Committee on National Economy discovered that Uganda had no levy on hides and skins. We have benefited because we have about four big tanneries now in Uganda and they are creating employment. They are operating under capacity and if we pass this levy, I am quite sure that we shall have created an enabling environment for investors in the sector.

MS Starta has a plan to put up a factory to employ 3,000 people and they can only do it if our policies are compliant -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think we are talking the same language only that we do not seem to have prioritised rightly. If there is an investor planning to set up but he is worried about our policies, I think what should be put in place first are those tanneries by those investors. I want to speak from the point of view of a representative, seeing how our people are slaughtering cows, goats and the like from the villages but at the end of the day, the skins never have value.

Whereas the minister could have wider vision or interest to see this happening, the fact on the ground is that our farmers are not benefiting because those who were buying the raw skins and hides cannot export them. So as a representative, I gauge your arguments on that basis. Have you found the market? Remember we withdraw from engaging Government in business and now at the same time you say the Government position is this yet it cannot invest money? I think that is where the problem is but from a larger perspective, I see this as a value addition challenge we have as a country. Some time back the President said that we Africans and Uganda are the donors to Europe. We export raw cotton and we shall now start producing Nescafe. We are still waiting for that.

Again even in this respect, whereas you could be having high sounding promises, the facts on the ground are saying otherwise. So can you convince this country that indeed we are moving in the right direction? Set your priorities right first then we can all mobilise with you to say that we want a levy so that we can own our leather.

MR NSEREKO: Mr Chairman, it is true that none of us is anti-value addition to products in Uganda. However, I would like to also inform the minister that it has become a policy of ring fencing certain investors at the expense of Ugandans. It is a deliberate policy based on promises. This is because when a given investor comes with that cosmetic proposal and says, “I am going to employ 5,000 people”, it is not even there in the agreement that if they do not employ 5,000 people, after Government making this commitment, their certificates of incorporation and licenses would be rescinded.

So, we perform our duties based on promises by investors and at the end of the day, they even hold Government at ransom. One, they fully repatriate all their profits as you may realise and some other issues but in this case of hides and skins, I think we will not work on promises. We all want value addition. 

No one objects to this 100 percent increase in the levy but what we are saying is that I would like to support the committee chairperson on this. Let us go back and find out. There is no rush, why the hurry? Let the investor come and put up his factory because the hides and skins are available in Uganda and they are not going anywhere. If he provides a good price, people will sell the hides and skins to him. Let him -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, hon. Member.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It would appear to me that the minister and the chairperson of the committee are reading from different scripts and I think you really need to help us. Whereas hon. Rwamirama is bringing a very strong argument about the capacity that exists in the country, on pages 3 and 4, the committee says we really lack the capacity. Whom should we believe?

We know that we were informed by the committee that their method of work entailed meetings with the ministry of finance. I think during those meetings, this matter should have been resolved. Whereas the committee says we do not have the capacity, the Minister of Animal Industry claims we have the capacity. Whom should this House believe?

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to request the House to support the minister for the reason that the policies we make here should be policies that will promote industrialisation in this country.

The issue of a factory here for leather tanning is a reality. To take the trend of hon. Nsereko’s argument that let the factory first come here, no investor will come when you do not have policies that promote him. If we move in this direction and if you see how much we are importing and if you go to these local artisans in Bwaise who are involved in the leather industry, you will realise that everything is being imported.

So we need to move in a direction that will promote industrialisation and this is the right way to go. The point that hon. Wadri raised is a very good one and I also agree with the hon. Rwamirama. There are some investors who have approached us wanting to establish abattoirs here. This would even address the point, which Members were raising about road safety because when you are travelling at night, most of these trucks are carrying cattle. So we will have reduced -

So I request the House to support the minister of finance and we pass the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, honourable. This matter seems to be dragging on and on and I propose that I put it to vote.

MS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Government does not support the report of the committee for the following reasons. The House agrees that value addition is very important to Uganda as it leads to growth of the economy and job creation. We all agree on that.

Let me just put some numbers on the table. One of the honourable members asked: what is the revenue we are getting from the export of hides? In the last financial year, it was Shs 10.2 billion. On processed skins, there is no tax as an encouragement to people to do value addition within the country. The value addition from the hides and skins would have a multiplier effect on the good quality of our beef; it would also assist in the setting up of more abattoirs.

As for environmental concerns, they are very important and that is the reason we have NEMA in place; NEMA licenses projects after carrying out environmental impact assessment studies. So we feel that the presence of NEMA is enough to make sure that investors do comply with the environmental issues brought to this House.  And so there should not be a reason for undermining taxation growth, industrialisation and job creation. Currently, when we export processed skins, there is no levy. The proposed levy increase is a signal to investors that we are encouraging value addition. The levy industry, like any other industry comes up as a result of demand. We are seeing interest in value addition in the leather sector and can only be developed if there is an incentive against export of raw materials. It was mentioned in the House today that some people are throwing away hides because they are not allowed to export them in raw form. This means that there is an opportunity for us to –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Chairman, the Minister had all the time to interface with the committee to put forward all these relevant issues and information. However, she is now attempting to put Parliament on a collision course with the Front Bench. Are we procedurally right to allow the Minister to come with issues that she did not present at the right time to the committee? I know that the committee is well positioned and has all the relevant information and even good will to accept her explanation. Now the Minister is turning the entire House into a committee on a matter that is likely to put Parliament at a collision course with its committee which moreover derived its mandate from this House itself. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The committees of Parliament work on behalf of Parliament and they make recommendations to this House. It is for us to approve whatever comes from the committee; if you fail to make your point before the committee or it does not accept your point, you still have recourse to the whole House to make your point. The Minister is, therefore, perfectly in order to proceed that way.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman for allowing me to do the House the courtesy of answering the questions that have been raised. The Government is creating an enabling environment instead of competing with the private sector. So when a Member asks how much Government has invested – the Government would prefer to let the private sector invest by creating the enabling framework. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have just made a simple computation; the Minister said they got Shs 10.2 billion from export of skins. If you changed it into US dollars, it is about $7 million. If you divide that by US $0.4, it gives us about 17 million kilograms. Assuming a skin of a cow weighs two kilograms when it is dry, it gives us 8.5 million cows. Is it true that we have all those cows? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the argument at the beginning was that other people are using Uganda as a conduit for exporting their hides because there was no levy here. So they are coming from other places and not only Uganda.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Why I am rising up is to ask where the other cows are coming from. Some of them go to Sudan alive; is there a problem? What are other countries doing?

MR MUJUNI: Thank you, hon. Mafabi for giving way. I entirely agree with you because although the calculation may not be accurate but approximate, we have more cows in Uganda than we should have. That is the reason the Minister is saying that some of them are smuggled and even some hides and skins are smuggled from Tanzania and other countries.

MR BASAJJABALABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to clarify; the assumption used by the Leader of the Opposition is not right. Each piece of hide does not weigh one kilogramme; on average, they weigh between 15 to 20 kilograms. What is exported and what is levied on – and the popular product exported from Uganda is wet-salted. But before I sit down, the information I wish to give to the House is that hides and skins and scrap are the only exportable products that have export duty. Much as the Minister is giving us a figure of Shs 10.2 billion as the basis for the tax, the foreign exchange earning has gone to almost zero as a result of export volumes that have gone down. Moreover, the products that are being exported are not final products. What is being exported as processed is wet glue and not fully finished leather. So what we are proposing is that even the tax that was there at US $0.4 two years back, the export price, C&F, to Hong Kong was US $0.4. So for one to promise to pay the tax and still export – and what is happening is that our people are being exploited; you have the so-called investors who grade the hides into three; the first being the biggest for which they give the highest price, the second is given almost 40 percent of the first price and the third is given a very low price, almost 0.5 percent of the first price.

Mr Chairman, this House is here to legislate on behalf of Ugandans and the interests we should protect should be that of Ugandans. Levying this tax is unacceptable, especially if we want foreign exchange increment in this country. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know Members may say I am wrong on numbers but I am nearer, if you try, because I want you to get that money, divide by – the exchange rate has just gone up but if you are talking of last year, it was about Shs 1,700 to Shs 1,800 per US dollar and I went to a good primary school in the village, which knew how numbers go on. (Laughter)

You remember in 2001 when we came to Parliament with you, there was a newspaper called Confidential of Teddy Cheeye. It said that one businessman has got US $59 million from the export of hides. Do you remember that time? I was very interested in knowing where he got the US $59 million from. If he took every hide at US $10, it meant that those were 5.9 million cows. Now 5.9 million cows and yet the total number of cows and goats in Uganda was about three million; where did the difference come from? We did an investigation and we discovered that it was not the right figure. 

Having said that, there is a problem; the problem is what are they talking about the hides now? If we in Uganda export, we get Shs 10 billion. Which country is that one which does not need tax so that it allows their skins to come into Uganda? Which country is that one?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: When a country has high tax on a commodity, those commodities do not normally go through that country. They are brought to where taxes are low so that they can be re-exported. What we discovered in Nairobi - and I remember there was a workshop, which was organised mainly for Ugandans to wake up and see how we are distorting the facts in the industry, the hon. Leader of the Opposition is very right – they would get papers here and stamp them and the hides stay in Nairobi and they go as Kampala skins. We discovered that Uganda was exporting more skins than any country in this region and yet we did not have the numbers.  

Mr Chairman, it is against this background that we must actually put this levy. I want to inform the House that we are even going for the wet glue skin. When we are finished with the skins, we shall go for the wet glue skins because we want shoes and bags made here. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Have you finished hon. Nandala-Mafabi? Are you accepting the information?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: From hon. Kakooza, I can accept. (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: I thank you hon. Leader of the Opposition. When you read the Bill they are specifically talking of fresh or salty and this tax has been there but they are increasing it from 0.4 to 0.8 percent. What is the use of increasing it from 0.4 percent to 0.8 percent? It means that it is going to act as a deterrent to protect those people who are going to be engaged in processing and tanning. What is needed and what is required? It is the Government now to lay a strategy. We who are in the cattle corridor – hon. Wadri was saying that we are exporting the whole cow because of the way they are transported. We could have as many abattoirs as possible and we only transport carcasses and we do not transport skin –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have got the information and it is enough. Mr Chairman -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Order! You had accepted the information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, and it is enough.

MR KAKOOZA: One point because when you change now, I want to be guided by the minister of finance because the 0.8 percent was projected to start on 1st July. About the taxes, we passed a Vote-on-Account and the money has been collected. What will happen when you change this percentage? Will it not get affected? About this rate, I understand that the ministers for finance sit in the East African Community and decide the rate of each and every item to be increased in the Finance Bill. If it was reached and they agreed, how are we now going to turn around and change it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let hon. Nandala-Mafabi wind up and then I come to the minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thought that hon. Kakooza would tell me about clearing because that is what I was expecting –(Laughter)– that when goods are being cleared, we verify the goods and confirm and then we stamp. That is what I was expecting from him because the minister said –(Interjections)- yes, it was hon. Rwamirama who said that the papers are the only ones we are stamping, which means that the minister for finance is very incompetent. 

How can you just stamp papers without seeing the items? To export, you must ask what is being exported and they will say, “These are the goods”, and you will see them and then you stamp. This thing of saying paper work – you have told us that you have a problem in your ministry as far as rotation of papers is concerned - and that is revenue. It also means that you have declared here that you are not competent enough to deal with these issues because I know what we call transfer pricing but this issue is no longer transfer pricing but physical goods moving from Uganda to another country and you are telling us that in Uganda, we had 8.5 million cow skins that moved but now you are turning around and saying that they are just bringing papers. 

So, I want to propose that for a time being, I think we still have a contentious issue. As we study this thing further, we should maintain the rate which has been existing so that we study further and then the minister will tell us that as we maintain –(Interjections)- listen! You have been a member of the finance committee since 2001 and you should listen to me also. I know what I am saying – yes, we fixed it. That is true but we should maintain it, study it further and if there is need, that is when we can adjust upwards or downwards but this business of coming with 0.8 percent without reasoning which is so clear, I am so hesitant to agree with this.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As we were discussing, this levy is to further the cause of job creation, value addition and economic growth but I have heard the comments from the Floor. I would just like - someone mentioned scrap iron. Export of scrap metal as you know is banned and it is for a strategic reason to help develop the metal industry within the country.

The proposed levy is imposed throughout East Africa. It is not peculiar to Uganda. So, what I propose is that the House should approve increasing the levy while we come back, I guarantee in six months with a definitive document - I will not use the word “study” - to answer the questions and to demonstrate the effect. There are already four industries that are either operational or ready to start operating in Uganda to process hides and skins. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have discussed -

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, a commitment from the minister of six months can be taken and we concede on our position. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 2, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, as the hon. Members recover from the voting process, I just wanted to point out that there is a small drafting problem here. We have gone over clause 2 and when you turn the other side of the page you again come to clause 2. So I suggest that for purposes of making it neater let it be clause 3 at the back of the page.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the proposed amendment is that the clause 2 appearing on the second page be amended to be clause 3 following from the clause 2 we have just passed.

Clause 3, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.12
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Finance No.2 (Amendment) Bill, 2011”, and has passed it with one amendment to change the paragraph numbering at the end as proposed by the Deputy Attorney-General.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCE (NO.2) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

4.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance (No.2) (Amendment) Bill, 2011 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE FINANCE (NO.2) (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

4.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Proceed.

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the Income Tax Act, Cap 340;
a) 	To provide for the exemption from tax of the value of right or option to acquire shares granted to an employee under the employee share acquisition scheme;
b) 	To provide for the exemption from tax of income derived from agro-processing;
c) 	To substitute paragraph (j) of Section 79;
d) 	To substitute Section 86(4); 
e) 	To amend Section 89 QC (1) (a) by substituting for Section 54 the words, “section 154”;
f) 	To amend Section 121(1) and sub-section (3) by substituting the words sub-section (2) for this section;
g) 	By inserting new sub-sections providing for a person who fails to notify the commissioner to be personally liable to pay to the commissioner the amount of tax that the non-resident is liable for on the income arising under the contract but the person is entitled to recover the amount from the non-resident;
h) 	To substitute section 140 to provide for failure to comply with obligations under the Act.

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

4.18
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, allow me to present to you the report of the committee on the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011 -(Interjections)- do not worry, I know when to concede and when not to.

The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development under rules 113 and 161(c) of the Rules of Procedure for consideration and subsequently report to the House.

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure, the committee has considered the Bill. I now present the report of the committee on the Bill.

Method of Work

The committee held consultative discussions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Uganda Revenue Authority. Their submissions informed the contents of this report. 

The object of this Bill is to amend the Income Tax Cap. 340 to provide for the exemption from tax of the value of a right or option to acquire shares granted to an employee under an employee share acquisition scheme; to provide for the exemption from tax of income derived from agro-processing and for related matters.

Observations

The committee made the following observations and recommendations:

URA guidelines on land and vehicle transactions:
The committee was informed that in a bid to collect more revenue and reduce tax evasion, URA instituted a new measure that requires for any transfer of land or vehicle worth Shs 50 million and above, the buyer must satisfactorily show evidence of payment of tax on the income used to purchase the land or vehicle. Actually failure to do that – one does not get clearance to transfer.

While the committee appreciates URA on the innovativeness to collect more revenue as per last year’s committee recommendation, the committee observed that there is need for URA to issue and publicise clear guidelines on how the method works such that taxpayers know what is required and to avoid unnecessary haggles and negotiations between the taxpayers and URA officers, which may breed corruption.

The committee further recommends that URA and the ministry of finance should conduct a study on whether this indirect method of tax compliance will not affect economic activity and in turn, narrow the tax base given the long time strategy of a liberalised economy.

Secondly, the committee recommends that in the event that there is a dispute for pending determination by the Tax Tribunal arising out of the assessment by URA on this particular income, the transfer of the property should not be hampered since the issue is bound to be decided upon by the Tax Tribunal.

Pay As You Earn Threshold

The committee notes that PAYE was last reviewed in 1999. Since then, the value of the shilling has fallen tremendously and it is no longer viable to set the threshold at Shs 130,000. The committee observed that this situation is unfair to the low income earners who are now heavily taxed compared to the high income earners. 

The committee further notes that the Net Present Value (NPV) of the Shs 130,000 in 1999 is now approximately Shs 418,174. Therefore, in light of the current economic situation, the Government should consider raising the PAYE threshold with the objective of lessening the burden on the low income earners.

Income from telecom companies: the committee noted that URA has not taken logical capacity to track all business operations undertaken by the giant telecom companies and depends largely on the technologies used by the Uganda Communications Commission and also on the self-assessment returns of the same companies. The committee observes that the monitoring capacity of URA has to continuously evolve to capture the changing technology used by these telecom companies.

Government Policy on Agriculture

The committee notes that despite Government’s commitment to promote agriculture as a major contributor to the GDP, this commitment is not reflected in the taxation regime on agriculture; while many other categories of income, for example, business income derived from managing an educational institution and income derived from agro-processing are exempt so as to boost those sectors whose margins are much higher than those of the producer in the value chain.

The committee, therefore, recommends that if exempting agro-processing income is meant to boost processing for agricultural produce, then income from production should also be exempt too so as to motivate more farmers and investors to produce on a large scale. The committee will propose an amendment to this effect.

Research on Previous Tax Reforms

The committee notes that Government needs to make a detailed report to Parliament on how previous tax reforms that is; exemptions and wavers have affected the economy and therefore justifying their relevance. 

I beg to submit for now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issues are fairly clear; you might want to have some debate when we have some amendments. 

4.27
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the chairman about an aspect on farming. You know Kakira Sugar Works and Mehta; how do you treat that? Is it farming? And if so, are you going to exempt them from paying taxes?

The second issue is on Pay As You Earn; you said it was last reviewed in 1999 and the set threshold figure is now worth about Shs 418,000. However, you have not even proposed an amendment. Have you come just to inform us about history? You are saying the inflation rate is being taken at 1 percent per annum and you say that from 1997 to 2001; and yet you say that it was last reviewed in 1999. So what is the right period when PAYE was last reviewed? Is it 1996, 1997 or 1999 –(Interjections)– I want to tell you that it is 1996? If you go by 1996, then the value is even above Shs 418,000.

Finally, how did you come up with this Shs 50 million? Why not Shs 10 million or 100 million? If you are talking about exempting – the income is only Shs 1; so you should say that any land above Shs 130,000 should be charged income tax. How did you come up with that 50; what was the rationale? Are you not encouraging forgery? Because if I am dealing with brother Kiyonga, he might ask me to value his land at Shs 45 million, then he gives me Shs 200 million. So, are there no better methods that URA can use to improve tax collection? For instance, they could apply what we call back duty. 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, it is true that we want to get even tax that exists in the world so that we can make our reserves better. But in this case, like the honourable member has noted, what is the magic with the figure of Shs 50 million. Why not Shs 2 million or Shs 10 million? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the information you are giving to the honourable member?

MR NSEREKO: I am informing him that what is the magic in the figure Shs 50 million?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, kindly resume your seat!

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, let me complete my submission. It has also been used in various issues. Before we came to this issue, someone said, “It was 40 and the levy was increased to 80”. What is the magic in those figures? That is the information I am giving you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for the magic, my brother Mohamed. The law in this form is going to bring a lot of trouble. I am aware that hon. Kiyonga should be the best advisor on these matters. When the ministry of finance introduced the issue of clearing income tax by stamping in the passports of travellers; you know what happened. People instead paid to those with stamps; others went to Nakasero and cut out stamps. So why don’t we improve on our methods of back duty and investigation so that we can improve on tax collection? 

Finally, the ministry of finance has talked about reforms and said they would explain – I hope hon. Bright Rwamirama is here. He knows very well that these reforms should have been done many years ago. So why don’t you put in place a timeframe when you will return to Parliament and explain the reforms they have put in place, how we have benefited and how it improved tax collection? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will limit debate to 20 minutes; two minutes each.

4.30
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to say something on the issue of the Shs 50 million. I support the idea of having a levy on Shs 50 million and people having to explain if they are buying anything beyond Shs 50 million. A lot of people are keeping money in their homes. Some of it is illegal money; even money launderers transact their businesses in cash. So I think that if this levy is properly managed, it will increase tax collection and discourage money laundering. And people who steal public resources and keep it in their homes and then buy things using cash without going to the bank will be restricted. 

However, it could be a double edged sword because somebody can politicise it to punish Wafula Oguttu because he belongs to the Opposition using this rule. Anyway, generally, if managed well, it is a good rule and I think it should be pursued and perfected; we should support it.

Secondly, on the issue of the Pay As You Earn tax, I would like to say that the threshold for this tax should be increased. From our position, this threshold should move to Shs 500,000. This is because this tax is dollar-rated. The Government fixes taxes based on the dollar rate but because prices are changing, Government revenue increases due to inflation. So, we cannot base our taxes on a dollar that keeps depreciating. So, hon. Minister, why don’t we first have the salaries fixed on the basis of the dollar’s value because that is what is being done for taxes? Also why don’t we increase the rate? I am saying this because Government loses nothing in that situation.

4.33
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues here. One is about the computation of taxation at the farm level. You know that most of our farmers are also peasants. So, how are you going to compute this income in order to generate the annual income to be taxed?

Secondly, you also know that our farmers do not receive any substitutes ordinarily speaking because the policy is very clear that Government does not provide for that, yet the persons who are benefiting from the farm produce are the middlemen who process these produce. So, if you are exempting them from taxation, then there is no moral right or even obligation to tax this guy who only produces at farm level. Unless you deal with total exemption, you should not even think about taxing the farmers because most of these farmers are actually operating on a hand-to-mouth basis. This means there is actually no income to be taxed. I find that wanting.

Also on the issue of transfer of vehicles and land worth more than Shs 50 million, all this is good but the question is – of course loans are taxed and the savings too, but what about the ordinary businessman whose taxation is not tracked like hon. Wafula Ogutu has said? How are you going to compute these figures in order to arrive at a morally acceptable figure? Thank you.

4.34
MR KYEWALABYE MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about land transactions. I would like to inform the House that the biggest percentage of the class that does these transfers of land is the business class. So, the moment you try to make transfer of land longer, you are incapacitating the businessman yet once you start doing that, you as Government will be shooting yourselves in the foot. This is because it is from those transactions that the businessman gets income to pay taxes.

Secondly, I would like to say that the moment you put stringent measures in place; you are going to promote forgeries. I have been working with the lands department so what I am telling you I know from experience. For example, if you put a law that taxes on land must start with any transaction worth Shs 100 million, then someone will struggle to value the same piece of land at Shs 10 million so that they can evade taxes. I would like to ask the committee and the ministry to put that into consideration in order to simplify life for the businessman. Thank you.

4.36
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister of finance for trying to make ends meet by looking for taxes. However, I would like to say that I don’t know whether it is not possible – this tax is intended to benefit the ministry and the Government at large but I also wonder if they can manage to do that; why can’t they fix prices for necessities like sugar and other household commodities, the way other countries have done?

Our people are suffering so much! Yes, that will benefit us in general but not directly the people at the grassroots. You know that our grandmothers no longer take tea with sugar as they used to do in those days. So, why can’t they fix prices for things like sugar, soap and so on? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.37
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas I agree entirely that the ministry of finance must collect taxes, I also wish that these taxes are put to good use. There are countries where people pay up between 30 to 40 percent taxes willingly because the taxes are used properly.

When you look at Shs 50 million – people are already finding it difficult to transfer their land titles. The Uganda Revenue Authority is giving its own value. For example, one may buy a piece of land in Mbale at Shs 40 million, but URA  will argue that such land cannot be worth Shs 40 million; they will value it at Shs 90 million. So, you will be working at the mercy of URA yet land value varies from area to area. This is going to increase corruption because the person transferring land will be at the mercy of the revenue official. This means if you give the official something, they will bring the value down and if you don’t, they will give that land the value they want.

As we talk now, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, there are already so many titles lying in lands awaiting transfers but they cannot be transferred because there is discrepancy on the value. Please, look at that element seriously. 

Also, I know that Ugandans would be willing to pay taxes, but are these taxes being put to good use? That is the question that the ministry of finance should examine.

MR BARYAYANGA: I would like to give information to the hon. Member. I do not see how a farmer who has sold his 100 head of cattle to buy a piece of land at Shs 60 million should again sell another 30 head of cattle to pay taxes. (Applause) If you are promoting the Bonna Bagagawale programme, how are these farmers going to become rich when they have to spend all their savings in taxation? So, I do not think this is applicable, as far as land and motor vehicle transactions are concerned. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.40
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that we need a clarification from either the minister of finance or URA to tell us that actually the threshold of Shs 50 million is not a tax and that the only tax on land transaction is the stamp duty. However, the problem that is likely to arise, and those who have been or are in the land transaction business know this, is that once this process becomes laborious, then people transacting in real estate property of a value above Shs 50 million will undervalue it. And once they undervalue, you will lose out, first of all on the stamp duty which is your legitimate tax; and you may actually not be able to get the income tax on these perceived irregular incomes. 

You need to study this thing in detail. My other business, when I am not in this House, is sometimes transacted in the lands office. There are a lot of pending transactions there. The situation borders on the chaotic. They will be asking: “Where did you get this money from? How did you get it?” Businessmen are not interested in those sorts of questions. 

So, you really need to study this. I expected the committee to have talked to stakeholders on this: to talk to the land officials, business people and see whether this policy will achieve the desired results. (Member timed out_)

4.42
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start from where hon. Katuntu has stopped. You remember we abolished graduated tax. With due respect to Mr Okullo Epak, one of the major canons of taxation is that the tax should be easy to collect, willingness to pay, accommodative and fair. When you find that there are laborious activities involved in paying the tax, it will lead to evasion and under valuation of the land. There is a need for more study on this tax.

Secondly, when you look at the report of 2004, this Parliament has been recommending the rise of the threshold from Shs 130,000. The Pay As You Earn threshold of Shs 130,000 has been there since 1997. The moment you reduce the purchasing power – if somebody has Shs 200,000 and you deduct it by 10 percent, he will purchase a few goods and you will not get more revenue. But when you do not tax that person and he purchases goods worth Shs 200,000, you collect more revenue. Besides, currently there is inflation.

I think the ministry of finance should come out and tell us how many people are below the Shs 130,000 threshold. It is high time that the ministry of finance came out with information on how much they could lose if they didn’t tax people in that threshold –(Member timed out_)

4.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have the honour to respond to some of the issues that concern the report. Hon. Kakooza was directing his concern to the minister. I will start with the concerns of hon. Katuntu and hon. Wamanga. 

First of all, the question of that URA procedure; we were told it is an indirect method of ensuring tax compliance. It was not an issue of an amendment in the Act but the committee picked interest in it and we had so much time with the Uganda Revenue Authority. Like hon. Ogutu said, many people keep monies in their bags. There is no formal business for URA to audit. The concerns of the committee are some of the concerns Members are echoing. 

It is not the committee that talked about Shs 50 million. The Shs 50 million is what URA deemed as a good measure to think that you could have some income and yet you are not on their registered taxpayer’s database. We said, “Fine, that is okay. But again, how do you ascertain the value? How do you ensure that it is not at the discretion of the URA officer, clearing the papers, to say yes or no given some form of inducement?” And this is an observation of the committee in the report. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think URA is demonstrating incompetence. It is the owner who collects stamp duty. What will happen is that if you allow somebody to pay stamp duty on Shs 1.0 billion, you will note that Nandala bought land at Shs 1.0 billion so where is his income tax return? They have the data. The moment you do this, you will be promoting corruption and incompetence. They have information and they can follow up anybody at any time. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Information taken and that is a good observation too. At the same time, we were very sensitive not to stifle the seemingly good innovation because we were told that when the measure was put in place, in three weeks, close to Shs 1.0 billion was collected. So, that is the position the committee was on. 

However, the concern you raised is very pertinent. How do you ensure that the system – and this is the challenge we put to URA - I have seen them respond in the papers by giving some details. I am a Member of Parliament, I earn this much, my PAYE is known, my savings are known, what then do I require? If I got a loan, do I get cleared immediately? They say, “Yes”. We have urged them to come out clearly on some of those issues. 

We are asking; what is the impact on the economy? The concern of hon. Abdu Katuntu; if transactions of land are reducing, are you promoting real estate? Are you chasing people in employment, for example, the legal people? These are issues the committee was able to observe and we welcome more concerns. At the same time, there are people who say tax evasion in this country is very systematic. People are not registered; people keep money in their bags. That is also a view that the committee took heed of. 

The concern of the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi; taxation on agriculture; Kakira Sugar Works, Mulwana, mention them, there will be a handful of some commercial farmers. Granted they produce, they have a ready market and they are totally different from your farmer in Bulambuli and from my farmer in Kamwenge. Section 21 of the income tax does not differentiate between Mulwana and my farmer in Kamwenge. We are all eligible to pay tax from that income. 

The Act defines a farmer as someone in pastoral, agricultural, plantation, horticultural or other similar operation. The question is, because of Kakira, Mulwana, among others, how would you motivate more subsistence farmers to come up and reach the level of the Mulwanas? If we can manage to put a tax holiday on importation, for hotels and others – because if you look at educational institutions, there are poor people operating schools exempt from tax. Sudhir is also exempt from tax. So the question is, as we try to respond to inflation by trying to encourage production, why not send an incentive to exempt farming income such that more people with pension money, more people with remittances from abroad can go and invest in farming? They will be induced to go into a venture of farming, which is hitherto seen as unprofitable. We are very strong on that point. 

The other issue was that why didn’t we propose an amendment on PAYE? That is a good one. We made an observation but did not propose an amendment. We went through some calculations. The bill on revenue loss was huge and the ministry of finance said this had to be prepared for; it cannot be abrupt especially in light of the challenges the economy is facing. So, we conceded on that but the observation would be made such that people appreciate it and then we work towards mitigating that anticipated revenue loss. 

Mr Speaker, I think those are the issues that Members raised. 

4.51
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government opposes the amendments of the committee based on the fact that agriculture is the backbone of our economy and employs more than 80 percent of our people. The Government has already supported agriculture through removing taxes on fertilisers, seeds, pesticides, hoes and other implements. Removing tax on agricultural income will lead to loss of income of almost Shs 9.0 billion especially from large scale farmers like sugar, tea and coffee estates.

Currently, the Constitution of this country does not permit discrimination between small and big farmers. I have also noted that the Budget for this year has already been approved with these parameters in mind. However, the Government has undertaken to do research on how to assist any small farmer, who is adversely affected by this.

Most of our farmers do it on a small scale basis and their income cannot be ascertained because they do not keep accounts. We cannot administratively reach them.

The proposal of the committee will, therefore, favour big farmers leading to the aforementioned revenue loss of Shs 9.0 billion. It is not possible at this time to propose a threshold to the House for big, small and medium farmers. However, I do commit that this proposal for a threshold for agricultural income will be considered as part of our proposed assessment that Government intends to carry out.

We have agreed to carry out a workshop with MPs before next financial year to see that whatever is agreed is incorporated in the budget for next year. This is an unequivocal pledge that we have made.

As far as Pay As You Earn is concerned, we agree with the committee that we will handle it in this same retreat with the MPs. The Pay As You Earn threshold will be one of the major issues for discussion.  Whatever discussion that will be made will be incorporated into next year’s budget. Any revenue loss at this time from adjusting the Pay As You Earn threshold without understanding the implications cannot be accommodated as it will severely impact the Budget.  

The chairman has said that Pay As You Earn constitutes a big percentage of our total tax revenue. This is in a country where our total tax revenue is only 13 percent of GDP compared to the Sub-Saharan average of over 20 percent. Our neighbour Kenya is approaching 18 percent as a ratio of their GDP. It shows that we have quite significant leakages in our system. 

The Income tax Act provides URA with powers to make assessments where a person may be viewed as under declaring a transaction. This is a basis for requesting people transferring land or buying cars above Shs 50 million, for their taxpayer information. Compliant taxpayers, recipient of gifts, inheritance or borrowers do not pay it. Only non-complaint taxpayers pay. 

One Member has said that if his relative sells his 100 cows for Shs 60 million, what happens? By the time a person has 100 cows to sell, in Uganda they are viewed as a substantial asset holder. 

We hereby oppose the amendments proposed by the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have not proposed yet; we shall come to that later. Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill” be read for the second time.

Hon. Members, the voice voting was not clear to me so let us vote by a show of hands.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the results of the vote on the motion are as follows: those in favour of the motion are 13; those against the motion are 45 -(Applause)– and there are none abstaining. The total number of votes cast is 58. 

We have a situation where this House is not dully constituted and, therefore, incompetent to make a decision and according to our Rules of Procedure, we don’t have the sufficient number. We require 125 Members to at least make this decision. So, a decision is not made. 

Hon. Members, it is clear that we do not quorum. So, we will not be able to proceed with any other business for these purposes. The House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 5.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 September 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)
