Wednesday, 6 September 1995


The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament Building, Kampala.


(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)


(The Council was called to order.)


COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY


CONSIDERATION OF ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE PHYSICAL YEAR 1995/96 FOR THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES


VOTE 013 - MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

Programme 01

Programme 02

THE CHAIRMAN:  Programme 01, hon. Ntimba please.

MR NTIMBA:  Mr Chairman, I discovered that a number of Items on that programme have disappeared.  Mainly Items 10-15, 10-17, 10-20 and 10-21.  I would like to seek an explanation from the Ministry of Finance as to why these Items were removed and yet they resisted last year, and to alley the fears of the House that the removal of these Items may not jeopardise the running of the activities of that Ministry of that Ministry of Education and Sports.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, we are considering what is here at this stage in Committee Stage in Parliamentary you ask - you consider the Items which are presented.  But for the sake of explanation - it is true that at Committee Stage the Parliamentary procedures you consider what is budgeted for.  But for the sake of explaining, I ask - I will ask that these Items were not budgeted for and what is here is what is budgeted for.  And we are sure that -(Interruption)

MR NTIMBA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Minister of State for Finance that during the discussion the Sectoral Committee.  Many Members of the Committee expressed concern that these Items were made to disappear and although we had a debts officer from that Ministry, we were tempted to explain why these Items were deleted, I am afraid we are satisfied.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  As I was explaining that we consider what is budgeted for.  But during the Committee Stage and even in the report there are some areas where they have made some recommendations.  And I made it clear yesterday that whatever recommendation which has been made in sessions is noted.

Programme 02

Programme 03

Programme 04

Programme 05

Programme 06

Programme 07

Programme 08

Programme 09

Programme 10

Programme 11

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of shillings 26,440,640,000- under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 92,916,000- under Vote 014 -Ministry of Health be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 114 - MINISTRY OF HEALTH

(Question proposed.)

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, we have a dispensary which was turned into a hospital in Budadiri.  Until the President took it that he would come since the President was in Budadiri, the Minister has been promising to rehabilitate that dispensary or hospital.  May I know if it is going to be one of them and then it will be rehabilitated, because since 1990/1991, nothing has even been done and promises all.  So, I would like the Minister to clarify this.

DR MAKUMBI:  Could I inform the hon. Member to turn to page 92; he will find a solution to that problem.  We have considered that health centre and it should be in one -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Use the microphone.

DR MAKUMBI:  We are carrying out a major exercise of rehabilitating many health centres all over the country and that one is one of them.  I wish to clarify one point that, we no longer believe in turning health centres into hospitals.  Hospitals are very expensive to maintain, and probably the work which is done by an advanced improved health centre is done just as well in a health centre rather than a hospital which we cannot afford to sustain.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAJUBI:  By the same talking, Mr Chairman, Kasanda dispensary was up-dated to hospital status and we were promised a doctor or doctors.  But we have not received any of these doctors up to now.  Shall I ask the Minister of Health to explain?

DR MAKUMBI:  Mr Chairman, the problem, manpower is a national problem.  We also we suffer from the problem that a good number of our trained staff have left this country for greener pastures.  We are now fairing with fewer technocrats even considering those who are turning out of the University.  We have a programme of posting these doctors out there as and when they pass out from the medical schools.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of shillings 6,249,100,000- under Head 114 - Ministry of Health be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 018 - MINISTRY OF INFORMATION

(Question proposed.)

Programme 01

Programme 02

MRS BWANIKA:  Mr Chairman, our Committee proposed that under Programme 01 we re-instate Item 110.  Our Committee recommended that under Vote 018 - Ministry of Information we re-instate Item 110 under Programme 0 which was omitted by making improvision of 1,000 shillings from Item 2030 on the same programme.  We found out that this Item was very, very important in running of the Ministry and that is Item covering training.  That you cannot have the staff of the Ministry of Information without training.  Therefore, we recommended that we re-instate this Item so that the staff are provided with adequate training to offer good service.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, since the only proposed re-allocations that is normally left to the accounting officers, it will be taken care of them.

MR BWANIKA BBALE:  Mr Chairman, what we are saying this Item is not in the budget.  Therefore, they cannot do re-allocation unless the Item is opened.  So, all that we are asking for is to open this, open so that they will give opportunity the Minister for Finance to re-allocate when is there. (Applause)

MR NTIMBA:  Point of information.  For the benefit of those who are not familiar with government budgeting, that figure is what we call a token figure in order to keep that Item alive.  In the hope that in the course of the financial year, we hope that the Ministry of Finance should be convinced about the necessity of that as long as the Item has been kept alive without token figure, appropriation should not be a problem.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, this is within the envelop of that Ministry, I have no objection to the re-allocation as long as administratively this can be done at that level.  What we need is to approve the figure but the vote can be done administratively.

(Hon. Bwanika Bbale’s inclusion put and agreed to.)

Programme 02

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:  Mr Chairman, again our committee recommended - observed that under Programme 02, one very important Item was omitted, that is Item 4010, operation and maintenance of vehicles under directorate of information.  And we thought that this Item is very necessary and that we should re-open it and make a provision of 1,000 shillings to enable the Ministry of Finance to do re-allocation to this Item.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, since there are already operations and maintenance of vehicles, Programme 4020 and he is asking more less to the same thing, this is - these are the issues which can be done technically -(Interjection)

MR LATIGO OLAL:  Mr Chairman, you realise that in the Ministry of Information, when you talk about operations you are talking about taking vehicles to the field film making, radio coverage and those - that is a separate department.  Then you come back you are talking about administration, that is PS, the Ministers and the rest.  So, where do you put that one?  That is why we discovered this Item 4010.  And the technicians of Ministry of Finance agreed just as they agreed in the other one before.  So, I think my colleague and good brother here see a bother.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  The Parliament should not take the work of accounting officer.  It is not the first time that accounting officers at their level being able to make re-allocations with the permission of the Auditor General.  This thing can be done otherwise; we are going to be doing this thing on almost everything.  

DR TIBERONDWA:  With due respect to the hon. Minister for Finance, what the Committee has done is the smartest thing that could be done.  They have not really put in you manage, all they have said is open the vote, put there a token 1,000 shillings to leave it open for provision of supplementaries.  I support the Committee and I disagree with the hon. Minister of State for Finance.

MR SEKIZIYIVU:  I want to provide the Minister with some technical information on Item 4010.  Item 4010 is operation of motor-vehicles administration.  That includes saloon cars, pajeros and the like.  Item 4020 is for trucks, min-buses and buses, therefore there is a difference between the administration and the other ones for operation.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Item 4010 Programme 02 which was omitted be re-opened as proposed by hon. Bwanika Bbale.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Programme 03

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I inform the Minister of Information that Programmes from National Assembly here are not covered at all.  Or if they are covered, they leave much to be desired - I mean, our debates here.  There used to be a programme on ‘agafa mu Parliament’ or ‘new from Parliament’ but now people are very poorly educated about what happens here.  May I know why these programmes were scrapped from the Ministry?

MR LATIGO OLAL:  I would like to inform my hon. Friend that these programmes in full swing, you realise that just about few weeks ago the CA was on and that was covered fully, and it you only cared to listen to the news we call the news hour you will get occupied or covered.  I am sure with the CA now off, definitely we shall be able to occupy most those times we used to do for CA to cover this programme of our National Debates.  And our programme and our technocrats are ready for this, and we have programmed it.  So listen to your radio you will be informed.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, may I ask the Minister of Information about the traveling of news coverage staff up-country.  Right now if you are going to address a public rally say in Agago County and you need a news coverage from the Ministry of Information, they would ask you to pay traveling and subsistence allowance for that particular service.  Under this Vote, I see some 9 billion shillings voted for traveling and transport of this staff upland.  Are they going to demand same time from us as before?  Or this vote has stopped this?

MR LATIGO:  The Ministry of Information collects a lot of money everyday through our for example such programmes.  But this money goes direct to the consolidated fund of the Ministry of Finance.  Neither resolves we have no money.  We have to make a requisition for money, and as such when they are programmes upcountry to be covered that it not government which will have sponsored.  Then the individual will have to take care of our staff subsistence wise and give them transport.  Our machines are basically free.  As for the money allocated here, you have been told often repeatedly here that we have stations up-country and instead of about ten also we shall have about 34 other little booster stations for us to take care of.  This money is basically for our up-country maintenance not for traveling and for covering news.  Inform you Sir.

MR KAWANGA JOHN:  Mr Chairman, as a follow-up hon. Minister of information.  In view of the fact that government is selling off government vehicles, I want to know specifically from you what arrangements are in place to ensure that vehicles which are specifically needed for operation within your Ministry will be catered for so that the Ministry of Information does not end up by not having vehicles to carry it around to do its work.

MR LATIGO OLAL:  The operation on vehicles rather than being sold are being renovated.  We had asked for development funds to be able to enable us to buy such vehicles but such - this year’s budget says no provision for development funds.  So, our operational vehicles like film vehicles are there, they are not sold however, they are grounded.  Whenever we can be allocated some funds we will repair them and make them operational for our purposes.  The ones we are selling are those which were referred to by hon. friend across as buying pajeros, the old pick-ups, double cabins those are gone and they are our actually carcasses.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 1,998,926,000- under vote 018 - Ministry of Information be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 020 - MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE

(Question proposed.)

Programme 09

MR ONGOM:  (Inaudible)- Item 3030 material supply - supplies and manufactured goods.  I presume these, since they are under relief services, they are for - they are being bought for relief purposes.  During the substantive debate on the budget a question was asked which has never been answered by the Minister of Labour, and that was that some iron sheets which were bought and meant for the people in Bundibugyo in Kabarole victims of earth quake that some of these things were diverted to other districts.  Now specifically Kapchorwa awes mentioned and this has not yet been answered.  May we be assured that this money when used will - Items will be supplied as directed and not diverted?

MR WANENDEYA:  I have got two points to raise.  One, Mr Chairman, is may I know under Programme 09,4020 operation and maintenance of vehicles, you have 186 million shillings, Mr Chairman.  The point over here is whether the Ministry’s vehicles carry relief goods from Uganda to other destinations.  The reason for asking all these which I want the Minister to clarify is the fact that World Food Programme has got a fleet of lorries by foreigner but they have got diplomatic number plates on them.  So, instead of giving that job to Ugandan citizens to ferry the food around the country some other destinations, these foreigners have deprived the Ugandans of that opportunity.  And if the Minister wants me to give him a list of those lorries, I will do it.  

Secondly, you find that in operation and maintenance of vehicles, may I know why we go in - and this is directed perhaps also to the Minister of Finance, why we go in for expensive vehicles?  For instance, some of these pajeros when you want a four-wheel drive, you can get a vehicle which has got four wheels and you can drive it.  Can we afford this kind of maintenance as a country and we keep on crying that we do not have money and yet we buy expensive vehicles which need expensive spares, consume a lot of fuel and that kind of thing.

MR CHEBROT:  On the question of iron sheets.  I would like to tell him that the iron sheets were not lost, but they were given to a school in Kapchorwa and also some were taken to Lira not only Kapchorwa.  On the other issue of the - I did indicate that there was a school which needed those iron sheets which have been destroyed by heavy storm and these were taken to Kapchorwa to assist the people of that area.  And these were received by the DES of Kapchorwa, and also some of the schools in - one school in Lira.  This is where the iron sheets went.  Apparently, there are only 300 iron sheets.  On the question of trucks, it is true that the World Food Programme takes food to Pekere and to other refugee areas.  We do not control the operations of the World Food Programme, this is an international organisation, it has had to import trucks from outside because the local capacity of the private sector here is not adequate to meet all the requirements of the World Food Programme, and I would like to ask hon. Wanendeya to give me a list of those companies who have adequate trucks not one or two trucks because our food programme needs at least, ten vehicles of capacity 50 tons to be able to allow you to carry that food.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA:  The question raised by hon. Ongom wanted the Minister to assure this House that when iron sheets or other items are allocated for the particular job, they are taken to that job.  The Minister has accepted that he has diverted the iron sheets and we would like him to assure this House that next time he will not be able to divert it again, and he has not answered that question.  What we want is an assurance from the Minister, Mr Chairman.

DR CHEBROT:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member that the iron sheets were not diverted, they were merely re-allocated, they were not diverted. (Laughter) 

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I thought it would be useful to give some information on four wheel drives.  Because the point was brought up that they are very expensive vehicles, and that this government has been buying four wheel drives.  But I wanted also to bring the information that when this government came in power, the four-wheel drives, which were being driven here, were cross-country Mercedes Benzes.  Today, the Mercedes cross-country is 100,000 dollars per vehicle.  A pajero is about 35 million dollars.  A few compared to -(Interjections)

THE CHAIRMAN:  35,000?

CAPT. BABU:  35,000 without tax.  I am giving you tax free prices.  And, Mr Chairman, for a government to remove a vehicle which is 100,000 dollars and replace it with a vehicle which is 35,000 dollars.  And therefore, its an improvement in my opinion which is better than what some people used to drive before which were Mercedes Benzes and cross-country(ies), that culture has been removed and cheaper vehicles are being sold everyday.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, hon. Minister of State for Education was trying to tell us.  Points which we know are not quite correct.  Some of those vehicles because they are imported through other people, commissions are given on them, and if there is anybody who would want correct quotations direct from source, that could be done.  For instance, when we owe the government bought these pick-ups for us, they were much cheaper than they are on the market.  And therefore, we should subsidize for the information of the Minister of Education, the only thing we did not pay is duty and sales tax.  So, the question of talking without knowing exactly what is on the ground the challenges that we can get quotations direct from the countries concerned and we should not be just hoodwinked and say they were subsidized.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR BYARUHANGA PHILIP:  My worry is with the World Food Programme trucks.  It is not true to say that we do not have internal capacity.  Our businessmen do not say that we do not have internal capacity to ferry this food.  This is a deliberate policy by World Food Programme to suppress our internal business men here, they vehicles, they do not pay taxes, they carry out business with these tax free vehicles even export - take out export items without paying the necessary taxes.  So, it is not correct to say that we have no internal capacity to ferry food here.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I would like to give this information to the House through you.  It is true that I have a Tata Lorry; I applied to United Nations to allow me carry foods to my own district.  They told me they are going to allocate tonnage and that tonnage needed minimum 7 lorries under my care.  If I had them, I would have won the tender, but because I had one lorry, I physically could not find how I was able to take the tender. (Laughter)

MR KAJUBI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am sorry about my friend, he would have hired other lorries anyway to use.  But my question is about food, because the World Food Programme is buying food from Kenya, bring it here and then ferry it to other Sudan wherever or Rwanda or Burundi.  Instead of buying our own maize, they buy maize from Kenya or even from South Africa.  But this is a very, very disgraceful state, I would like to point out.

MR WANENDEYA:  I want to tell the House that I have got numbers of lorries of non-Ugandan citizens, which are diplomatic registered.  The point over here which I want to inform the House is that, these foreigners deprive Ugandans the opportunity and even if the Minister of Social Services has said that we do not have the capacity of 50 tons, most of the lorries which are on the roads are 40 tons and Ugandans can mobilise those with the help of our government and our ministry so that this business does not go to foreigners.  Because whenever in most countries you have the citizens of that country, they do the job for that International Organisation.  So, we should not be hoodwinked and I want the Minister to assure us whether he would assist Ugandans to acquire this business.

MR CHEBROT:  Mr Chairman, the transporting of food and the buying of food under the World Food Programme is liberalised.  And anybody is free to tender for the buying of food under the World Food Programme.  First of all, I would like to say that the World Food Programme buys a lot of food from Uganda, and from time to time, they do send out tenders for willing people to tender.  However, there are instances where if the prices goes beyond a certain thresh hold like 220 dollars per ton, then the country representative here is not allowed to buy be beyond that thresh hold.  That is why sometimes they have to import food from as far from Argentina.  If which it can be delivered here at below 170 dollars per tonne.  So, that is the policy of World Food Programme.  So, the problem is sometimes we do not have enough food, and two, because of the price frustrations, sometimes the prices go beyond the thresh hold which is committed by the World Food Programme.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of shillings 1,856,578,000- under Vote 020 - Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare be provided for.

HEAD 120 - MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE

Bugangaizi Settlement Project

MR SEKITOLEKO:  Mr Chairman, Government settled some 30,000 people in Bugangaizi but as you can see, there is nothing budgeted for that exercise.  These people need water, need roads, need dispensaries and so on, but there is nothing that government has budgeted for such a venture.  I need to clarify that for quite sometime, the whole exercise has been left to NGOs and NGOs have done very, very little to assist these people.

MR WANENDEYA:  While I can see Bugangaizi resettlement project, there are some people who do not have anything from Mt Elgon area, therefore, may I know if the Minister would consider also that they be settled somewhere in plains of Mbale and therefore be given something instead of only Bugangaizi alone.

MR BAKABULINDI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have also seen here Bugangaizi but company and UTC.  These workers have been misplaced.  They have not been paid, they are just moving around, they are wonderers, they have no room, and they are not paid.  Why cannot they be settled also?  Thank you.

DR CHEBROT:  First of all, it is true that the development budget for the resettlement of people in Bugangaizi was inadequate.  This was basically in Bugangaizi.  We did not have enough money however, we are going to run programmes together with EEC to see how best we can assist the people of Bugangaizi, it is not that we have forgotten them.  Number two, we have now split the department of relief into two.  We are now having a separate department of relief itself and then the department of resettlement, so that it gets more attention.  So, I would like to assure the Member that, attention which is given to Bugangaizi together with Mbale if you have a list of people who wish to be resettled in Mbale, we will be more than willing to discuss this issue with hon. Wanendeya.  On the question of workers, it is true the workers of UPTC and UTC were laid off as you know UPTC is under receivership, and arrangements are being made in consultation with Auditor General and Ministry of Finance to see how this retrenched people can be paid.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 163,000,000 under Head 120 - Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 023 - MULAGO HOSPITAL COMPLEX

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 9,310,840,000- under Vote 023 - Mulago Hospital Complex be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 123 - ORTHOPAEDIC WORKSHOP - MULAGO HOSPITAL COMPLEX SSRP

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 579,400,000- under Head 123 - Mulago Hospital Complex be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 024 - MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 20,328,433,000- under Vote 024 - Makerere University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to)

HEAD 124 - RE-EQUIPMENT UNIVERSITY PLANT VETERINARY MEDICINE

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 1,761,100,000- under Head 124 - Makerere University be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 030 - GENDER AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 1,098,220,000- under Vote 030 - Ministry of Gender and Community Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 130 - STRENGTHENING MINISTRY OF GENDER AND COMMUNITY                    DEVELOPMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 1,063,700,000- under Head 130 - Ministry of Gender and Community Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 040 - TEACHING SERVICE COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 1,123,505,000- under Vote 040 - Teaching Service Commission be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 042 - MBARARA UNIVERSITY

Programme 01

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:  Thank you Mr Chairman. The Minister of Education discussed Mbarara University, it was discovered that Item 1016 under Programme 01, this is making a provision to pay contract staff was omitted and the contract staff we are talking about there are especially the Cubans who are teaching at the University.  The Committee therefore felt wise to re-introduce this Item under budget by making a provision of UShs 166,000.  So, we are proposing that UShs 166,000 be transferred to the new Item, which you will re-introduce to cater for the contract staff, Mr Chairman.

MR NTIMBA:  Mr Chairman, this was discussed at length then the Committee Members and the Ministers agreed that these provisions be made.  I would also like to take this opportunity to appeal - to make a special appeal to the Minister for Finance that having agreed as we are going to agree, that we create a token figure of 166,000.  We should not merely stop there, because in course of the year, some friendly countries are going to give us these contract staffs and it will be very disappointing if these contract staff were given to us and there is no money to pay them.  So, I am requesting especially, the Minister for Finance to ensure that when this happens money should actually be appropriated under supplementary. 
       
MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, this is just the allocation, an administrative matter I have no objection. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 2,429,120,000 - under Vote 042 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 142 - MBARARA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY                      CONSTRUCTION OF RURAL HC NURSES HOSTEL

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 1,064,100,000- under Head 142 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Programme 01

MR BWANIKA BBALE:  Mr Chairman, the Committee observed that under Vote 044 - ITEK, the following Items were omitted and recommended that it has been re-instated.  Under Programme 01, Item 3020, this is Computer charges; we note that this ITEK is now a self accounting and they have to deal with the computer affection of the Ministry of Finance direct, so we propose that we re-instate this Item so that funds are made available for it.  We also recommended that Item 3040 books and practicals to enable them to train the students there.  

We also proposed that Item 3050 Maintenance of roads equally important and recommended that resources be re-open so that ITEK could maintain their roads.

Lastly, we also recommended under this Programme that Item 6040, contribution to recognisation, also be open to enable ITEK to be associated with other sister institutions, and we said this money could be made from Item 30; material supply and manufactured goods and I , therefore, request the House to approve the re-opening of this Item with a token figure of one thousand on each recovering it from Item 3030.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  What Items are you talking about.  Item 30?

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:  It is Item 3030.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  We have no objective with these new opening Items I said earlier that they could be taken care of even without coming here, but for the sake of opening these Items then I have n o objection.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 2,345,052,000 under Vote 044 - Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the total sum of UShs 69,300,000 under Head 144 of Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council of the whole House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Votes 013, 014, 018, 020, 023, 024, 030, 040,042, 044 and Heads 113, 114, 120, 123, 124, 130, 142 and 144 and passed them with administrative amendments.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister to even insult this House that it interferes in administration of this country when in fact our role is to legislate legally rather than taking actions administratively, Mr Chairman, is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order.  I think he can withdraw that please.  

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  And have passed them with slight amendments. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Report adopted and estimates passed.  With that we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.


(The Council rose at 4.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 September 1995 at 2.30 p.m.)
 

