
Wednesday, 2 September 2009

Parliament met at 11.10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have just a few issues. One is that we had issued an Order Paper today indicating that we shall do the report on Agriculture this morning, and Infrastructure in the afternoon, but I am amending that.

We shall instead do Gender, Labour and Social Development in the afternoon. Tomorrow morning, we shall deal with the Ministry of Defence, and in the afternoon, the Ministry of Works. Those are the changes I want to make, and to give you notice so that you prepare.

The second issue is that tomorrow there will be a Parliamentary Prayer Breakfast at 7.30 a.m. in the Members’ Lounge. Dr Cecil Stewart OBE, will be speaking to Members of Parliament. You are invited to go to the prayer service at 7.30 a.m. Is it too early? You talk early to God and things will go well during the day. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I hope that you will summarise, because I noted that you are also a member of the committee. You participated in the committee and you are participating separately as well. So, please, summarise. 

11.11
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Christine Bako): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Certainly, it is a very brief report that will take a short time. 
Our shadow minister presented the finance position, and our interest was to deliver Ugandans from poverty through the Ministry of Agriculture. Therefore, we have a theme, which is, “Repositioning agriculture to ascertain livelihood security for Ugandans.”

Government resource investment in agriculture, in real terms has been declining over the years in Uganda. In the financial year 2008/09, only 4 percent of the Budget was allocated to this sector. This year, only 4.1 percent of the GDP was allocated. This comes at a time when agriculture forms the basis of realising the overall development framework enshrined in the Poverty Eradication Action Plan through the PMA. 

The low funding of this sector is a reflection of total disregard for international protocols such as the Maputo Pact and the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme to which Government of Uganda accented.  

Low funding has lead to substantial declines in this sector. Most of the sub-sectors have been declining too. The cash crop sub-sector declined by 1.7 percent last fiscal year from 9.0 percent in the previous fiscal year, and tea production declined by 11.3 percent last financial year. 

The fisheries sub-sector registered 0 percent growth in the last financial year. This is documented in the government’s background to the Budget, MOFPED, 2009. The 2.6 percent growth rate of the sector pronounced by the NRM Government is not matching the population growth rate of 3.2 percent, which is the second highest in the world, and in real terms there is no investment and, therefore, no growth in the agricultural sector. It is, therefore, no wonder that Uganda, a green country, is starving.

Despite gross under funding of the ministry, it continues to be an avenue of mismanagement and abuse of resources. In the last financial year, Shs 272 million meant for rural electrification was abused for allowances, without any results of villages being electrified. This is not the mandate of the ministry, and hence we propose that there should be a relocation of these resources for better production.   

The early warning system of the ministry has done nothing to inform the country of the likelihoods of disaster despite receiving Shs 127 million, hence making the Vote 0081 irrelevant. 

The ministry has diverted its attention from the core functions of production, research and extension to tasks like rural electrification and roads, and micro financing thus shifting focus away from the real concerns of farmers. Everything about the ministry is done haphazardly with no clear sense of purpose and focus, and the entire ministry is run on project basis. 

The fact that a parent ministry of this nature does not have a policy, yet it holds 35 percent of the GDP portfolio, is a revelation that the perceived 8 percent growth rate is a cooked statistic. Hence, everything done in this ministry is guesswork; for, injecting only 4 percent of the GDP back to the sector amounts to biting the hand that feeds us. 

Unless there is a parent policy in place, real investment in the sector, and a sense of focus in this ministry, Uganda is not about to overcome famine, stunting and rural poverty, for no activity is based on a body of knowledge. In fact, despite efforts of the PMA, a decade and a half later, Ugandan agriculture is still as rudimentary as in the second Stone Age. 

Today, 31 percent of the Ugandan population lives below the poverty line, with eminent household food insecurity across the country, small landholdings, low uptake of technologies, high fertility rates, turbulent fiscal regimes and high illiteracy rates with no livelihood security. 

There is limited gain from agriculture due to weak backward and forward linkages between the industrial sector and the agricultural sector. Inconsistent supplies of raw materials from the sector render some industrial capacities under utilised. For example, the demand for sunflower seeds for oil production by Mukwano industries far exceeds actual supply. Therefore, the weak inter-sector linkages have not been able to deliver the youth of the country from unemployment. 

The NRM regime has a choice either to accept our proposals and provide an escape route out of poverty, and hence insure Ugandans of their livelihoods, or dismiss them and usher majority Ugandans into untold suffering as they have done over the years. 

I want to fix our attention on agricultural extension service provision. Agricultural extension services in Uganda under NAADS programme carries with it the assumption that farmers have got both as individual and group capacity, to demand for services for the production decisions and choices. The current programme of provision of agricultural advisory services does not conform to the principle of all-inclusiveness, of providing a public good or service. 

The choice of six farmers per parish is in total contravention of the NAADS Act part 2(b), sections 5(b) and (e). Without any amendment of the Act, Government is seen to be deliberately breaking the law. The essence of NAADS was to shift away from the public supply of extension service to a demand-driven private sector-led supply, in line with the notion of a private sector-led economy. 

The system has not been able to achieve its cardinal objective of promoting food security, nutrition and household incomes, through increased productivity. Although some farmers may have made headways in increasing production; others have remained rudimentary, since the introduction of the programme to boost the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. Hence there is too much hunger in Uganda and we cannot believe that NAADS still exists. There is need to scrap NAADS and do the following:

The Opposition strongly believes that the extension service provision is a public good and must be enjoyed by all farming households in the country and hence it should be provided to all households.

We also propose a structural move to have a production officer in a very sub-county and an assistant production officer at the parish level. 

When we abolish the existence of 80 RDCs and their 80 deputies, we as a nation can meet the wage bill of the above officers. It is, therefore, not a resource constraint that can stop this structural proposal for efficiency. And beside that, NAADS has become an engine for realising the Prosperity-for-All election promise.

It is unfortunate that the NRM election promise has no framework of implementation and hence has been smuggled to mean Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

It is not untrue that when this regime came into power, it had no platform for implementing its promise. This Prosperity-for-All policy is dated, February 2008, the election promises were 2006.

A total revelation that when a promise was being made to the electorate there was actually no framework for implementing that election promise, and hence, something was haphazardly developed two years down the road to be pronounced as Prosperity-for-All policy, that means the government came into existence unprepared. Therefore, we recommend that this programme be depoliticised and it should not mean prosperity for six households.

We also propose that the NAADS Act be amended so that government is seen to be operating within the law. Otherwise, what they are doing right now is unlawful and criminal.

National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO)
The value of research in agriculture to generate technologies in form of fast-maturing crop varieties and animal breeds cannot be underestimated in the face of exponential population growth rates.

It must be stated here that although NARO has generated quite a number of these technologies, it has been mainly the effort of individual scientists writing project proposals that continue to be funded through the donor circles. There is minimum investment in research in this sector. 

In real development terms, there are no clear guidelines for an interface of NAADS and NARO, and how such technologies can be churned into the farming communities. Despite an independent budget allocation for research, the number of new technologies developed in terms of high yielding and fast-maturing crop varieties and animal breeds is low, because most of the money is recurrent expenditure and not for development. This implies that few technologies are generated over a longer period of time, and yet poor illiterate farmers have low uptake of these technologies. We propose the following:

    • That government should increase the development budget of the sub-sector by 80 percent, this would avail resources for generation of technologies for dissemination to farmers.

    • There is need for a patent rights law; this would help NARO reap from the technology generation through cost recovery. Again, this would enable tracing of the lifespan of such technologies generated by the scientists and NARO itself.

    • There is need for clear guideline for coordination of research and extension. Deliberate efforts must be made to renovate all research institutes; infrastructure like residential houses, laboratories, mini irrigation systems, green houses, among others.

    • The current state of infrastructure is absolutely wanting. As an estimate of around Shs 40 billion based on assessment, was done, and NARO has these figures and possibly there is room for provision of these figures in the next financial year.

Water for Production

The productive potential of Ugandan soils is unquestionably one of the best in the world. However, some regions have high capillarity soils hence production is always lost in face of shocks of drought, even if it were just for a month.

The current famine in the country is more associated with lack of strategic investment in water for production through irrigation, and lack of rains.

Our soils are becoming increasingly barren due to continuous use, arising from rising population and reduced land holdings. We propose the following:

That there should be a comprehensive investment in irrigation in the country, since we have fresh water coverage in almost all regions; we believe lake Kyoga can irrigate Lango and Teso regions; the Albert Nile can irrigate West Nile region and river Aswa can irrigate Acholi land. Lakes Bunyonyi and some of the lakes like Edward in Western Uganda can irrigate that region.

Indeed, no responsible government with abundance of such fresh waters can watch its population starve. The NRM regime must learn to tame nature to ascertain livelihoods for Ugandans.

The proposal to invest Shs 30 billion in this sub-sector is just a joke. We propose that Government injects Shs 100 billion into irrigation, in addition to the Shs 30 billion provided.

Resources should be moved from the roads and bridges, to functions and rural electrification under the ministry, to facilitate this investment, since the two are not the mandate of this ministry. It is absolutely wanting.

There are bridges, roads, and even highways stated in this policy - in this ministry, yet we have a portfolio ministry for provision of such services. It is, therefore, unfortunate that we can allocate resources within a ministry that is grossly under funded for such items. 

Our proposal is that we move this money and take it for water production and projects. We should have annually some investment of at least Shs 100 billion into water for production through irrigation. 
 
That government should critically re-examine all agreements related to the use of Nile waters, and as such, a position that maximises the use of the waters for irrigation.

Input Policy
The current input policy position is that Government should not provide inputs for farmers as directed by the Structural Adjustment Programmes. Government ought to realise that one of the greatest investments in the developed world, apart from research, is subsidising agriculture.

Our position is that the current manner in which inputs are being given to farmers through NAADS is selfishly selected.

We propose the following:
    • That government develops an input policy with a comprehensive framework defining supply and target frameworks.
    • That government identifies strategic food and cash crops for which inputs such as seeds and/or cuttings can be supplied directly by the seed companies, with a bearing on the ministry’s budget.
    • That government establishes government-owned seed multiplication farms in every region, for strategic crops or legumes that can be identified.

The Cash Crop Sub-Sector
Cotton as a strategic crop has shown no value for the farmers. The farm gate price paid to the farmers per kilogram of unginned lint is unrealistic, given the cost of production. Even recent Government intervention on farm gate prices does not encourage its continued production. We propose that:
    • There is need to establish a stabilisation fund to offset distortions of set price and actual price.
    • That government needs to cross-examine the investors in the cotton industry, since it is apparent that all costs of production are being displaced onto the farmers, leaving the end investors with abnormal profit margins at the expense of the farmers.

Coffee output has continued to decline due to Coffee Wilt Disease. Uganda’s coffee earnings stand at US $300 million, which is inadequate for an economy with exponential needs.

Uganda is mainly exporting the seeds, but if the NRM regime did the following, possibly coffee would save the resource gaps:
    1. Establish coffee roasters so that we export finished products. This should be a very fundamental investment decision that Government should undertake, because a small tin of coffee in the ordinary market is almost Shs 6,000, and we are always exporting the coffee seed. Why can’t we, in the 21st Century and as a nation, invest in giving the world finished products, unless we want to stay in perpetual poverty?
    2.  There is need to provide Shs 5.2 billion for coffee seedlings. This will go a long way in expanding production.

The food crop sub-sector in this country is almost declining. In a starving nation like Uganda today, there is need to identify key food crops that can be strategically invested in. Cassava and the main cereals like maize and rice need to be promoted by supplying subsidised cuttings and seeds to farmers.

The proposed Centre for Excellence in cassava research by the World Bank needs to be fast-tracked. Maybe the minister will give us an explanation here. There have been centres of excellence established. One is in Ethiopia and there was a proposal to establish one for cassava research in Uganda and World Bank was interested in financing this. 

In the higher circles, there was a proposal that it be switched from cassava to animals, but we have disturbing statistics. Maybe -(Interjection)- Mr Minister, I am talking; I will give you evidence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you try to summarise? You are reading page by page. Go to your proposals.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, this is a critical sector. I need to give the country proposals and the minister is interjecting, which is very unfortunate.

The Livestock Sub-Sector 
Animal production in this country is wanting. The following statistics are unbelievable after more than a decade and a half of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. There are 11.4 million cows, 12.2 million goats, 3.2 million sheep, 37.4 million chicken and 1.5 million ducks. When you take the per capita consumption of these products, that leaves Ugandans with 0.3 cows, 0.4 goats, 0.1 sheep, 1.2 chicken and 0.05 ducks. How can we establish a centre for excellence for such? This is very disturbing.

We in the Opposition believe that the most immediate implication of this is that livestock products, especially for food, are in short supply, and it is, therefore, no wonder that we are a starving nation.

My government in waiting proposes the following:
    • That investment in research to generate technologies that can easily offset such unacceptable statistics must come on board as soon as immediately. So, there is need to invest heavily in NAGRIC.
    • Government ought to treat FMD as an emergency, and release resources accordingly. When we were discussing this, we were told that these releases are mere rhetoric. You actually don’t give the monies but, please, can the Ministry of Finance make sure that FMD is an emergency and is sorted out? You are seated next to your colleague; you will discuss it further but that is our proposal.

    • That more extension service provision for veterinary services needs to be provided to livestock farmers.
    • That we must make the livestock and fisheries sub-sector a ministry of its own. This is because crop is over bloating whatever is supposed to be in Ministry of Agriculture. Can you take Fisheries and Livestock and make this a ministry of its own?

The Fisheries Sub-Sector
This sub-sector is currently experiencing negative growth, having grown at zero percent last financial year. There has been rapid harvesting of marine life by investors. In 2005/2006, fish exports were the second ranked forex earner for Uganda. Unfortunately, there was total lack of preparedness to keep growth with rapid harvest. The investors are now encroaching on immature fish, and the waters are dry, yet fish is now so expensive in both the domestic and international markets. Most Ugandan families cannot even afford a decent meal of fish. 

We propose the following:
    • Government maps all waters and gives some sections fallow time.
    • Enforce the use of correct fishing regalia.

The entire Fisheries department needs a comprehensive investigation and audit; in fact, a commission of inquiry into the financial resource use and management, and agri-business financing.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the peasant-ridden agricultural practices face double tragedy in terms of financing. No insurance company wants to insure agricultural uncertainty for they always predict a 50 percent risk occurrence given the nature of agriculture. 

The financial institutions are unwilling to lend to farmers due to unpredictability of business decisions. Hence, farmers suffer a lot in trying to secure credit for agricultural production. The current provision through NAADS is limited in target and focus. We propose the following:

Resources from the government through micro-finance can be used to insure the risk portfolio of interest-friendly loans to farmers through some of the micro-finance institutions 

Tax holidays should be given to such micro-finance institutions as an incentive to support lending to farmers.

The cross-cutting issues in this ministry are just a nuisance. The gender issues in this ministry are lost in mainstreaming and they mainstream them into policy matters of the ministry. There are no specific targeted activities for issues to do with gender. For example, citing labour-saving technologies as an output for women’s gain is less meaningful. We propose the following specifics: 

One, that there is a deliberate attempt to supply inputs such as seeds and farm implements to female-headed households and child-headed households in the aforesaid input policy framework. 

There is documented evidence that female-headed households are more food secure with more stable livelihood safety nets. Also, there should be targeting of training of women in agri-business, since they have a culture of saving and investing. There is limited involvement of women in agri-business.

Madam Speaker, lastly, on HIV/AIDS, there is no clear guide on how resources meant for this are going to be used, due to lack of planned activities, yet there are monies meant for this. We propose the following:

Let resources meant for this be moved to irrigation, under water for production, until they come up with the specifics of how they are going to use these resources. 

The ministry should realise that HIV/AIDS at the workplace is a reality, and looks into issues such as rest days and counselling, and addresses issues of promotion of HIV positive employees. These are the specifics we want to look at in ministries; about cross-cutting issues. But the whole assumption that in this, you are going to just say, we are mainstreaming them into policies, is very wanting.

The ministry itself has no policy in place. I hear there is one in the pipeline. But the question, we in the Opposition ask is, “For all these years, there is the policy arm of this ministry. What has this arm been doing for all these years?” 

We, therefore, ask in the structure of the ministry, if they cannot generate a parent policy for this ministry in the next two years, then they should scrap that structural framework within the ministry to give us a position that we are operating haphazardly because we do not have that body in place. I thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.38
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Five minutes. 

MR OLEGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. My first point is on NAADS. Hon. Deputy Speaker, you remember that in our policies, we agreed that about six people will be selected as farmers in parishes to be given some inputs. 

In my view, the practise has been going on very well except that there are vulnerable groups who are getting problems from other people; for instance, the disabled and women. Once these women are identified and given some seeds - at times local leaders tend to take away their inputs.  

This has happened in my district in a place called Pena, where a woman was given 28 goats, but these animals were confiscated by the local leaders. We intervened and reported the matter to the authorities. I do not know how far they have gone with it. So, there is a need to safeguard those who are selected to benefit from these inputs under this programme. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the programme, it is a good one, because the ministry is actually following up the materials, and the funds allocated to the farmers. As a result, we found out that the local leaders are now aware that if you mess up the NAADS funds, you will be arrested. 

So, I would like to commend the ministry. They should continue with that action of following up whatever they have given to the people so that these things are protected; the items are protected and used properly. Madam Deputy Speaker, as of now, there is no joking with the NAADS funds. Please, hon. Minister of Agriculture, continue with that spirit.

Regarding the issue of extension services, I know farmers are supposed to operate on their own. But I think there is a need for the ministry to provide expertise so that production is achieved from what is planted. If these farmers are left alone to work on their own, they cannot do much. So, I would like to ask the ministry to intensify the activities of extension services to various areas where these funds are going.

The fisheries sub-sector is doing very well because in my view, there are some laws in place guarding against illegal fishing on these lakes. If the fishing is not protected, I am sure within a short time, we shall have no fish as indicated by the Opposition. So, there is need for us to have regulatory policies whereby fishing in the lakes is actually protected. 

I am also happy that the ministry is also following up the issues, and I think the minister concerned is actually going around the lakes trying to educate people - the fish mongers, to use legal fish nets. (Interruption) Yes, please.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One question

DR EPETAIT: I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. If you can refer to page 10 of the report, the very first bullet under the fisheries sub-sector. Fish exports were falling sharply since the industry was threatened by destructive fishing methods. Catches from Lake Victoria are dwindling, while those from Lake Edward and George are almost down to zero. 

In your view, you said the fisheries sector is doing very well. Are you, therefore, contesting the committee’s observation? In fact this is the position of the ministry. The fisheries exports are going down. The lakes are threatened and in your view, we are doing very well. I do not know. Can you justify how you derive that view? Thank you.

MR OLEGA: Thank you for this clarification you are seeking from me. Madam Speaker, what I said was that something is being done in that sub-sector. I think it is absolutely clear. So, the minister is not doing nothing about it. That is why there are policies guarding against illegal fishing. I mean it is absolutely clear. I hope my colleague takes it up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know you have five minutes. You are giving away your time. No.

MR OLEGA: Please, let me finish. Let me make my point. Okay

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, please! 

MR OLEGA: Illegal fishing, I need that also cleared. I hope my colleague does take it up –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, you know you have only five minutes; you are giving away your time.

MR OLEGA: Okay, let me finish. Madam Speaker, I said here that the Ministry of Agriculture is doing something in that regard. So, illegal fishing is actually controlled. 

I have one issue to raise about the fishing industry. There are some areas where the small rivers dry out during the dry season. What mechanism does the minister have to ensure that fish farming is practiced in such areas? For instance, in Yumbe, during the dry season, all the water dries up. The fish ponds dry up and the farmers cannot get any yields from fish farming. So, what mechanism is there to ensure that people in such areas can also benefit. 

Lastly, I wish to thank the committee and the minister for their work.

11.44
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for raising important issues in this report. I want to thank the government for having developed eight new breeds of coffee which are resistant to the Coffee Wilt Disease. I think this is a step forward. It is now the onus of government to make sure that they multiply these breeds very fast and disseminate them to the farmers in order to liberate our coffee industry.

However, in the same sector, I feel sad for the government; I do not know whether this was by omission or by intention, for not providing for the purchase of 33 million seedlings to be provided to the farmers. This was a very important activity that should have been provided for. I now request Government to give an explanation for this omission and make sure that an intervention is done. 

About the vegetable oil development project, this project is in my constituency. I have been reading about the progress and I have had a few questions in my mind. For the last three months, it has been stated that 7,000 hectares have been planted, whereas on the ground, we see land being provided and more planting is going on by both the out-growers and the nuclear farm. But every report that comes they say, 7,000 hectares; why isn’t there any increase. 

We now request government to plan for an independent land audit to see whether this project has got enough land or not. They could be getting land and continuing to report the same figure. I feel concerned about this –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, vegetable oil project is not the only one in Kalangala. This is the biggest import-substitution government intervention in edible oil industry. 

Phase I was introduced in the North and North Eastern part of the country on the basis of traditional oil seeds. That is why sunflowers, Soya and groundnuts flourished in that part of the country. The one in Kalangala is just phase II of the Government intervention. 

So, the only problem now is that the ministry does not report the success in the traditional oil seeds. That is why we are only getting the meagre statistics on the basis of the Kalangala output. So, the minister should be prepared to explain the status of the phase I of the government intervention. 

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank hon. Badda and hon. Odit for providing that very vital information. I want to add that the project has been a major success not only in Kalangala, North and Eastern Uganda, but also the value addition component has been doing very well with the palm oil factory in Jinja, which is now being expanded. 

I am also informed that the factory is soon to be constructed in Kalangala so that there is some processing at site. But if hon. Badda thinks that the project should be given more land, to expand even further, that is something that can be looked at.

MR BADDA: Thank you, hon. Minister. My major complaint arises on page 2 concerning land. I am very happy about the general performance of the project. Even the mill to squeeze crude oil is to start next month. 

But my concern is about land, because they have so far acquired and planted 7,000 hectares. So, I ask you to make a land audit because I think there is already more than this land in Kalangala District. 

Before I leave this issue, there is also another constraint concerning the out-growers. For example, this year, the seedlings have not been available; farmers opened up land and there were no seeds to plant. 

The second constraint was the cost of inputs. The cost is too high. A kilo of NPK fertilisers costs about Shs 3,000 and that is too high for the farmers. Even the seeds which are supposed to be cover crops to mitigate the soil erosion have not been available. The ones which were brought were fake and did not grow. So, the minister should take note of that.

11.50
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report and the shadow minister for the response. The sector we are debating today is a very important sector. 

According to Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 2009 Statistical Abstract, the agricultural sector provides approximately 73.3 percent of employment. And most industries and services in the country are dependant on this sector. Therefore, the sectors contribution to GDP is very important. 

Unfortunately, according to that report, its contribution to GDP has been declining and in 2008, it contributed to 21.5 percent of our GDP. This is a trend if left unchecked worries the country. 

On page 2 of the committee report, the committee is very explicit about the expansion of NAADS to reach all sub-counties and provide farmers with necessary inputs. Under the new NAADS, the model farmer gets inputs and later pays 70 percent. It has been noted that the procurement process is flawed and likely to bring forth inflated prices that put a heavy burden on the farmer. 

I have two fundamental questions for the minister. First, what measures will the new NAADS put in place to fight inflated prices, including procurement? 

Secondly, what enforcement measures have been put in place by the new NAADS to compel farmers to refund the 70 percent?

Under the livestock sub-sector on pages 9 and 10, I appreciate that the committee has reported that vaccines were secured and sent to districts that had diseases like Foot and Mouth Disease. I am reliably aware that since January 2009, some parts of Apac and Lira districts have been under quarantine. In Lira District specifically, I appreciate that vaccines were procured and sent and that the relevant personnel in the veterinary department did their work and submitted a report to the ministry. However, since then the ministry has not sent a technical officer to the area to verify if the situation necessitates the lifting of the quarantine. I would like to appeal to the minister to ensure that this is done as this has affected the economic condition of our people because parents cannot even now sell their livestock to raise money to send their children back to school as the term begins.

In case the situation necessitates lifting the ban, let it be done so that the people can benefit from the livestock they have. I pray that this very important sector contributes a lot to our country. I thank you.

11.55
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): I would like to thank the committee for the report. We know that the agricultural sector is the backbone of this nation. However, when we look at the money allocated to the sector, it leaves a lot to be desired. If we were serious about the agricultural sector and we concentrated and took fundamental decisions as Parliament to ensure that the sector is functional, we could not have famine is this country.

When you look at what is happening in the country side and projects like NAADS that have a lot of money, it worries me. I will refer you to Bundibugyo, my district where the NAADS programme is being mismanaged and yet the money could be used for irrigation in some areas. It is very embarrassing to find a country like Egypt donating food to Uganda which is gifted by nature. I feel this Parliament should try and make fundamental changes in the next budget so that the pictures of starving people and yet our soils are good, are no more. 

When I looked at the Cocoa report, I was surprised that it was just two sentences and yet Cocoa gives the people of this country and Bundibugyo a lot of income. There is nothing much being done to improve conditions for the Cocoa farmers in Bundibugyo apart from what the people are trying to do for themselves. The budget just says, “The ministry targets to increase Cocoa production”.

MR BUKENI: I want inform you that other than cash crops, the committee has not mentioned anything in its report about food production, including the rate at which it increased and if there is anything being done about it.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, colleague, for that information. I expected more mention of production in the report, how much money the cash crops are bringing in and what programmes are in place to increase productivity, especially for Cocoa that has never been mentioned except for this year where it is mentioned in two sentences. 

Bundibugyo also has lakes and rivers that allow for fish farming but for the last five years, we have been promised –(Member timed out_)

12.00
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): I would also like to thank the committee for their report. I take the opportunity to commend the NAADS programme because it has overshadowed the other sectors under the Ministry of Agriculture because you find that the debate here is mostly about NAADS. Despite its shortcomings, I think they are making a way forward.

However, Madam Speaker, I would also like to urge the Ministry of Agriculture to avail planting materials, where possible, to the ordinary citizens. The drought has been too long yet people cannot find planting materials to plant when the rains come.

In the same vein, I would like to commend the Minister of Disaster Preparedness for having given Busia some food in form of grains. When I went home recently, I realized that people had planted some of the bean seeds although some people had eaten some of the beans. 

Madam Speaker, I have noticed that the Ministry of Agriculture has also been slow in plunging into the areas of processing. I would like to report that under NAADS, my district received some hatcheries for poultry, but they are being kept in stores; they have not been utilised and I do not know what the problem is. But it looks like they do not have the eggs to be used in these hatcheries. I consider this wastage of resources!

It would also be good for the NAADS programme people to make people understand how funding is sent to these sub-counties. I am saying this because when you ask about NAADS money, most of the officials down there will show the six farmers, but they will not tell you what funding this programme is receiving. The people down there are confused; they think government is not doing anything in terms of funding. This is not good because we know very well that funding is being sent down there to support the rural farmers. But maybe that is also room for money being misappropriated.

Madam Speaker, we recently heard of arrests of NAADS officials who have been misappropriating money, but in this report, there is nothing about that yet it would be good for us to know how these cases are or have been handled. We need to work on this because this issue is real; there is a lot of inflation of figures where, for example, a piglet can be reflected to cost a lot of money, which is not correct and quite many other issues that need to be cleared. Those arrests were giving hope to the citizens; it is unfortunate that they have stopped. I would like to report that those who were arrested in my district were released under very unclear circumstances. We need to know whether there is any follow up on those cases.

Concerning fish ponds, it is true the report says there is need to rehabilitate the hatcheries at Kajjansi, but I have information that people in Busia were told to organise their fish ponds long ago and nothing has come out of it. This has given a very bad image to government; many people think they were only taken for granted. There is need to speed up this issue so that people operating in this sector can also benefit – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Baliddawa. I want to request Members who contributed yesterday to give the others the opportunity; I will see you in the afternoon. Members of the committee will not be allowed to contribute.

12.05
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to congratulate the committee for the good report presented. Let me draw the attention of the House to page 8, which talks about NAADS. 

Among the committee’s recommendations is one that says that there should be an assessment of the existing private seed companies. I think this is a very good recommendation although it is coming late. One of the reasons NAADS is failing in villages is the lack of supply of farm inputs, some of which are being supplied late with those that are supplied allegedly being expired ones. I suspect this is due to the inability of these private companies to assess the viability of the seeds. I urge the ministry to vigorously pursue this recommendation to avoid the supply of, for example, un-germinating seeds that cost a lot of money.

On page 10 the committee addressed itself to the fisheries sub-sector, in which it said the fish exports have been falling sharply due to drops in catches from lakes. Because of this, eight of our fish processing factories have closed.

The committee says that in order to improve this, the ministry intends to rehabilitate 100 percent of the existing fish ponds, which have been named as Kajjansi, Gulu and Mbale. This is commendable, but I am wondering why the ministry is forgetting the other ponds that have been there for a very long time like the one in Namadope in Iganga. This is a very large pond; it has ever had fish, but it does not feature on the radar of the Ministry of Agriculture.

Madam Speaker, let me address myself to the issue of Farming in the Tsetse Controlled Area (FITCA) project. We are told in the report that this project was initiated in 2001 and is due to expire in 2009 - with a budget of US $5.2 million. The intention was to decrease Tsetse infestation by 75 percent or more in high risk areas. There was also the intention to reduce Sleeping Sickness incidences to less than five percent per sub-county, which I think is a very good projection. 

However, what the committee did not tell us is the status as of now. We are soon coming to the end of the project but we do not know what the status is, in some of these sub-counties. I come from a district where this project is operational, but I can tell you that the people there do not know what they have achieved as far as reducing Tsetse infection in that area is concerned. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, let us hear from hon. Bikwasizehi, then the hon. Member for Isingiro and hon. Najjemba before I turn to the Members of this side. As I said, members of the committee, please allow the others to comment on your report first. If there is time, I will give you the opportunity.

12.10
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that I am no longer a member of that committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, there was somebody who is still a member, but who had stood up to contribute. I have the list here. (Laughter)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Like my colleagues, I would like to thank the committee for a job well done before presenting this report.

I want to report that as pointed out in this report, the Government of Uganda has assisted Buhweju to put up a tea factory. (Applause) In fact, as I talk, we are handing over the site for construction to the contractor today. 

HON. MEMBERS: Why are you here?

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I said “we” because I am with others. 

Two, I would like to inform you that power has already been extended to that site. However, while I admit this is an achievement, I would like to report that Buhweju Tea Factory is one of the four tea factories whose construction had been started in 1970, but abandoned. We still have other tea factories like the Mityana Tea Factory, Kyenjojo Tea Factory – Mpanga was completed, but the other ones have never been completed.

My appeal is that while we complete Buhweju Tea Factory, we should work hard to complete those others too. In that regard I want to technically report that as a country, we have the potential of growing more tea and capable of constructing more than 30 tea factories, if we get focused. As a committee we one time demanded a policy on tea from the Ministry of Agriculture, but up to now that policy is not yet in place. Can I appeal to the ministry that much as they have put a lot of attention on NAADS, they should focus on some other sectors that can boost the economy of this country by completing these factories, which can also bring us foreign exchange and create jobs for the people of this country?

I have seen the obsession by the ministry sectors to purchase seedlings, but I would like to point out that procurement is not an easy process. Such money can be used by the farming community. For example, Coffee Development Authority is now talking of Shs 5.2 billion to purchase about 33 million seedlings of coffee, but when you look at what is involved, you realise that it cannot be technically achievable. If this money were used to procure say inputs or planting materials to be used by farmers in the communities, we would produce seedlings maybe up to four or five times what is being targeted. 

In that regard I would like to request that we get focused; we should stop the business of procuring - technically, can you take a situation where someone transports coffee seedlings from Mukono to Mbarara – (Interruption)

MRS MAGOOLA: I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that the directorate is working on that. The young men in the various areas are receiving the seeds to develop seedlings. Be informed that that process is going on.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: While I thank you for the information, I would like to express my dismay because I am only getting it from the report. Anyway, what I am saying is that by the time you transport these seedlings from say Mukono to Mbarara, they will have withered on the way.

Three, a lot has been said about the seed policy. The seed industry was privatised sometime back and the Ministry of Agriculture was to provide certification services. But as we talk now we have 16 seed companies with only six seed inspectors who cannot manage to control the quality of seeds from these companies so – (Member timed out_)

12.14
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to express my satisfaction and gratitude to the committee for the good report. However, I have got a few issues to raise.

One is on page 8 and it is about the NAADS programme. It is reported that NAADS has started implementing the changes that were recommended during the review. But from the report, the committee observes that NAADS still faces a number of challenges. My considered view is, why don’t we transfer this programme from the Ministry of Finance to that of agriculture for its better implementation? I do not know, maybe I need guidance on that. Otherwise, in my opinion, if this programme were to be under the Ministry of Agriculture with the agricultural officers taking charge of the situation directly, possibly it would be doing –(Interjections)– I have limited time – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh! This is her maiden speech. Please do not interrupt.

MS BYARUGABA: Allow me to raise my comments in relation to page 17 where we have sector priorities for the Financial Year 2009/10. Here the sector highlights one of the priorities as scaling up water for production, but my observation is that this water for production, for example, in Isingiro District, the contractors construct very big dams that are located in a particular place. As such they become inaccessible to other farmers. Sometimes the movement of animals from one corner to that very big dam might encourage the spread of the diseases. My opinion is that we should construct smaller dams spread out in the other areas to make many of our farmers benefit.

Lastly, I have not read anything in the report to do with commercialisation of agriculture. I am interested to see that we encourage the tractor hire service scheme for production to increase. I have not seen it and I wish the ministry could consider this as one of the priorities for the next financial year. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Buliisa, then Gomba, and then hon. Sebuliba.

12.18
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the committee for this report. Mine is also on page 8 on NAADS. The committee observed that there are so many challenges being faced by NAADS but the most serious one is corruption. You find that these inputs are being hiked so much and by the time they are distributed to the farmers they are very few and there is no impact being created. Then I am always asking myself: how is the government going to achieve its objective through NAADS when we have not addressed the issue of corruption?

Still on NAADS, there is climatic change whereby we have experienced almost semi-deserts in most of the districts and next year the population of Uganda will not have what to eat. Will the government be in position to supply food or feed this population when we have not addressed the issue of irrigation? I think it would be better to make sure that we address the issue of irrigation and I know we have the money whereby we can even begin with this season since Uganda is full of water bodies.

Then other issue is on farming. It is good the committee has observed that the fishing industry has fallen but there are no plans to reactivate this industry. I am representing a community which entirely depends on the fishing activity. It is almost coming to two years and there is no catch in the lake and the situation in those communities is worse. Buliisa District, which depends on fishing activities, has no programme on fish farming or any alternative so that those people can be helped in terms of food and even income generating activities. 

Again on agriculture, there is a programme on restocking throughout many districts and even in NAADS. We have failed to modernize our ways of keeping animals. You find that there is pressure on land but at the same time we are still encouraging our communities to continue grazing animals from place A to B, causing more problems. Even the animals which are being supplied to the farmers some of them are nowhere to be seen and even they don’t have pasture.

The last one is also on animals. Foot and Mouth Disease is also very common especially in Buliisa but now the government has failed to implement the movement of animals and those from different areas come and infect those animals which are already in one area. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Gomba then hon. Sebuliba, hon. Mabikke, hon. Malinga, Dr Epetait.

12.22
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report and also thank the Shadow Minister of Agriculture for another good report.

About 60 percent or more than 60 percent of the population of Uganda depends on agriculture and we know that this is the bulk of our population. We also know that the agriculture ministry receives less than four percent of the entire national budget. We are well aware that the Maputo Declaration recommends that we should give or allocate 10 percent of our national budget to the Ministry of Agriculture and we know how important this sector is but we continue to give it less attention and less money.

So, I would really start with funding. So long as we continue to give less than four percent to this sector, we shall continue lamenting, we shall continue talking, we shall continue crying, we shall continue being paraded on TV dying and starving of famine and nothing will be done. It all starts with the funding. Let us show our commitment. If we are really committed to the more than 60 percent of the population which depends on agriculture, then we should give it a substantial amount of money and that is ten or even more than 10 percent. That is where we should begin.

Although we are gifted by nature we can no longer depend on nature. We can see that nature has failed us. The long drought that has hit the entire country and especially some of our areas in Gomba, for instance, has caused the death of many animals. The President himself lost animals totalling to more than 200 head of cattle. You can imagine if the President loses cattle in this drought, what about the ordinary person! So we can no longer depend on nature.

The Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Industry should look at alternative measures, for example, irrigation. Why should we continue suffering, why should animals, why should people die because of lack of food yet we continue to say we are gifted by nature, we continue to say we are the food basket, what are we doing as a country? I want to be very open; if we do not give this sector the attention it deserves then we shall continue wasting a lot of our time.

I would also like to ask the Ministry of Agriculture: what happened to the agricultural zoning that we used to talk about? Even in our NRM Manifesto, you remember we talked about zoning, that we shall have specific areas concentrating on particular crops. What happened? I want an answer to that.

I also want to know whether we have a food policy in this country and if we do, what does it say? Why are people dying of hunger? Why are we starving? Madam Speaker, I am one of those people starving. If my people are starving, then I am starving. Yes, we are starving in Gomba and we need to find an everlasting solution to this and it begins with the funding. A few days ago, I sent somebody to Namulonge to find out whether we could get planting materials for my area and I wanted a specific number of sweet potato tubers and cassava stems but they could not provide the number that I wanted. Now what happens if we want planting materials and they are not there? Are we not going to starve to death? What are these agricultural institutions doing? Why are they not producing enough? The Minister of Agriculture should tell us. If you want us to give you more money, lobby. We need to put a lot of emphasis on this. We need to find the money; we found the money for CHOGM very fast and we get money for disaster very fast but why can’t we prevent these disasters from happening? I have no regrets for saying what I am saying because it is from the bottom of my – (Member timed out_)

12.28
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague who has been on the Floor but the question I want to ask is: what is so magical about the four percent which is given year in year out to the agricultural sector? Maybe the Minister of Agriculture will come and explain to this House the reason behind the four percent that they give to this sector because if you calculate, if you are going to collect Shs 7.5 trillion, four percent of that comes to approximately Shs 300 billion and if you divide it by the entire population of Ugandans who are about 30 million, then each one is budgeted for with a figure of Shs 10,000. We should sit down with the economists and they tell us if the ministry has failed to address the issues concerning this sector.

A country like Malawi, small as it is, was a net importer of food but they sat down and they looked critically at the problem and now they are net exporters of food. They just subsidised the inputs, in particular the fertilisers. The World Bank came against them but they did that and of recent, they have won so many accolades and praises and there is double production if not quadruple. So, what is so magical? They should come out and tell us what the problem is about this four percent, where they are giving every Ugandan Shs 10,000 on agriculture -(Interruption) 

MR EBONG: Madam Speaker, it is not only apportioning money but how the money is utilised is the question. So, there are two dimensions to the problem in this situation. As a matter of information, the actual budget for this financial year dedicated to increasing productivity is really very gloomy. On page 64, there is completion of agricultural zonal studies budgeted at Shs 1.7 billion. On the same page, there is acquisition of land by government at Shs 6 billion and it continues; government is going to construct one green house at Shs 680 million. And government is going to invest Shs 3.4 billion in policies, laws, guidelines, plans and strategies to design it. So in essence, we are investing in a non-productive sector than in absolute terms of productivity of our people in terms of agriculture. Thank you. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, you have heard; a non-productive sector is taking a large chunk of our money and that is why you have heard that we are being warned that eating macaroni that is imported is now dangerous yet we are suffering from under productivity. Where are we going to run to? The people in Teso are suffering; in the North they are suffering; in the West they are suffering and in the Central, they are suffering. What is wrong? 

Yesterday, you saw what happened in Masaka. There was a caption on TV about an area where most of the banana plantations are being cut down because of the Banana Wilt disease and recently in one of the reports we had allocated a lot of money, Shs 9 billion, for Banana development. It seems there is something fundamentally wrong and we are now hearing things like new NAADS and PFA. These are ad hoc approaches to the entire problem. If there was a NAADS Act that was enacted in the Sixth Parliament and there are new development programmes coming in, they should be brought here so that we sit down after real consultations with the people and we come out with a solution to this country. Short of that, we are going to continue wallowing in this abject poverty. How dare you provide one cock per parish? What is it going to do? (Member timed out_)

12.33
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, the first assurance I would like to make goes to hon. Christine Bako. Today you have secured yourself a position in the cabinet after Yoweri Kaguta Museveni as Minister of Agriculture -(Laughter)- and therefore, hon. Bright Rwamirama must start writing hand over reports forthwith. 

When we take charge of government, the first thing we shall do is to write Uganda an agricultural policy. It is only Uganda that runs things upside down. You run a programme like NAADS, PMA and Prosperity-for-All with no foundation at all! Where is Uganda’s agriculture policy?

We are aware that the colonialists had an agriculture policy that was revised in 1969 by the UPC Government in a document called the Common Man’s Charter, and that explains that boom and burst of the agricultural sector in the 60s and 70s. What happened to Uganda’s agriculture policy? We are tired of experimenting. All these programmes, NAADS and PMA, are not moving because we are experimenting day in, day out. We lack an agriculture policy.

The first thing we shall do for Uganda is to write it an agriculture policy -(Interruptions)

HON. MEMBERS: When?

MR MABIKKE: Don’t you worry; when the time comes; you will be out of government very soon. 

If we took charge of government we would immediately commit Shs 4 trillion to do the following: more research -(Laughter)- the research that we are doing in Uganda is just a joke. Last night we were comparing amounts that other governments commit to research. We were looking at the amounts of money that the South African Government, for instance, committed in this year’s budget to just KwaZulu Natal alone. They committed the total amount that we are committing to agriculture, to research alone. So, we shall give more money to research, agricultural extension services, agricultural credit, agricultural subsidies, agricultural mechanisation, and of course irrigation.

We get so concerned when we keep seeing photographs of the President inspecting prosperous farmers. Farmers in Uganda are struggling and working under very serious hardships, with none or minimum government support, but you find the President inspecting prosperous farmers. Why does the President inspect prosperous farmers whom government has not supported? What point is he making?

I would like the President to come to Gomba to inspect farmers as a showcase of what government is doing, but not to just come and inspect people who are struggling on their own and say, “You know, farmers are doing very well in Uganda.” That one we shall reverse when we take charge very soon.

Everybody is talking about NAADS. NAADS is a good programme -(Interjections)- yes; that is a very good programme by the way. But the problem with it is that it is being “movementalised”. You are now using it as a tool to promote Movement supporters -(Interjections)- yes, the programme is good but we need to review -(Member timed out_)

12.38
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I will continue praying for Hon. Bako Christine. I pray that God will give her the opportunity to take charge of this ministry at the appointed time of God, so that the Ministry of Agriculture can be streamlined by her very brilliant ideas that she has given this Parliament. 

This is a copy of the report of the Auditor-General. Let me read for you just a small portion -(Interjections)- and those who are saying, “Aha” will compare it with the report given by hon. Bako. That, “… between July 2001 and June 2006, a total of US $107 million was spent on agricultural activities by NAADS programmes. However, agricultural productivity remains very low, despite the interventions. The low productivity has been attributed to poor advisory and information services; poor technology development and linkages with markets; lack of quality assurance regulations and technical auditing services; and lack of private sector institutional development, and poor programme management and monitoring.” I hope the Minister of Agriculture will read this book and re-organise his programmes according to the advice.

I have a few comments to make. One is on the vegetable oil production project. Groundnuts are some of the seeds that are used for producing vegetable oil. I would like to report that the Teso region that has been producing a lot of groundnuts had nearly 97 percent crop failure this season. And I would like to invite the Minister of Agriculture and this programme to restore the production of groundnuts in this region. 

Also, there has been a lot of redundant land that has been lying between the areas bordering Karamoja and the neighbours because of insecurity. As a result of the disarmament and the efforts of the local authorities, the owners of that land have now reclaimed it. It is very good for production of vegetable oil, and I would like to draw the attention of the Ministry of Agriculture to this area. I think we shall produce more vegetable oil. 

I have a comment on the vegetable oil crops. I am surprised at how the Ministry of Agriculture is co-ordinating the purchase and distribution of inputs. You find that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is purchasing and distributing inputs. Sometimes it is another group. I was surprised last weekend when one of the ministers, while addressing his constituents said, “You see, the President of Uganda has directed that hoes be bought, and because they have asked me to distribute them, it will be up to me to decide how many of them will go to Kaberamaido and Kapelebyong. But I will start with Amuria. If I allocate 50,000 hoes, Kaberamaido can also have 3,000.” How can a government run like this in this 21st Century? 

I listened very attentively to the presentation of the Woman MP of Isingiro. She was talking about water for production. Of course you can hear from the minister himself saying, “Vote wisely.” No wonder the Woman MP of Isingiro is complaining.  

Although we say water for production has been given to Isingiro, it has gone to only a small location, and my guess is that it must be at Rwamirama’s parish. And if you tell me to vote wisely, what about those people in Isingiro? Are they not voting wisely? Why should they not get the water?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Malinga to impute that the dam is in my place when in the policy statement and Budget Speech, the location of dams was specified? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he was responding to what the honourable lady said. She said they are in a particular area but she did not say that they were in hon. Rwamirama’s constituency.  

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, hon. Johnson Malinga might be right. We provided US $29.6 million and the biggest component was supposed to be water for production for the cattle corridor. We have not seen any serious dams in the north-eastern part through the central and south-western part of Uganda. I feel embarrassed because as Chairman of the Agriculture Committee then, I was invited to witness the President launching this project in Soroti. The programme is finished and nobody knows where the dams are. And that was under the stewardship of hon. Mary Mugyenyi, when she was Minister of State for Agriculture. 

At committee level, we gave notice to the Ministry of Agriculture that this committee would demand for special audits of that project. So, when the big dams are being concentrated in one area – and now they are demanding for smaller dams - we really feel very hurt.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Thank you very much for the information. Madam Speaker, if you read the Budget Speech, which was read by hon. Syda Bbumba, the big dams for which we have appropriated money this financial year are in Isingiro District, and they are two of them -(Member timed out_) 

12.46
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you. It is unfortunate that out of four ministers, we only have one here. I hope that he knows everything related to the issues being raised. When famine and disaster hit the East and the North, I went to the Ministry of Agriculture. My issues were that we needed seeds and seedlings for the rains that were starting. I was told to return after a week; that there were going to be consultations with those responsible for development of seeds. After two weeks, I was told that there was a national crisis. I was told that the ministry could not raise enough seed and seedlings for this country. 

I want the Minister to tell us, people from the North and North East, who were promised seeds and seedlings for short term planting by the Ministry; now that there is a national crisis and there are no seeds and seedlings - I heard about this in an agriculture meeting where they sat with all those who are developing seeds and seedlings, including the private sector, and they could not raise seeds and seedlings. I am now wondering: where is the money that we have been appropriating all these years for research under NARO, for development of seeds and seedlings? If at the time when we had a disaster, the ministry could not get seeds and seedlings, then this is a national crisis. 

Mothers can no longer feed their children on milk because a litre of milk now costs Shs 2,500 up from Shs 1,200. We are seated here and the minister is busy chatting away and not caring about this country -(Interjections)- of course he is not bothered. I cannot be surprised that a minister like him is put in charge of the sector of production of dairy and he is not bothered that milk prices rise from Shs 1,200 to Shs 2,500 a litre that Ugandans cannot afford, and we do not have a substantial amount of money in the Budget to address this problem. 

The question of irrigation is not substantially addressed. If you think about the question of food, hon. Hope Mwesigye sometime back stood here and told us that she had sent to each sub-county about Shs 13 million for food security. I went to two of my sub-counties over the weekend, Ayeri sub-county and Aduku sub-county, and there is no money that has been received for food security. 

I want the minister to tell this House when the money was sent - how much was sent per sub-county; because people sit here and tell us that they have sent money to the sub-counties and when you go there, either the money is not there or something went wrong. 

As we sit here, there is no policy on food security. There is no policy on disaster; the ministry is operating on an ad hoc disaster relief way. It is now the Food and Agricultural Organisation that is developing the policy and the law. They are trying to come up with a law on food security and the ministry –(Interjections)- we have been consulted by the Food and Agricultural Organisation on the question of food security. And we stand and talk about -(Member timed out_)

12.51
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you for this opportunity. A number of colleagues have rightly alluded to the under funding that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries continues to suffer from. But for obvious reasons, I am going to start on the livestock sub-sector, being a veterinary surgeon.

The livestock sub-sector within the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is suffering from under funding within under funding. No wonder if you looked at the report, the livestock sub-sector has only two paragraphs and from page 9, there are only three bullets mentioned. 

The committee also chose to just talk about the livestock census figures and the vaccines which were bought, and it stopped there. There were no observations made; no recommendations. It is as if the livestock sub-sector was just a by the way, that it also ought to be mentioned. I am very disappointed with the way the committee handled the livestock sub-sector in this report.

If you look at the issues of procurement of vaccines, the figures, which are indicated there, vis-à-vis the target livestock that are to be covered, stand at 600,000 doses of FMD for a cattle population of over 11 million. That is about only four percent of the animals to be covered. We shall not keep quiet when the sector is dwindling. I am not happy that the livestock sub-sector continues to be ignored. 

Hon. Rwamirama, you recall at a certain time before you went to the Front Bench we were speaking one language and we demanded that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be split. You even presented a report on the Floor of the House insisting that that ministry be split. I would like us to follow the same argument. Not until that ministry - you know the ministry has been bundled up and the two sub-sectors of Livestock and Fisheries are just being ignored. I think we cannot keep quiet about this. 

In terms of disease control, emergence disease control funds are housed in the Ministry of Finance. When an epidemic like FMD breaks out, the bureaucratic red tape that the Ministry of Agriculture has to follow in order to acquire funds for acquisition of vaccines is terribly inhibiting, to the extent that by the time they get the vaccines procured, a number of animals will have been lost. I even insist that that emergency disease control funds be shifted from Finance to Ministry of Agriculture so that quick procurements can be made.

I am concerned about the government’s shift to absorb public agriculture extension workers under NAADS. You know, the whole NAADS framework is becoming a big problem, and is causing disharmony in communities. Where you talk about six selected farmers to be demonstration farmers, what is happening down there is that most of those farmers who were selected under NAADS do not cooperate with the locals. They say this is their project and so, the attempt to absorb veterinarians or agricultural workers to start working under the NAADS programme is going to deny the majority of the farmers the much required extension services.

I would like to reassure my colleague, hon. Ashraf Olega, that the fisheries sub-sector is not doing any better. Studies have been carried out - I refer to page 10 of the report - NARO undertook certain research on the fisheries bio-mass in various lakes. The findings are that - and to quote one example of the Nile Perch - the bio-mass had reduced from 1.2 million tonnes in 1999 to 0.25 million tonnes in 2009. That is an 80 percent reduction in Nile Perch bio-mass –(Member timed out_)

12.56
MR HARRY KASIGWA (FDC, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, Christine Bako, for that insightful presentation to the House this afternoon. Out of courtesy, I thank the committee for the report that they presented.

There were three or four basic pronouncements that the Minister of Finance made. The first was that our agricultural production stock had grown by 2.6 percent, the second was the initiatives to develop the sector; and the third was financing of the sector.

In my opinion, this should form the thrust of our analysis as we appropriate these funds for the sector. Having said that, I would have expected the committee to come and tell us whether the 2.6 percent growth in our production was proportionate to the overall performance of the budgetary allocations. But the committee is silent on that.

Secondly, I would have expected the committee to come and tell us the initiatives that the minister mentioned in the Budget Speech. How are they going to implement them? What is the cost of implementation? Are the budgetary allocations proportionate to those interventions? Shall we move forward?

It is my opinion that - I said out of courtesy, I would thank the committee because they were not analytical when it comes to these issues. I will take the issue of the CDO. First, it has taken 20 years for the NRM Government to evolve a textile policy, which is very unfortunate. Over eight million families live off the cotton sector in this country, but it has taken 20 years or so to develop a cotton policy. 

Today, the committee tells us that the over performance of the development budget was because CDO was allocated an additional Shs 20 billion. And that Shs 20 billion led to an increase in production from 65,000 bales to 125,000 bales. And the committee was very happy about that. Do not forget that three years ago, the production was at 250,000 bales per annum. When I do quick arithmetic, this intervention shows that the production of the additional 60,000 bales of cotton - each cost Shs 340,000, yet the market price for a bale of cotton is about Shs 100,000. So there is that disproportionate arrangement. 

My opinion is that we are throwing good money against bad ventures. And as Parliament, we sit here to make life better for the people that we represent. I want to say that we should take keen interest in the development budget of the Ministry of Agriculture.

Let me comment on the issue of NAADS. If well handled, this would have been a good programme, but we are dealing with the mindset of our people. Where we come from, there is a saying that, “Akanghe kakira akhaife” meaning that “mine is better than ours”. I am trying to juxtapose that against this element of selecting six farmers per sub-county or is it per parish? With that kind of mindset and individualism that has been inculcated into the population over the 20 years - because you remember that before that, we were all co-operators - how do you expect me to go to hon. Migereko’s farm to learn? (Member timed out_)

1.02
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for this report. I think the biggest mistake we shall commit as leaders of this country is to turn this honourable House into a talk shop; that we come here, make beautiful speeches and walk out. We make contributions and the Executive walks out like we have said nothing. 

Today, the Member of Parliament raised a very important issue in my view, when he talked about the agriculture sector. How do you talk of developing a sector without a policy? This “ad hoc-lism” should come to an end. You need to take this country very seriously. They entrusted you to run this country with billions of taxpayers’ money and you did not develop an agriculture policy. So, what are we talking about?  

When you look at this report, it says nothing about the agriculture policy. Agriculture takes place on land. Can the minister tell me today, “What is Uganda’s land policy?” Zero! And we are here passing money. That is the reason why even the money you are sending upcountry as NAADS funds is being embezzled. It has no impact because you have no policy. A government is supposed to put a policy in place, and not handouts. This politics of patronage should stop. 

Today, when the President moves to Iganga and someone has lobbied him to visit a certain farm, he orders, “Give that one Shs 10 million; give that one Shs 20 million”, and you see him giving away envelopes. The following day, the PPS writes to the minister, “When the President visited Iganga, he promised – implement the Presidents promise”. And that is happening all over the country. It happened in my constituency; he came, visited two groups and gave one Shs 10 million. But if you go there today, nothing has happened. These are donations –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, hon. Abdu, for giving way. I want to inform you that the President right now is caught in between what he said and what he has not realised. On page 42 of his Prosperity-for-All policy, I will read verbatim, “The Prosperity-for-All funding will follow the existing financing arrangements under key programmes like NAADS, microfinance and other agricultural programmes and projects. However, in releasing funds for agriculture, care will be taken to target the country’s agricultural seasons and persons. The Office of the Prime Minister will continue to stir the harmonisation of agriculture related programmes scattered in different ministries”.

By simple implication, agriculture as a ministry has been targeted, and hence, when he is dishing out those envelops, it is in this policy. 

MR KATUNTU: That is where the problem is –(Interjection)– Madam Speaker, I would not mind clarification from him, but my time should be taken into account. So, what we demand of this government is to have clear policies; policies that we can debate; policies to which Ugandan experts can make their own contributions. That is why today, you are talking about NAADS III yet we have not gone back to the drawing board to look at the policy and the law, and see what we can amend to take agriculture more seriously.

Even the so-called bankrupt regimes, which some of these people are always talking about, I will give you an example. Each and every district in this country had a district farm institute –(Member timed out_)

1.07
MR JEROME KADDUMUKASA (Independent, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, the shadow minister and hon. Katuntu. (Laughter)

I will start by informing the Minister of Agriculture why NAADS has got no impact in our villages and probably in the whole country. I think as you are welcoming the new NAADS, these issues should be looked into. NAADS has no impact in our villages because there is lack of sensitisation. When we go into our villages and talk of NAADS, people think there is a kind of a monster called NAADS, but this is just National Agricultural Advisory Services. They do not know what we need. 

There are some farmers who are strong on the ground but they are not advised. What NAADS does in our villages is that when they find a very well looked after banana or coffee plantation, they put up a signpost in the names of NAADS. When you move around, you might think that belongs to NAADS yet it belongs to Kaddumukasa. They only look for good plantations and put their signposts to indicate NAADS is working and yet money is not put anywhere there.

To help NAADS work, it should not be partisan –(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Is it procedurally right for a new Member of Parliament to come on the Floor without being introduced? (Laughter)

MR KADDUMUKASA: Madam Speaker, the House has responded and now we know who is new and who is not. But my friend knows me and we have been together. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the honourable member came to my office yesterday, I also asked him who he was. For the record, can you introduce yourself and your constituency?

MR KADDUMUKASA: I will introduce myself to hon. Ssebunya that I am Kaddumukasa for Mityana South.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not to the House?

MR KADDUMUKASA: The rest of the House knows me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you introduce yourself properly because the Hansard does not know you.

MR KADDUMUKASA: This is Jerome Ssozi Kaddumukasa for Mityana South.

I was talking about NAADS being taken to be partisan - when you go to some sub-counties, the only people who can benefit from NAADS are those who are following the same line with the leadership in that area. If you are not in the same party with the leadership in that area, you cannot benefit from this. 

I can give an example of Sekanyu sub-county where I was on Saturday and Sunday. Those people told me that in four parishes, there was only one person who had benefited from NAADS, and just because he was sharing the same political ideology with the leadership in that area. Others do not know what NAADS means. 

Something else to be done to help NAADS work is for the ministry to look into subsidies. We have to appreciate that some of our farmers are still practicing subsistence farming. We need to subsidise the hoes, and the farm inputs like fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, the knapsack sprayers and the rest. Our people are crying for hoes. A hoe cost Shs 6,000 and some people in the villages cannot afford it. How much is a knapsack and its durability? We have very many knapsack sprayers and that is what our people need to improve agriculture in those villages. Those who have started to go into large scale farming cannot use hands to plough all the plantations.  

I have not read about introducing tractors to those who can afford. I only hear adverts over the radios talking about tractors, but in our constituencies, nothing like a tractor can be seen on the ground. There is no way we can improve agriculture without that. 

Let me talk about these micro-finance institutions briefly. They have stolen a lot from our farmers. People go there to borrow money to improve on the agriculture. They are made to write agreements that they are paying within a week with profits. You tell somebody who is going to grow maize to pay back in a week with profits! In this material world, I have not seen maize which can grow in a week and you start selling and you pay back with profits. That means you use exactly the same money you have borrowed to pay back -(Member timed out_)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am standing on a procedural issue. We have two sides in this House - the ruling party and the Opposition. On the ruling side they chose more people; on the Opposition side, they are choosing a few. Is it procedurally right for us to choose more people on one side and leave the rest out?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, I have chosen ten people from each side. You do not count. By the way you contributed yesterday. 

DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the committee, for producing the report. Thank you to those who have contributed to this debate. I have a few issues and I hope they will enrich us. 

The President goes around seeing the prosperous farmers and I have been occasioned to be part of the rallies that he addresses and when the President sees people laugh, he thinks they are happy with what he might have said, but they are usually laughing at him because they cannot imagine he can believe what he is saying. (Laughter) 

That people are earning Shs 20 million out of the Prosperity-for-All programme amazes them and people simply burst into laughter. The President is duped to think they are happy, which is not true. (Laughter) I know this is going to be a campaign issue come next year - whether Prosperity-for-All is a good political reason, whether it has been evaluated and whether it deserves being given attention including appropriation of money. 

I think there is need to decide whether this ministry should be called the NAADS ministry or not. I am saying this because we see the Ministry of Agriculture’s extension workers being integrated into NAADS instead of the project being integrated into the ministry. We really need an explanation –(Dr Epetait rose_)– let me complete this because you have been contributing, Dr Epetait. I am sorry.

What I am saying is that this is very interesting. Are we going to relegate our responsibility as government to outsource donor funds in order to run agricultural projects here or we need to have our own budget to plan for our population? This explains why a fertile country like this one has got communities where starvation is the order of the day yet it should not be. 

This country exports food, it produces fish to the tune of two million tones, as the report says, but it all goes into export leaving our population without the proteins. Imagine after doing that, we go on to import Golden products and certain tablets as nutrition supplements to feed the population. Which kind of government is this? We forget that such nutrition tablets are expensive. In future, you will ask children to draw a picture of fish and they will not be able to do it. They will draw bones because that is what they are used to. I hear they call it “fish fillet” and it is bony like people suffering from HIV/AIDS. That is what people who have got the money are eating –(Interjections)– do not “semantisize” these things.

Madam Speaker, we have heard from both sides of the House that people have been looking for seeds –(Interruption)

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member on the Floor, a medical doctor, to equate people suffering from HIV/AIDS to fish bones? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bayigga, I think you are being insensitive to sick people. Withdraw the likeness between the bones of the fish and the sick people, please.

DR BAYIGGA: I will withdraw the phraseology of the statement. I think I was misunderstood.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I already ruled.

DR BAYIGGA: I am sorry. Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that both sides of this House have told us that people are searching for seeds to assist their constituents combat food insecurity. The NAADS programme that we are talking about offers only Shs 3 million to this, out of a budget of Shs 45 million, which is a typical sub-county budget for NAADS. You can imagine only Shs 3 million going to food security. Are you still wondering why there is food insecurity in these areas? It cannot be like this when you well know that the seeds are the ones that must be used to produce enough food to feed the people.

I notice that there is a problem of improving the productivity of our people. Somebody talked about Prosperity-for-All and included infrastructure as a component. That person forgets that there is insensitivity to production areas including fish landing sites. I come from a fishing community and I can tell you that many of the fish landing sites there do not have access roads. Can you therefore be surprised that the people in the vicinity cannot afford to eat even the small fish? They cannot because the infrastructure to the fishing villages is not there –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, doctor, for giving way. I also want to thank the Speaker as well. You talked about fish but we gave the Ministry of Agriculture US $34 million to improve fish landing sites in 2001. I do not know who has kept that money. You should not be crying for money because the money was given. I do not know whether the audit report is with the Speaker or the ministry.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much for the information. So who cares whether people living in the fishing villages have got their children going to school or whether they have alternative methods of production in order to get food –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Butime comes in; hon. Nandala, are you insinuating that the Speaker is hiding the audit report? That is wrong because I am the one who instructed the Auditor-General to carry out that special audit. When the report came in, I passed it on to the committee on which your members sit. The audit report is with you, Members of Parliament.

1.23
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have got three points. While I thank the committee, I am disappointed that the tea sub-sector has been given very little room in this report. I am saying this because apparently there is no policy in regard to this sub-sector.

Mwenge County North is the largest tea growing constituency in the whole of Uganda and that is my constituency. We have got five tea factories to prove the fact that that constituency is the largest tea grower in this country. My concern is that there is no policy and very little in this report talks about it. 

All I am asking for is that government should work on the Kyenjojo Tea Factory, which has been lying as a skeleton for the last 25 years. I am glad that Buhweju Tea Factory is about to be completed - through pushing. I hope that the minister is taking note. I also demand the completion and renovation of Kyenjonjo Tea Factory. 

The second point is derived from the statement of the Shadow Minister of Agriculture, and I like it. She said that the Opposition strongly believes that extension service provision is a public good and must be enjoyed by all farming households in the country. I really agree with this. In other words, extension services should not just be for those households that are selected by NAADS but for every household in this country. Fortunately, in this country everybody practises agriculture; that is something natural to every Ugandan. Therefore, extension services must be spread to each and every peasant and to each and every household in this country.

Finally, there is consensus, and this consensus has been on for a long time, that the Ministry of Agriculture must be split into ministry of agriculture, ministry of animal industry and fisheries or something like that. It is high time the powers that be looked into this kind of situation. Apparently, there is no focus on agriculture in this country. Let me give you an example; since 1986, there have been eight ministers of agriculture: Kitariko, Victoria Ssekitoleko, Nasasira, Kazibwe, Kisamba Mugerwa, Mukwaya, Hillary Onek and Mwesigye. This means that in these 23 years, for every two and half years there is a new Minister of Agriculture. 

To me, the Ministry of Agriculture is one of the most important ministries in this country. Actually, it should be ministry No. 1 but you can imagine it has had eight ministers! How, therefore, can you talk of focus? How can you have a policy if a minister sits for two and a half years and he is out? Let this message be transmitted to the appointing authority - treat the Ministry of Agriculture like you treat the ministries of works, defence, finance and others. I am really serious on this. There is no focus but there is consensus on the Ministry of Agriculture being the most important ministry and there is consensus on splitting the ministry. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.29
MR NORMAN MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are continuing to debate the policy statement and the committee report on agriculture but as we speak, the acting Minister of Agriculture has even walked out because –(Interjections)- can I make my point? Can hon. Omach allow me to make my point? Hon. Omach is a minister in the Ministry of Finance and I guess since we are discussing the budget, he is here in that capacity. He cannot be here and hold two portfolios. 

This shows the un-seriousness with which the Front Bench treats this debate. We have five ministers in that ministry but even the one they delegated has walked out. What are we really doing here? We cannot allow this. The Front Bench and the Executive should take this House seriously. We cannot sit here and talk as if we are in a primary school debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the minister informed me that he was going to the bathroom -(Laughter)- and he left his colleagues in charge. 

MR MUWULIZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a report well written. However, I also find the report not quite thorough. I will first subscribe to the school of thought which says that a policy in the area of agriculture is lacking. This is because when I look at the crops that are mentioned I do not see sugarcane, which agreeably contributes enormously to the economy of this country. 

We agree that sugarcane contributes enormously to the economy and a monopoly of large scale plantation farmers engage in its farming, and a number of other upcoming small scale farmers are also in place. However, due lack of a policy, these people are at the mercy of the monopoly, large scale, farmers. How are we going to develop this industry? I hope the ministry is taking note of this. 

I find myself at pains because the Ministry of Agriculture is being crumbled by this programme project policy approach whereas people get used to the programme and as the farmers take interest in the project, it phases out. This ministry that is the backbone of the country then loses grip on the community it is supposed to take care of. So, I think policy must be emphasised. 

The mainstream structures of the ministry need to be emphasised more. The extension farmers need to be closer to the community than the NAADS people because tomorrow, this is going to phase out. Actually, it would have phased out a long time ago if it were not for the manoeuvres that were made for NAADS I, NAADS II and others. That means that it is not in the mainstream arrangement of the agriculture ministry. 

I find myself at pains when just at the end of the rains a farmer next to a stream suffers from the drought with the same pinch and effect like the farmer uphill. At least let us get mobile irrigation units. Let them be available and accessible to people in the first place because people who are close to a stream also suffer the drought at the same rate as those up the hill just because of lack of these facilities. 

Madam Speaker, with these few points, I hope the ministry will take note of this. I thank you very much. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am worried that if we continue like this, the Minister of Agriculture tomorrow will ask for money. I really want you - if you could allow - to grant the minister permission to be clarifying some errors that continue coming up. For example, I know we have PMA, which is a comprehensive policy for the agriculture sector. If you have 10 MPs saying there is no policy in the agriculture sector, then the minister tomorrow will be forced to ask for money for agriculture to make a policy. 

The problem is that government did not provide for funding for different sectoral policies but we have a comprehensive policy, which was exhaustively made ten years ago. There was wide consultation but government narrowed the focus down to only NAADS. Can the minister clarify on this? Otherwise, there is an error being repeated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I cannot anticipate what members are going to say. Let them speak and he will respond. 

1.36
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to address myself to two points. One is the matter of UCDA on which it is reported that 100,000 coffee seedlings were planted and 150 community-based nurseries were established. I would like to think that this is not correct because if you have 100,000 seedlings, it means that you are using about three bags of coffee seed. Now, I know a number of people have been engaged in this and I think this is not correct. 

However, the gist of it is about the Shs 5.2 billion, which is proposed to be given to buy coffee from nurseries. I would like to agree with hon. Bikwasizehi that instead of using this money to buy seedlings, we would rather support the farmers to start their own community nurseries and to nurse them so that they can be able to plant the same coffee. Besides, if you get people and you give them seedlings, it is difficult to know their commitment to growing the coffee. Indeed, many people who have got the free seedlings have had them laid to waste. So, let the people show the interest by having their own nurseries and then UCDA can give them technical support in nursing these seed beds.

On page 8, on the issue of NAADS, I note that Shs 87.5 billion has been put in NAADS to increase the funding but one important matter that I think is not very well addressed in all this is the number of people participating in NAADS. I was doing a small follow-up on the progress of NAADS in my constituency, but you find that a number of people in the country are actually not participating in NAADS; NAADS is therefore benefiting a few families -(Interjections)- the six people per parish are model farmers but there is also supposed to be money for the rest of the NAADS members. 

You find that in a parish, for example in a sub-county of 3,000 families, less than 1,000 families are actually engaged in or are benefiting from NAADS. So, a few people are actually benefiting. The bulk of the people are not benefiting from this important programme.

It should also be remembered that NAADS groups, first of all, are very small entities. You find 20 people in a NAADS group. A NAADS group is not a legal entity. A NAADS group has no capacity to gather enough to store and market. It cannot add value to what it produces.

This brings me to a point we have been advocating for, that we cannot advance our people through these small unviable groups. I think the way to go is co-operatives. As we promote NAADS, NAADS should feed into co-operatives and district unions which can be used to process and add value to what is produced by the farmers.

I also wanted to pose a question. We have supported 30,000 farmers in the last year. May I know from the honourable minister when we are starting on the bulk of another 30,000 farmers for this financial year, so that we make 60,000? May I know when and what arrangements are being made to have this activated?

Lastly, I want to talk about the matter of bananas. In the area where I come from, the bulk of people earn a living from bananas either through selling or also growing them for food. Now we are threatened by the Banana Wilt but I do not see any serious intervention being undertaken by government to address this matter. Our people in the North and the East are suffering from serious shortage -(Member timed out_)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to appeal to the members who contributed yesterday to allow the others to speak. I will give you a chance in the afternoon. 

1.40
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to address myself to two points. The first one is about food production. As we deliberate in this House, a number of Ugandans, even as far as 20 kilometres away from Kampala, are experiencing food shortages. There is shortage in food production and we know that one of the causes is climate change. This part of the country geographically lies in the lake region and we would not expect to have long spells of drought in this area, which actually contributes to food shortages. However, I have not seen any activity in this report which addresses this problem.

When you look at the report on page 14, there was an attempt; there was a project which actually was implemented in 37 districts and the only activity which is near to curbing this problem was irrigation. However, we know that one of the causes of aridness is cutting of trees. As much we may address ourselves to irrigation, ecologists will tell you that if you do not have trees, even the water table will go down. So, you will not be able to drill or you will get difficulty in drilling water for irrigation. 

I want to know the kind of inter-ministerial intervention that is there between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Environment to address this problem, if there is any intervention anyway. I am saying this because when I was still working with civil society, there was a project about women and tree planting but I think it was phased out. Sometimes when we talk about tree planting, some people think that it should be done in some parts of the country and not others, but I feel that even in the arid parts of the country, this project can be done because the last time I visited Saudi Arabia, as much as it is very dry, they planted trees. 

Secondly, I want to address myself to the issue of NAADS. When one analyses the way NAADS was designed and the way it is being implemented, you can just see that it was exclusive of needs of persons with disabilities. 

I can give you an example - there is no single trainer who can train blind farmers and yet blind people also farm. I would like to thank NAADS because when I raised this matter with them, we worked with them and had a baseline survey. I thought that this financial year under NAADS, at least a paragraph would feature on how they are going to involve people with disabilities but I have not seen anything. Can I know whether this is being done as per the findings of the baseline survey? Thank you.

1.44
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you. As a leader, whenever I go somewhere, people beg me for money – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byandala, you spoke yesterday so we will have hon. Guma.

1.45
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, the planning function of this country at national level is housed in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is the sector responsible for determining which aspect of the economy should take the lead. Hon. Jachan Omach is here alone and all these educated economists in his ministry are all absent. This is something I note with disdain. 

Look at the resources that sustain Uganda’s public spending; where does the money come from? Are we a mining society? Are we an industrial society? Where does the bulk of the resources that we need for public spending come from? I thought that this is something that puts food on the table. All of us eat and so, how can the agricultural sector be de-emphasised in the manner that it has been? 

I heard about Brucella about 10 or 12 years ago. It never used to occur in this country. I have spoken to veterinary doctors in this country and they tell me this disease called Brucella is got from eating milk or meat that is not well cooked. The animals used to be treated well then. I can see hon. Epetait getting excited -(Interjection)- It is called Brucellosis or something like that but the disease is now very common. 

To neglect a sector that employs over 75 percent of Ugandans is not only being irresponsible but – the majority of us represent peasants in this country whose livelihood is directly linked to the soil. So we are partly to blame as leaders, especially us on the Movement side who are the majority in the House. I would want to invite all Members of Parliament, but more particularly those from the Movement side, to discuss this matter very seriously. I am sure the Government Chip Whip is listening. Rather than us lamenting here, we should discuss it. We have the Budget Act, which enjoins Parliament to be involved in the budgeting process. So, when resources are scattered all over, as we all seem to believe -(Mr Okupa rose_) – I do not have time, hon. Elijah Okupa. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Guma, for accepting this information. Just to add to what you are raising on the budget, this year the African Union heads of state met with ministers of agriculture and agreed that the African region raises the percentage of agriculture in their budgets to 10 percent. When is that going to be implemented? African heads of state and ministers of agriculture of the African Union agreed on this when they met.

CAPT. (RTD) GUMISIRIZA: We are the ones who appropriate; I do not want to blame the Executive. If we all know that and we are serious on our part, especially we on the government side, we can say no to our colleagues, the ministers. We can even call our party chairman and talk with him on this. I can assure you that we are also partly to blame as Members of Parliament. So, instead of roasting hon. Rwamirama and Hope Mwesigye, among others, the blame is ours as well. 

I am now clocking 15 years in Parliament, so how do you say you are not part of the problem? That was why I was wondering what hon. Katuntu was saying when he said that there is no policy on agriculture. I am not so sure about that, but I have not heard an alternative policy from the minority part of this House. You are blaming us about no policy, which is not far from the truth, but –(Ms Bako rose_)- no, I will not get the information. I know you are going to disorganise me. She is a very difficult sister I know. Agriculture is very vital -(Member timed out_)

1.51
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I just want to highlight about three issues and one is on coffee. Coffee is and was one of the leading foreign earners for this country. I want to emphasise that while the report talks about developing varieties that are resistant for Robusta Coffee Wilt Disease, I do not see the alternative for Arabica Coffee. What is the programme for Arabica Coffee in terms of having resistant varieties that are not subject to Coffee Wilt Disease?

I also want to support the programme that UCDA has. I come from an Arabica growing area and what UCDA has done is to identify some farmers in particular sub-counties where they develop nursery beds and they give them some support. However, I have also hinted to them that what they should do is to expand the number of farmers that are involved in developing these nurseries because the demand for coffee nurseries is very high. In order to meet that demand, the nursery farms should also be expanded. Now that we are expanding sub-counties and parishes, it is also important that UCDA expands the community farmers that are developing these nursery beds.

On page 8, the report talks about public-private partnerships, particularly in honey processing. They say there are six sets of honey processing equipment, to mention but a few. I want to know where this equipment is located. Is it distributed across the country or in Arua where honey processing is more pronounced? 

I also want to suggest to the ministry that this is an area that we have not ventured into seriously. As such, it would be important at this stage that we venture into apiculture because you know the demand for honey is very high and everybody is going into organic honey as it is. So, this is an area that the ministry should put a lot of effort into especially when it comes to areas with forest, like in my constituency where we have a national forest and trees all over the place. This is an area that the ministry should venture into.

Page 9 of the report talks about NARO; the last bullet says that all the land for the organisation was surveyed and land titles are being processed. When they say land titles are being processed, for how long does a land title take to be processed? Many institutions in this country do not have land titles and I do not know what the problem is with the Uganda Land Commission and Ministry of Lands. 

I also want to know from the Ministry of Agriculture whether they are just talking about NARO having its land surveyed and titles being processed or even research institutes that belong to the Ministry of Agriculture. Are these also being catered for?

To wind up on that point, even Parliament of Uganda does not have a land title. Recently, the Parliamentary Commission appeared before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and when we asked about the land title, they said it is being processed. Every time we meet them, they say it is in the pipeline. I wonder how long this pipe is. Is the water near the tap now? What is happening? Very soon, we may be evicted from Parliament because we do not have a land title. Uganda Land Commission should be brought on board to help government institutions expedite the process of land survey and acquisition of land titles.

Finally, I want to emphasise the area of food production. Many Members of Parliament have raised this and it is not implemented. Our country now –(Member timed out_)

1.56
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture for the extensive report. Agriculture is very close to our hearts because we all depend on it. We are currently facing food shortages because we have not put a lot of emphasis on agriculture. I think that in this budget we should open our eyes and insist that agriculture is given priority if we are to overcome future famine.

I would like to talk about the agricultural extension workers. In the past we had extension workers who would go from village to village and from home to home and they were facilitated. They were graduates working with the people. However, since the onset of NAADS, these extension workers are dormant; I do not know what they are doing. I would like to know how much money is budgeted for these extension workers to facilitate our farmers. This is because NAADS is becoming very narrow and only for a few.

When NAADS was introduced, we were very excited. I went home to excite everybody to join NAADS so that they can benefit. To my amazement, only six people are taken from the parish and the rest are at a loss. They are asking me, “Where is your NAADS, hon. Margaret?” Please, to make NAADS realistic let us extend it to everybody so that we can benefit from it.

During the past NAADS, they acquired three walking tractors in Koboko District. These tractors are now abandoned and we do not know who is taking care of them. The Koboko District Farmers Association wanted to claim them but they said “No, these are for NAADS.” Who is supporting those walking tractors so that we can help? If we are to modernise farming, we need to at least use walking tractors, but at most we need the running tractors - the real tractors. 

Madam Speaker, we have emphasised production and there are many factors necessary for production. You must have land, you must have capital, you must have input, you must have instruments for mechanised agriculture. But in Koboko, I have not seen any of these. We have encouraged people to leave tobacco because our land is small. We prefer smaller crops which can be harvested very fast, but because BAT provides the inputs, some money and the market is ready, people have stuck to tobacco. 

This year, I think the honourable minister heard about the tragedy when people perished on a vehicle overloaded with tobacco. There were one hundred people on top of the tobacco on the truck, and ten people died on the spot at the accident scene. All this was because they were looking for money. I am sure if we had been facilitated to produce groundnuts, Sim sim, and rice, then we would leave tobacco. 

On the issue of the people who died, the minister is very quiet; he has not called BAT and it is as if they were not Ugandans. I would like the minister to comment about the death of these people and on whether BAT is going to compensate them or not. 

Madam Speaker, we cannot prosper if we are still using hoes. We are talking of mechanised agriculture, but where are the tractors? My people are still using hand hoes which make women curved when they grow old; when shall we relieve our people of this? Let us give them money for seeds. Hon. Minister, you told me that the seeds are in NAADS. How can you transfer the money for food production for NAADS to agriculture for seeds? Why don’t you allocate separate money for seeds rather than what you are doing now? Even the one you talked about of Shs 13 million, it was appropriated and it is already there. I have been to my district and to the Chief Administrative Officer; that money does not exist. So, please tell us the truth so that we know what to do with our people.

My people of Koboko are very hard working but they need support from government. We need our farmers to be subsidised in everything: with seeds, tractors and buying land for working so that we can increase production. I am looking forward to seeing the minister. I know he went to Koboko, but whatever he promised has not helped us at all. He said he would look for another walking tractor; a walking tractor for what? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.02
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the two reports but I would like to make a general observation. We have always complained that agriculture is marginalised. But from the look of the House, the attendance is very appalling. So, we may talk of government marginalising agriculture, but the House has also marginalised the ministry; basing on the attendance and considering the fact that we have just had famine in this country.

On NAADS, about the six farmers from the households, the minister should have a plan to step this up. There has been a general complaint from the masses that six farmers are very few. So, if need be we should have maybe demonstration farmers in the parishes instead of picking on only six members.

Secondly, in as far as NAADS is concerned, when it comes to livestock and poultry, the local chicken have been a boomerang. Most of them are locally raised and they are dying off. So, I would rather we concentrate on Ugachick chicken and that of other chicken breeders. 

On the issue of irrigation, this is something that we should begin with. I would like to appeal to the Minister of Animal Industry and Fisheries to ensure that they bring a policy on how to move. In a year we can have about three seasons.

On the NARO land, this is something which is clear. Two years ago, the Minister of Internal Affairs came to Mayuge where some myopic leaders were grabbing land from NARO. I want to see in their report something like, “All the land for NARO has got land titles”. If you are still processing them, I would like to assure you that the fellows are scheming to grab this land. The Minister of Internal Affairs saw this for himself. When he tried to evict them, they said he was worse than Amin. So, you can see the mentality of some Ugandans. I would like to appeal to the minister to move faster and get these land titles because the land is going. 

Madam Speaker, there is something to do with goats. The committee report says somewhere that Shs 9.12 billion was used in the Financial Year 2008/09 and 120 goats were bought. Using my P.5 arithmetic, it means that the average cost per goat was Shs 76 million; because only 120 goats were bought. They were put on farms at Ruhengere and Byana Stock Farm. I would like the chairperson to clarify to me how the Shs 9.12 billion was utilised. Does it mean that a boar goat cost Shs 76 million? I need clarification.

Lastly, I would like to say that the issue of lamenting here that we have not reached 10 percent is a misuse of the powers of the institution of Parliament. I know we can reallocate money and move to the 10 percent. I appeal to the Members that lamenting does not help. Instead, let us sit down and dissect some Votes; there is money that we can raise. You remember we have always reallocated money. The issue of coming here to do a post mortem is not good. And before we realise it, the figures are passed and –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. You know we also demanded that agriculture as a sector should provide a justification for demanding the 10 percent. What they have done instead is to go for a wider perspective of the proposal by giving what they call Rural Development Strategy. PMA has now been destroyed and replaced by Rural Development Strategy, an investment plan, which covers the entire activities of government. In this case, we cannot really focus on agriculture. So, we are all at a loss, unless Parliament demands for that policy, which we are demanding to be laid on the Table to give us a clue on what exactly these priorities in the sector are all about.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: It is not true that the Ministry of Agriculture has come up with another policy called Rural Development Strategy. What we have is an investment plan, not Rural Development Strategy. That programme is actually a Ministry of Finance project.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much. Can I conclude? (Dr Baryomunsi rose_) Okay, let me have information from Hon. Baryomunsi.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Member for allowing me to give information. While I agree with you that we should raise the money for agriculture, I would like to inform you that on page 14 of the report, there is a project called National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project, which has been running from 2005 and is to end in 2010. 

However, in the same report the committee says that rehabilitation work for six out of 21 livestock markets has been done. It also says that seven slaughter sheds out of 27 have been done and that the project has completed 10 percent of the construction works. What I am saying is that the ministry must demonstrate that it is able to absorb resources that are allocated to it.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you honourable members, but I was only looking at the principle that we increase the money before we can compel them to utilise it.

I would like to give an example of when our committee visited the National Medical Stores and complained about that 30 percent; just three weeks ago NMS delivered drugs to Mulago Hospital, which took people four hours to offload. Many people wondered where they had got those drugs from. That is why I am saying that when we do that, we will have the mandate to compel them and yes, we can get this money. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.09
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for preparing such a good report.

I have been seated here listening very carefully, but also doing my analysis. I can say that I have a simple position on how we should move forward. We are talking of the 4 percent or something less than that of the total budget going to agriculture; but at the same time, as a country or as government or Parliament, we are busy talking about agriculture being the backbone of our economy. So, what are we talking about? In a nutshell, we are talking about nothing.

You know very well, and it is for a fact, that in 1967, Uganda’s economy was the best in East Africa merely because the government of the day had asserted itself; it supported the agricultural sector fundamentally, having known that it was the backbone of our economy. Today we are almost the least in the Great Lakes region in terms of economic performance and growth. Why? It is because we have not tapped well into the sector. We always talk of signing declarations all over the World like the Maputo Declaration and so on, but we cannot move an inch towards that. How do we move as a country? How do we move as Parliament? Even Parliament that should give a sense of direction, policy wise, is equally talking like a street person in Kampala with Members debating like people in Oyam South. 

It is high time this Parliament asserted itself in considering priorities that matter to the citizens of this nation. We will not accept to go back to our constituencies and begin to cry equally with he local wanainchi about policies and funding.

Just yesterday, we passed Shs 6.5 billion to go to the cadres who are going to handle patriotic clubs. Why can’t we transfer that money to agriculture, if indeed agriculture is a priority to this country?

Madam Speaker, we have been lamenting endlessly. When are we going to walk the talk? I would urge this Parliament that before we even pass this report, we should consider areas within the normal budget from which we can transfer funds to increase on the funding for the agriculture budget, if we are really concerned about the ordinary citizens of this country.

We know very well that agriculture constitutes over 80 percent of employment in this country. All of us feed on agriculture. Most of us went to school using money from agriculture especially in 1960s and 1970. It was possible that time because people grew cotton, coffee, cocoa and had livestock. What about now? 

Madam Speaker -(Mrs Mugyenyi rose)- I will not take the information – my time, please. I am aware she is the former minister but also a part of this mess –(Laughter)– she can use another forum to correct the impact -(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to say I am part of the mess when I am an hon. Member of Parliament like him? First of all, he refused my information when he did not know what I was going to talk about. So, is it in order that I should be called part of the mess? And which mess?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you substantiate the mess?

MR ISHAA OTTO: You know, Madam Speaker, when we talked about water for production as having failed to take off a few years ago, the former minister, now an ordinary Member of Parliament, was in charge. There were a lot of things that happened. We would not be talking about water for production for livestock because this should have been corrected then while she was in charge. (Laughter) That is my substantiation.

2.15
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for producing a good report, and the alternative minister for the very good observation that she made in her statement. She asked, “How come a country that is abundantly blessed with fresh waters can at any one moment ever cry of food shortages?” So, the challenge is really a serious one. 

Only recently, Madam Speaker, you gave us leave as Members of the Teso Parliamentary Group and we were accompanied by the Committee on Agriculture to the Teso sub-region. I expected the committee to have made a report and it made observations that there were actually abundant fresh waters in this sub-region, but that about 100 meters to 1 kilometre after the fresh water sources, crops had failed because water for production was not available. 

The same committee did also observe that there were actually dams that had been put up by the previous regimes but the dams just needed to be de-silted and it is not the first time that that had come to the notice of the Committee on Agriculture. It has come in the past reports; I have seen and we continue to lament. To me, this committee has not adequately presented its findings to this House on the tour that we undertook together to Teso. In other words, they have buried the –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, Parliament set up a select committee and we travelled to Teso sub-region, with my brother hon. Ekemu, to look at the famine situation. We have produced a report and we have covered most of the details that he is talking about but we will get the opportunity to present it so that it is discussed exhaustively. We have really done good work but we did not want to combine the two reports.

MR EKEMU: Thank you very much. The question is: where is the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have got the report and as the Member says, I did not want it to be crowded by other issues. If we are going to sort out famine, we must discuss it separately.

MR EKEMU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. The shadow minister also did actually propose a figure of Shs 100 billion for irrigation and I think this House should seriously take this proposal on. The Shs 30 billion provided is little especially given the challenges that we have been faced with. We do not want a repeat of those kinds of food shortages, not only in Teso but all over the country.

In their statement the committee also does not seem to capture the continuity and linkages on the previous programmes that we know of. I know of PEAP, PMA and what the President has usually talked about – zoning the country into agricultural zones. For instance, Teso sub-region has been zoned for Citrus growing and people actually took up Citrus growing and I thought it was important for the committee to have brought this out. For instance, on the plans for seedling multiplication, we know that an average Citrus seedling does not cost less than Shs 2,000 and if we have to make an impact, an ordinary farmer should averagely grow at least 100 seedlings. Where is that kind of money going to come from?

I want to take this opportunity to remind the Minister of Agriculture that there used to be the Odina Citrus Scheme, and it now lies in waste. In the dry season it is simply burnt off by fires and it seems the minister is not aware of such a facility where seed multiplication is abundant. Citrus multiplication is in hundreds of thousands that could have serviced the requirements of the Citrus region since even the President has identified the region as a Citrus growing area -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, so far 30 Members have contributed to this report. I am still grappling with the instructions I gave to the rules committee to help us manage a committee report, the Opposition alternative report, and the debate because yesterday the presentation took an hour, the shadow minister took 45 minutes and the rest was left for the House. I am grappling with that and I want the Committee on Rules to really help us sort out how we will manage this process. But I have noted 10 other Members who would like to contribute and I will give them an opportunity in the afternoon and tomorrow because we are still continuing. But I now want to ask the Minister of Agriculture to respond. 

2.23 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the Committee on Agriculture for their report. I also want to thank the shadow minister for her attempt. I thank Members for their contributions especially in highlighting some of the challenges that are prevalent in the different areas of the country. 

Before I respond particularly to specific issues, I would like to assure Members that we are noting all the concerns and where we feel there is a gap, we shall make serious attempts to fill that gap.

Madam Speaker, I will briefly comment on the report of the committee and also on the Shadow Minister’s report and I will then make specific responses to questions raised by the Members. In the report of the committee, they raised the issue of funding. The issue of funding is really a collective measure. We must know that as government, we must draw our priorities and while we appreciate that we need to upgrade the level of funding for agriculture, I think we have a challenge as a ministry because we have to work within the framework of government.

Two, is about the projects. It is not true that the NARP project which was referred to in the report had dismal performance. I think the chairman must have got either outdated information –(Interjections)– no, that is very old. Actually this project is performing very well. There was a challenge in the past because there was a requirement that we have to get land titles for the areas where we had to put these sites but soon after we got these land titles, we are now handing over sites. I was in Buyende and I handed over a modern market. Next week we are going to Soroti and Kumi to hand over some of these assets. So, the project is actually performing very well. 

The other issue that was raised on NAADS is the misrepresentation of the six farmers. It is true that we had a challenge with NAADS mainly on implementation and we needed guidelines to put it on course. We had challenges in procurement, challenges of coverage, challenges of participation and challenges of transparency but we addressed them. In the new guidelines, we addressed regional workshops involving Members and the guidelines we issued were in response to some of the issues raised by Members. 

For instance in procurement, districts used to procure inputs for the community and NAADS groups but we shifted the procurement from the districts to the community so that people could select their own community procurement committee to procure things that they approve as workable under the supervision of the technical team. Previously, there was little participation of local leadership and politicians and Members of Parliament in particular, and we provided guidelines for their involvement. 

There was also a challenge of coverage. Government now covers every sub-county in the country with NAADS -(Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you had an opportunity. Please, we need to finish this and do other things.

LT COL RWAMIRAMA: There was the issue of the six farmers, which was misinterpreted to mean that NAADS is only focussing on the six farmers. You must notice that the funding for NAADS increased by 33. Previously, we were covering the whole group and everybody in NAADS and we realised that we were not making any impact. 

So, we decided to appropriate more money to continue with the other groups and to also pick six model farmers routinely so that it revolves. The six model farmers are demonstration schools at parish level. They are farm filled schools in a sense because people are learning from those demos and the six farmers are selected by the same group members and it is on a rotational basis. So, it is not actually true to say that the six farmers are just receiving a token of money. At the end of the term, 70 percent of the input is passed on to the new group member while the new releases cater for other six farmers. It is estimated that in five years, we shall have covered every parish and everybody will have moved out of poverty. 

I would like to comment on the alternative report of the Shadow Minister for Agriculture. I want to thank her for her attempt but I also want to say that democracy is very good and it is very good that we also hear from the other side. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for providing such an enabling environment. 

On page 2 she says, “The ministry has diverted its attention from the core function of production, research and extension to rural electrification and roads, into microfinance, thus shifting focus away from real concerns of the farmers. Everything about the Ministry of Agriculture is done haphazardly with no clear sense of purpose and focus for the entire ministry.” It is very important that as leaders of this country across the board, we give credit where it is due. This country has gone through difficult times and part of this country, particularly the North, was not productive and we were faced with war. In spite of this, I want to challenge my colleagues that the figures on the ground actually show that the Ministry of Agriculture, even with the 4 percent, has performed very well. 

Coffee exports increased and you can find the figures on the Internet. We have gone to US $300 in export of Coffee alone. Cotton in the last year increased from 65 bales to 125 bales. Cocoa increased from 3,700 metric tonnes to 15,000 metric tonnes and we are actually looking for an investor to take on because the Coffee harvested can sustain a factory. Tea has increased in one year from 29,000 tonnes to 50,900 tonnes. 

It is also on record that in spite of famine in this country and in spite of the North being unproductive, we were the second largest suppliers of cereal to the World Food Programme for the year 2007/2008. We fetched US $54 million - next only to Canada. So, we are producing. In spite of all these problems in the livestock sector - the demand from our neighbours: Rwanda, DRC and Southern Sudan - we have managed to move the population of cows from 6.9 to 11.4 million.

The vegetable oil production alone is now covering 23 districts and we have increased our supply from 23,000 metric tonnes to 100,000 metric tonnes. We are actually about to break even and be self-reliant and also begin to export. So, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has performed tremendously well -(Interjections)- yes, these are figures; you can go and check.

In her report, she mentioned that Shs 272 million was misused in allowances under the electrification project. This is a misunderstanding of the whole project. The project was not supposed to put up wires. This project is supposed to link farmers to ensure that they are connected to electricity for value addition. It was designed to assist farmers. It is not to provide electricity or wires. 

MS BAKO: With due respect, Mr Minister, I wish to seek this clarification from you. Your policy statement explicitly says that this is for rural electrification and you have a sub-component within NAADS which your ministry is calling value addition. In the same vein, you have things to do with agro-processing at the village level. Which is which? Are you trying to  tell me and this country that this rural electrification which is supposed to be wiring the villages has now turned out to  be something else to an extent that you feel comfortable with deceit on the Floor of Parliament?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Rural electrification is the name for the project and the way it works -(Interjections)- yes! We are not the Ministry of Energy. We link farmers who are having difficulties accessing -(Interjections)- our people need affirmative action. You cannot say, “Cook the meat, prepare it so that I find it ready but do not put it on the fire.”

So the objective of this project is that we had farmers with maize mills and feed mills but they were having problems accessing electricity. This project was designed to link the Ministry of Agriculture and Energy to connect these farmers. Farmers had complained that -(Interjections)– it is under PMA actually. Farmers had complained that it was becoming increasingly difficult to access energy on their agricultural installations and therefore this was affirmative action. 

As for value addition in NAADS, this is a different arrangement. In NAADS we are actually concerned with primary processing and not secondary processing like maize shellers, coolers, coffee wet processing plants and the like. There is also an attempt to be very generous in the Shadow Minister’s report when she says, “Give so much …” etc. If you look at the proposal of giving so much money - when you are giving money, as somebody who is cautious of economics, you should know that when you give money you must also look at the sources. The implication is that actually we would tax people almost to their marrow because I do not think that the kind of money you are talking about can be found in this budget of ours at the moment.

Madam Speaker, allow me to respond to specific questions. There were many questions about an agricultural policy not being in place. The history of MAAIF is that we had two ministries merging and each ministry had its policy at the time. They had different policies and therefore MAAIF has many in place. Every sector has a policy in place. What we are doing is that we have combined all of them and they are ready for discussion. We shall bring them to this House for discussion and adoption. 

There was an issue which featured prominently in all the contributions and this is seed availability. The policy of government is not to give free seeds in the first place. You must know it from the beginning that you have to buy seeds and stock seeds. The responsibility of MAAIF was to make sure that these seeds are available. We had a seed company but when we liberalised, we privatised it. Everybody here, especially those who were in the Seventh Parliament, knows how this was privatised. 

The challenge we are faced with now is how can we avail seeds on the market for farmers to buy? We have now tasked NARO to work with NAADS under MOU to put in place supplementary measures to support the existing seed companies to avail seeds available on the market. 

The challenge we have with the private sector is actually being business-minded and in this country, contrary to what is coming out that research is going down, I would like to inform this House and the country at large that our researchers here in agriculture are very recognised internationally to the extent that they have come up with about 136 technologies. The challenge we have is how to use these technologies for the benefit of our farmers. 

As I told you, we have created a working relationship with NARO, the service providers and all agricultural agencies in regard to planting and breeding materials. 

There was a question on whether we have a food policy. There is a food and nutrition policy in place. The people who have been asking this question should request to have copies availed to them because the policy is in place. 

There was a concern about the contribution of GDP in terms of agriculture -(Interruption)  

MS MUGERWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. I represent Masaka and I came from there this morning. Masaka has not had any rains at all, actually our people are starving. We are discussing this report which is pertinent to food production and availability of seeds but my people do not have any seeds. 

When I read this report, there is no mention of seeds; there is no mention of rainwater harvesting and the minister is taking this as a by the way. He is saying that this assignment was given to the private sector; he is not assuring us that by tomorrow we shall have seeds. What will I tell the people in my district who are starving because I feel like crying? If the minister cannot guarantee food for my people, I do not know where to run to; I am lost especially with regard to availability of seeds. 

Mr Minister, what do you have to say about seed availability tomorrow so that my people can plant something when the rains come? Thank you.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I will explain later in detail the matter of food availability. 

There were concerns about the contribution of GDP to agriculture going down. What is true is that the other sectors have picked up and therefore their contribution to GDP is shooting up. So, while the production in the agricultural sector is going up, its contribution to GDP is going down. And sometimes it may be healthy for us if we are managing our food security to have something left to export. Therefore, the decline in contribution to GDP should not be seen as an indicator that the agriculture sector is not growing. 

There was a concern by many Members about mechanisation. Government has put in place about Shs 60 billion for farmers to access soft loans. We are working out a mechanism on how this will work. The Ministry of Agriculture and the stakeholders are working together with the Ministry of Finance to make sure that we mechanise agriculture.

Earlier attempts failed: the sub-county tractor hire service was a disaster. It was characterised by politicisation and maintenance became a problem. So, we are currently looking at farmers owning a tractor as a cooperative; as individual commercial farmers and we have also looked at the range of implements to be availed to support agricultural sector mechanisation, and this includes water for agriculture production. 

Many Members talked about water for production being a challenge. My colleague the shadow minister raised it. Actually we do not have the Shs30 billion for water for agricultural production that you are talking about. What we have done is that we are rehabilitating all the old irrigation schemes and we are working together with the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Environment and Water to make sure that we avail water for agricultural production as much as the budget can allow. 

While the Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for water for agricultural production, that is, irrigation, livestock and aquaculture, MWE is responsible for bulk water. There are people who talked about bulk water being cumbersome, including the Member for Isingiro – I am referring to the Dam in Buhweju. 

Water reservoirs are also good for the environment. So, while we should ask for more water for agricultural production, we should not abdicate our responsibility to keep water reservoirs for ecological reasons and also as a fall back position. 

There was an issue which was also raised by many Members about the extension service being a public good. Yes, it is a public good and we have no policy to shift extension services from being a public good. 

The conversion of part of the extension service to NAADS is an effort to bring efficiency in the NAADS programme. And we are focusing at one person per sub-county. 

Madam Speaker, there were challenges raised by many Members about NAADS transparency and accountability. We are making every reasonable effort to ensure that NAADS is accountable. We are involving the local leadership and we are also making regular supervision. We are amending the NAADS Act to take care of all those concerns and to also address the challenges in the structure, and to improve on service delivery as well. 

There was mention of the President visiting some prominent farmers and making donations. Some Members felt that the President should not be making donations. Madam Speaker, it is very important to encourage farmers to become commercial farmers. All these countries that commercialised - even ranches were given to these people; there was affirmative action by Government. So, when we are trying to industrialise, it is very important that we support farmers. 

It is against this background that we want to mechanise agriculture and provide loans that are subsidised. So, for the President to go around and see what is happening, it should be good news to us because he encourages farmers. The Chief Executive is going down to see what is happening and I think he should be applauded, yes. 

Hon. Nalule said that people with disabilities are not catered for under NAADS. I think the challenge with some of us is that we don’t participate when there are NAADS workshops and when we go out to evaluate these programmes. 

Some Members don’t participate but the fact of the matter is that the youth and people with disabilities are given affirmative action. They are given five points ahead of others so that they can be selected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I think she was talking about specialised training that is how to train blind farmers. Her problem was: who is training these farmers under the NAADS programme?

MR RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, since it is coming to my attention that among those with disabilities we also have to train blind farmers- Yes, I must be frank because we provided for them and the youth to get affirmative action on the programme. I am going to take this up and see how we can pull up people with disabilities, especially the blind.

Hon. Bikwasizehi and hon. Butime asked about the tea policy. The tea policy is in a draft form. Hon. Butime is asking about the tea factory in Kyenjojo. Hon. Members will notice that every financial year government makes a milestone. The last financial year was Buhweju. Possibly Ministry of Finance will mention this. I know that there is a plan to rehabilitate and put in place a tea factory there. 

There is also a plan to put up a factory because I know the money should be available for a food factory in Eastern Uganda. Otherwise, government is making all the reasonable effort to add value and also make our farmers earn more money instead of selling raw material.

Hon. Kubeketerya talked about something very good and I also want to use this opportunity to thank you very much for supporting us to recover. I want to inform you that we are in the final stages of getting this title of DFI. 

There are people who asked about the issue of land belonging to government. We had a challenge with local government and honourable members must appreciate this. When we come here, we demand for districts and when they are given, we must also accept that the districts must be nurtured to grow and develop capacity. 

Some of the districts took it upon themselves to distribute some government land and we are having problems with them wherever the land is. It is true that the Land Commission was not a very good custodian because we even lost some government land, which we are trying to recover. Every effort is being made to recover government land.

Finally, the issue of seed; there is a misunderstanding in the public and I would like to set the record straight. In our budget, we don’t have money to buy seeds for farmers. I have seen letters from members of Parliament asking me to give seed. We don’t have seed and people must buy it. 

Our concern is to make sure that the seed is on the market. There is only affirmative action when there is famine, war, disaster like floods and people have lost everything. The Constitution empowers government to do this, and if we did not empower those people we would have been abdicated from our responsibility. That is a special programme and it is a one off as the disaster strikes. 

What people seem to misunderstand is that we have money to buy seeds, which is not the case. In fact what we are trying to do between NARO and NAADS is to make sure that the money, which we have been sending to sub counties- If they raise a concern that they don’t have seed then we use NARO to make sure that we have seeds available for farmers.

I will come at an appropriate time to inform this House, maybe in two weeks time, about the seed position because seeds are a concern for all of us. What is happening in the market is that sometimes people get food, which is distributed to refugees, paint it and give it to farmers as seed. Our efforts to regulate seeds are frustrated because the local governments who are purportedly supposed to help the farmers sometimes provide some of these fake seeds. I want to thank you all for supporting the sector and I promise we shall do our best. 

There was also concern about fish landing sites. First of all, they were very many at the time the project started, and because of inflation and the associated costs as well as failure on the part of the programme especially microfinance, we had to restructure and we did less sites. 

There is phase II, however, which is going to cover all the sites. To the best of my knowledge, you made a report, which is coming here especially concerning that project and I think we shall answer most of the questions when that report comes. I thank you very much for your support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. Hon. Members, as we agreed yesterday the Committee of Supply will be a stand alone event for the remaining seven reports. For now I want to put the question that this House adopts the report of the Committee on Agriculture.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I suspend the House for one hour, we shall resume at 4.00 p.m. for the Committee report on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

(The House was suspended at 2.58 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 4.28 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just before they present, hon. Oduman had something he wanted to ask.

4.28
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of concern that has reached my office. Today is the 2 September 2009 and information reaching my office is that civil servants have not been paid for the month of August. 

The school third term commences next week and parents are preparing drafts for school fees. They must do that today and tomorrow, latest Friday but they have not been paid as we speak now. 

In some cases there are complaints regarding the implementation of the increment of 5 percent that was announced; a meagre 5 percent. We want to know from government what the problem is. Has government run short of money? I thank you.

4.30
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish you had drawn my attention to this matter by just giving me a telephone call. (Laughter) Before raising this matter, you could have informed me because I would have given an appropriate answer to your question. I am not in position to give you a clear and formal reply now; maybe tomorrow. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Parliament will be sitting tomorrow so he will give us the answer then.

MR ODUMAN: This now raises a fundamental matter of concern that is even more serious than the one I raised. Even though civil servants have not been paid, the people who are supposed to be concerned are not aware. These people earn meagre pay; the meagre pay must come promptly as earlier on directed by the Leader of Government Business and the Prime Minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oduman, the Minister of Public Service does not pay civil servants; there is an accounting officer. He has said that he will answer tomorrow. 

4.32
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Pherry Kabanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with Article 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Section 6(2) of the Budget Act, 2001, the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development received, examined and discussed the Ministerial Policy and Budget Estimates for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Financial Year 2009/10.

The mission of the Ministry of Gender is to protect and empower specified groups and promote productivity. 

The strategic objectives are to empower communities to appreciate, access, participate in, manage and demand accountability in public and community based initiatives; protect the vulnerable persons from depravation and livelihood risks; create an enabling environment for increasing employment opportunities and productivity for improved livelihoods and social security for all, especially the poor and vulnerable; ensure that gender inequality and other social issues that lead to exclusion in accessing services across all sectors and at all levels is addressed; and improve performance of social development institutions to coordinate and implement the social development sector strategic plan at various levels. 

In order to achieve the objectives, the functions of the ministry are: community mobilisation and empowerment, which is Vote function 1001; mainstreaming gender and rights, Vote function 1002; promotion of labour productivity and employment, Vote function 1003; social protection for vulnerable groups, Vote function 1004; policy planning and support services, Vote function 1049; and support to local government which is Vote function 1081.

Methodology
They held meetings with honourable ministers and the technical team from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The Committee made reference to the following documents -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sabano, those are the usual things. You can skip some of them, including the achievements. 

MS KABANDA: Okay. In the interest of time we will skip the achievements for 2008/09 but maybe I could highlight the financial performance for the Financial Year 2008/09, which you can find on page 3, I suppose. There are various documents that are circulating around; I do not know which one you have.  

Paragraph 2, on financial performance, the ministry’s performance is highlighted according to the vote functions. As I said earlier, Vote function 1003 performed at 68 percent due to low absorption under the non-wage component and other vote functions performed well. 

Community mobilisation and empowerment performed at 93.9 percent. Mainstreaming, gender and rights performed at 95.7 percent; Social protection for the vulnerable at 107.2 percent; policy planning and support services, Vote function 1049, performed at 93.6 percent and Vote function 1081, which is local governments, at 94.7 percent.

Madam Speaker, allow me to skip the planned activities and request Members to read them. I now go on to the amount of funds requested, which is on page 10.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has requested for a recurrent, which is wage and non-wage expenditure of Shs 14,541,000,000; development expenditure, which is, government of Uganda and donors, which is at Shs 12,707,000,000. Domestic arrears are at Shs 1,520,000,000 and taxes at Shs 2,250,000,000. 

A total of Shs 31,019,000,000 has been for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Of the total budgetary proposals, Shs 21,034,000,000 is Government of Uganda’s contribution, while Shs 6,214,000,000 is the donor component giving a 35 percent increase from last financial year’s budget of Shs 22,527,000,000. 

The increase in the sector’s budgetary allocation is attributed to an increase in the allocation of funds to youth, women and disability councils and commencement of the operations of the industrial court, commencement of the equal opportunities commission, monitoring and evaluation function components in all vote functions and support towards vulnerable groups. 

The table below shows estimates of the revenue and expenditure both recurrent and development, including arrears and taxes for the Ministry of Gender and Social Development for the Financial Year 2006/2007 up to 2009/10, and I will leave you, hon. Members, to look at that.

I will go to the observations and recommendations. The vote function 101, which is community mobilization and empowerment, the vote function received Shs 771,000,000 in the Financial Year 2009/10 as compared to Shs 4,360,000,000 last Financial Year 2008/09. The increase is attributed to the programmes of community development and literacy and the Government of Uganda/UNICEF community dialogue. 

Community Development and Literacy
The committee observed that Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development conducted a social sector development dialogue where activities under community development and literacy, were realigned and reviewed. For instance, library activities and wages for the national culture centre were earlier reflected under the gender and rights vote function 102. This financial year 2009/10, their activities have been transferred to community mobilisation and empowerment giving a justification for the increase in the allocation.

The National Library of Uganda 
The Committee observed that funding to the National Library of Uganda has remained at the same level this Financial Year 2009/10, implying that the institution shall not ably conduct its functional oversight and technical support to branches countrywide.

The committee further observed that whereas the title deed for the National Library of Uganda land is in place, the land has numerous encumbrances, for example Kampala City Council tenants are still occupying the housing units on the land.

The committee also noted that architectural drawings and the bills of quantities have not been completed.

Recommendations
    • Kampala City Council is urged, as a matter of urgency, to resettle the tenants in the housing units for construction to kick start. 
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development completes the architectural drawings and bills of quantities.

Culture and Family Affairs 
    • The National Culture Centre is a semi-autonomous institution, comprising of the National theatre and Nommo galley. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development supports institution through a wage subvention.
    • The Committee noted that the cultural centre has noted secured its land title as yet.
    • The committee observed that whereas activities of the National Cultural Centre are funded by the resources generated locally and spent at source, the committee is not updated on its annual performance.

Recommendations 
    • The committee recommends that the National Cultural Centre avails annual reports on its performance for scrutiny to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. 
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should work towards securing the land title being occupied by both the National Theatre and Nommo gallery.

Traditional Leaders
The committee observes that the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development has development principles that will guide the ministry as it offers support to the traditional leaders. These principles will be used to develop the regulations. 

The committee noted that the house of the Emorimor was not constructed as budgeted for in the financial year 2008/09, and this was mainly attributed to the conditions that were not fulfilled for the Emorimor to access the funds. The funds were, therefore, returned to the consolidated fund pending the receipt of the approved architectural and structural plans, the title deed in the names of the institution and an encumbrances-free location.

Recommendations
    • The committee recommends that the conditions be fulfilled by the Emorimor as required by the ministry so that funds can be availed in the financial year 2010/11 for construction to start.
    • The Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development should make provisions for construction of palaces for other traditional leaders on an annual basis. 

Functional Adult Literacy 
The committee was informed that there is no resource increment this financial year 2009/10 yet the programme has numerous activities at grassroots levels, such as skills development and enhancement, attitude change and poverty reduction. 

The committee further noted that functional adult literacy has registered over 1.2 million participants and approximately 900 passed proficiency tests and graduated.

The committee observed that functional adult literacy programme is still constrained with a funding gap of Shs 4,800,000,000 meant to facilitate the functional adult literacy instructors.

Recommendations 
    • Given the importance and need for basic social skills adequate resources should be made available for Functional Adult Literacy Programmes. 
    • More effort is required to ensure that Functional Adult Literacy Programme register success among the target beneficiaries. Specifically Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should fully support district local governments in their work to ensure success.
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should put in place follow-up mechanisms to assess the impact of FAL (Functional Adult Literacy) to graduates’ homes and the communities they live in.
    • The committee recommends that Shs 4.8 billion be availed in the next budget, that is, the Financial Year 210/11, to cover the facilitation meant for functional adult literacy instructors.
    • The committee also recommends that government should take advantage of the programme and include in it the necessary life skills in addition to literacy and numeracy. Civic education should be made part of the curriculum of the programme as well.

Public and Community Libraries 
The committee was informed that 16 public libraries would be constructed this financial year 2009/2010. These include: Bushenyi, Abim, Iganga, Kasese, Pader and Bugiri.
 
The committee was further informed that 16 community libraries will be established in Kasawo in Mukono, Kagoma in Wakiso, SOS Village in Gulu, Kwapa in Tororo, Lwampanga in Nakasongola, Nakulabye in Kampala, Nambi Sepuuya in Kamuli, Njeru in Mukono, Metu in Moyo, Yumbe, Michu in Arua, Bugembe in Jinja, Bulekeye in Busia, Bugiri and Nyarushanje in Rukungiri.

The committee was informed that community libraries are demand driven and that expression of interest should be directed to the district authorities who later forward such interests to the ministry.

The committee further observed that there is limited capacity to meet the overwhelming demands for the facilities.

Recommendations
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should consider even distribution of library facilities countrywide 
    • Whether or not communities demand for library services, district authorities should approach the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to establish such services in their areas.

Government of Uganda-UNICEF Community Dialogue 
The committee noted that the programme received Shs 5.45 billion this financial year 2009/2010 as compared to Shs 1.87 billion in the Financial Year 2008/2009 indicating a 290 percent increment.

The increment is meant for components such as Orphans and Vulnerable Children (OVCs), protecting vulnerable groups and Social Policy Advocacy and Alliances for Children, also known as community dialogue.

Recommendations
    • The committee recommended a review of activities under the programme to be conducted and concretised to ensure tangible and sustainable benefits to the communities.

Vote 1002, Mainstreaming Gender and Rights 
The Vote function has been allocated Shs 2.97 billion this financial year 2009/2010 up from Shs 2.161 billion in financial year 2008/2009 indicating a 37 percent increase.

Promotion of Gender Equality
The committee was informed that whereas the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has laboured to conduct capacity building sessions in gender mainstreaming, it still remains a challenge. 

The committee was further informed that gender mainstreaming is a functional responsibility of Gender Focal Point persons in line ministries. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is mainly responsible for formulation and development of policy guidelines.

The Gender Focal Point persons are merely assigned the responsibility of gender mainstreaming in ministries; and do not normally occupy positions at policy or decision making levels. 

When these officers are transferred, a vacuum is left in the line ministry. A recent report of a survey released by the Office of the Prime Minister concludes that whereas government has done well in political empowerment of women, the economic programmes and projects remain gender neutral. 

Recommendations
    • More gender awareness training be organised at sector level for technical persons in government ministries, departments and agencies. This will increase their gender alertness while designing programmes and projects within the ministries and organisations.
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should liaise with the Ministry of Local Government to conduct gender trainings for lower local governments that is LC V and LC III in order to improve gender relations at community level.

The National Women’s Council
The committee was informed that funds for the activities of the Women’s Council are sent directly to the local governments and are handled by the Chief Administrative Officers. 

The work plan is developed by the Gender Officers together with the Executive of the Women Council. Besides commemoration of International Women’s Day, no tangible activities have been earmarked to uplift the social welfare and status of women.

The committee observed that Shs 1 billion has been allocated to the National Women Council for the financial year 2009/2010. Shs 0.8 billion is for wage and non-wage subvention and Shs 0.2 billion is to support Kapchorwa FGM Group.

Recommendations
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should revise their activities for this financial year 2009/2010 geared at transforming the lives of women given the increment in funding to Shs 0.8 billion.
    • The ministry should support the National Council of Women to develop an acceptable work plan for that purpose.
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should develop guidelines on how to bring an end to Female Genital Mutilation.
    • Civil society organisations that have been identified to implement this activity should submit work plans before money is released.

Vote Function 1003 - Promotion of Labour Productivity and Employment 
The Vote function has a total budget allocation of Shs 2.355 billion for the Financial Year 2009/2010 up from Shs 1.151 billion approved for the Financial Year 2008/2009. The allocation gives a percentage increase of 105 percent. 

This Financial Year 2009/2010, Shs 0.5 billion has been availed for compensation of the Ebola victims from Bundibugyo; Shs 0.1 billion for setting up the Industrial Court and Shs 0.5 billion for the externalisation of labour. 

Labour and Industrial Relations 
The committee was informed that the increment is attributed to the creation of a new Department of Employment Services, strengthening relationships (supervision and inspection function) with labour offices in the local government.

The committee was further informed that the Employment Policy is in place and has been forwarded to the line ministries, donors and workers’ representatives and workers’ organisations for advice and comment.

The committee observed that the work site and labour inspection function at district level is weak owing to Ministry of Gender’s weak supervision function. No district inspection reports for the financial year 2008/2009 have been compiled and received.

Recommendations 
    • The Ministry of Labour should endeavour to commit and strengthen its internal structures to conduct countrywide labour and site inspections.
    • There should be a countrywide massive sensitisation campaign and awareness drive on labour laws.

Industrial Court 
The committee was informed that the Registrar has been assigned to put together materials and outstanding labour disputes before the judge starts work. The court is due to start its operations this financial year 2009/2010. 

Recommendations
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development urgently follows up the constitution of the court given the huge backlog of cases.

Elimination of Child Labour
The committee observed that child labour is rampant at border areas, with many children involved in smuggling, prostitution and subsistence abuse. 

Two NGOs, namely, Action for Child and the African Network for Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPCAN) have partnered with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to fight child abuse by putting in place toll-free numbers. The numbers are: 0800 111333 and 0800 111 222 to be used by children in case they are abused. 

The committee also noted the misconception about child labour, rights and work, which has led to many parents in the country fear to discipline their children so that they are not accused of child abuse.  

Recommendations 
    • Child rights should be harmonized with responsibilities. 
    • The Ministry of Labour and Social Development should hold sensitisation drives, especially in schools about the Children’s Act. 
    • The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development liaises with the above mentioned NGOs to come up with a three-digit toll-free number which can be easily memorised by the children.

Vote Function 1004 - Social Protection for Vulnerable Groups
The Vote function aims at protecting the vulnerable and deprivation and livelihood risks. It complements service delivery in all sectors because social protection is considered a vital intervention for strengthening the social capital of the poor and the vulnerable and enhancing their social inclusion in the development process. 

Disability and the Elderly
The committee was informed that older persons have not benefited from any income-generating activities to support their incomes.

The committee further noted that support to elderly homes is at community and not institutional level. 

Recommendations
    • The committee recommends that the government urgently plans for the social welfare of older persons, recognising and appreciating their contributions to society and the country at large. 
    • The Ministry should provide basic requirements to organised elderly groups and homes like Nalukolongo Home of the Elderly and reduce on “printing of policies and standards” which seem to appear every year. 

Youth and Children Affairs
The committee was informed that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in collaboration with other government departments, ministries and agencies, NGOs and civil society organizations, has developed an action plan to prevent child sacrifice that has plagued the country.

Recent reports have also indicated that youths and grown-ups are targets of human sacrifice. 

The committee notes with concern that the independent commission of enquiry that Parliament recommended to look into the vice has up to date not started work. 

Recommendations
    • Government should endeavour to investigate and bring the culprits perpetuating this evil, to book.
    • The local councils need massive sensitization so that everyone is on the look-out for suspicious behaviour.

Street Children
The committee notes that the problem of street children has continued to persist despite several interventions. Urban centres particularly Kampala, Jinja, Iganga and Busia are the worst hit with children, adult females, youths and redundant young males mainly from Karamoja sub-region. Fears are expressed that soon, all policy interventions will have no meaningful impact. 

The committee observes that the government treats the matter with laxity. Institutional establishments are not fully supported to address the problem of street children. Cases of uncertainty in mandates, that is management of street children, have been noted, particularly between the Central Government, Ministry of Gender, Labour and social Development and the district local governments. 

The committee observed that there is a persistent problem of street children, particularly in urban centres like Kampala, Jinja, Iganga and Busia. 

Recommendations
    • The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should embark on implementing the strategy to deal with the growing problem of street children.
    • The government should renovate the youth rehabilitation centres at Kampiringisa and Koblin in Moroto. In particular, Koblin should be prioritised as a reception centre for children before they are relocated for eventual settlement. 
    • The Minister of Agriculture should provide planting materials; the Ministry of education should provide schools; the Ministry of Health should provide health centres; Housing should provide low-cost housing and the Office of the Prime Minister, Minister for Karamoja Affairs, should all be involved in the withdrawal and re-settlement of children and their parents.
    • Kampiringisa Youth Rehabilitation Centre should not be turned into a reception centre but rather remains a centre for juvenile offenders to help in avoiding mixing innocents with convicts. 
    • A reception centre should be established in the central region to replace the one in Naguru that has now been turned into a home.
    • A youth rehabilitation centre should be established in Busia Town Council to help address the unique problem of street children in Busia. 

Youth Councils

In the Financial Year 2009/10, an increment of Shs 1 billion has been realized as a result of an increase in allocation from Shs 0.997 billion last Financial Year 2008/09 to Shs 1.82 billion this Financial Year 2009/10. 

Although there is a significant increase as noted above, the committee observed that Shs 1 billion has been allocated for the National Youth Council. 

The ministry, therefore, has a shortfall of Shs 1 billion in the wage ceiling to implement the new staffing structure for youth councils at the ministry and local government.

Recommendation
    • The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development issues guidelines for the usage of these funds, and strongly recommends that these funds be used for income-generating activities of youth groups in all the districts of Uganda.

Curriculum for Youth Training Institutions
The committee noted that although there are a number of youth training centres, the Ministry of Gender does not have a mandate for developing a curriculum for these centres. The Ministry of Gender used to conduct training sessions and pass them on to trade for trade testing. The mandate now lies with the Ministry of Education.

Recommendation
    • The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Education and Sports should partner to help the youths better their lives in preparation for the future. The system should be developed to enable them progress to higher levels in their chosen fields. 

Programme for Enhancing Adolescent Reproductive Lives (PEARL)
The committee was informed that the programme benefits only five districts, namely Gulu, Kibaale, Arua, Wakiso and Kapchorwa, and operates in three sub-counties of each district. 

The committee was further informed that PEARL works closely with the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Gender only creates demand for PEARL’s services and provides linkages to health centres. The committee noted that the choice of beneficially districts is a preserve of the donor. 

Our recommendation was that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should lobby for increased support to other districts. 

Vote function 149, policy planning and support services: the committee observed that the vote function was allocated Shs 8.99 billion for the Financial Year 2009/10 up from Shs 8.44 billion. This current allocation translates into a 6.5 percent increase. 

Domestic Arrears
Domestic arrears for the Financial Year 2009/10 stand at Shs 9 billion up from 4.2 billion from the Financial Year 2008/09. This is attributed to unavoidable expenditures, accumulated arrears dating as far back as 2000/01, rent arrears, payment of utility services and accruing taxes, workman’s compensation, outstanding bills incurred during the Afro-Arab Conference, feeding in youth and children institutions, accumulated contributions to international organisations, mandatory NSSF contributions, among others. Only Shs 1.5 billion is available this financial year for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to partly clear the domestic arrears.

Recommendation

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should abide by the Commitment Control System. It should prioritise and commit resources to planned activities and limit over expenditure like in the case of the Afro-Arab Conference. The committee also recommends that government comes up with a realistic plan for the settlement of arrears for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Ministry Establishment Structures
The committee observed that several positions within the ministry are not filled thus leading to low performance in the sector. The committee was also informed that the sector developed a comprehensive recruitment plan and submitted it to the Ministry of Public Service for approval and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development informed the committee that the recruitment plan shall be executed in a phased manner.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should urgently consider the recruitment of staff in order to enable Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to effectively execute its mandate.

Equal Opportunities Commission
The committee observed that the Equal Opportunities Commission does not have its own Vote in the budget this Financial Year 2009/10. The committee was also informed that the commissioners have also been appointed awaiting parliamentary approval and that funding of Shs 1.5 billion has been availed.

The committee recommends that the commissioners should be approved as soon as possible to enable the commission start its operations this financial year. The committee further recommends that the commission be given a Vote in the Financial Year 2010/11 to effectively manage its mandate. 

The committee also recommends that the Executive should quickly find a replacement for the chairperson so that the appointment is completed and the commission starts work.

Street Children

The committee observed that under Vote function 149, policy planning and support services, street children have been provided with a total of Shs 0.938 billion. The committee recommends that the programme of handling street children be consolidated under Vote function 1004 which is social protection for venerable groups. 

Vote function 501-850, Local Governments - which is Vote function 1081: the committee noted an increment of Shs 0.48416 billion resulting from increase in allocation from Shs 4.68430 billion during the Financial Year 2008/09 to Shs 5.16846 billion this financial year.

Funds for Government Programmes

The committee was informed that funds for community development workers in the Ministry of Agriculture have been returned to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and social development sector code No. 321434 created. The committee was further informed that funds for government programmes such as NAADS, water and sanitation health are sent directly to the sector ministries while the task of mobilising/preparing venerable groups to access and utilise these funds is left to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

The committee recommends that inter-sectoral allocations earmarked for social mobilisation, particularly from water and sanitation, health, roads and works and agriculture be channelled from the ministries to the local governments specifically for the community development functions of mobilising the communities for their specific programmes. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should be in liaison with the Ministry of Local Government to forge a way forward on how best to utilise the grants for local governments for the benefit of the marginalised. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development amplifies the functional roles of community development workers which the committee considers critical for the well being of the communities. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that this House approves the following expenditures: 
    • Recurrent, which is wage and non-wage, Shs 14,451,000,000;
    • Development, which is Government of Uganda and donor support, Shs 12,707,000,000; 
    • Domestic arrears, Shs 1,520,000,000;
    • Taxes, Shs 2,250,000,000. 

This adds up to a total of Shs 31,019,000,000 as the total budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Financial Year 2009/10. I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair, and the committee. Before we get the response from the Opposition, which will be brief because you have no prepared text, I would ask hon. Kajura to respond to the issue raised concerning salaries. 

5.11
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I   think there has been some understanding that in order to get appropriate answers for some of these technical or factual matters, those supposed to provide them should be alerted so that they can do justice.
 
Nevertheless, hon. Shadow Minister of Finance, I do appreciate your concern that some civil servants have not yet received their salaries and this is because of a recent decision that everybody who is paid from the Consolidated Fund should have their money transferred and their salary paid through the Bank of Uganda using the Electronic Fund Transfer system.
 
There was need to organise and transfer to the Bank of Uganda the data for everybody paid from the Consolidated Fund and I can say that within the next 48 hours, the transfers would have been completed. (Applause)

MS TUBWITA: I am sorry but we have not heard what the honourable minister has said.
 
MR KAJURA: Thank you. What I said, perhaps not so distinctly for some of us, is that in the course of the end of the financial year and the beginning of the new one, there was a need to clean up the payroll. In addition to that, a decision had been taken that all payment of salaries from the Consolidated Fund should be transferred to the Bank of Uganda and paid from there and so, there was need to prepare for this exercise and move all the payments on the payroll to the Bank of Uganda. This has been done and we expect that within the next 48 hours the exercise of remitting funds electronically would have been completed. 

5.16
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, I have just received an appointment from the acting Leader of the Opposition to be the acting Shadow Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development. Since I got the appointment a few minutes ago, I do not have a written response although I have some issues to raise, which I think should stimulate debate and guide us as we appropriate for this ministry.

When you look at the response to the report of the committee, there is a glaring point that is missing and you know the National Social Security Fund is a statutory body under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

When we were investigating the Shs 11 billion transaction, hon. Syda Bbumba, then the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, appeared before that committee that I chaired and one of the clear issues she raised, which we captured in the report, was that the social security sector needed a reform which should be spearheaded by her ministry. In the report however, there is nothing mentioned and yet we all know that NSSF is the biggest statutory body with the largest amount of money than any other statutory body in Uganda. 

How can we now run the social security sector without direct supervision by this ministry? Who is responsible for the regulation of NSSF? 

If the responsible ministry is not commenting anything about it, what happens to the billions of shillings that the poor Ugandans have saved and yet we have a section of Ugandans who have lost the sense of shame and advanced themselves billions of shillings?

I really think the committee should reconsider this position and in our view, as the Opposition, the government should come out strongly to reconsider the issue of social security reform. We do not want domination by the NSSF. We think that other actors should come into play so that the social security sector can benefit from the little money that they contribute to this fund. 

Two, Madam Speaker, the issue of funding for this ministry shows us the amount of importance that government attaches to it. When you look at page 10 of the report, the committee observes that government gives Shs 300,000 per sub-county to run the activities of gender by a community development officer in a given financial year. That means that for every month, every sub-county should receive only Shs 25,000, which is about Shs 800 per day for that office to operate. But how can anybody operate in such a situation? This is very abnormal and it looks like government is not bothered about what this ministry does; that it does not deserve the funding.

The other issue about funding is misallocation of resources. If you look at the complaint on page 15 – (Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Thank you, hon. Malinga, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I just want to inform my colleague that government attaches a lot of importance to that ministry. It is the ministry with the largest number of ministers who are very powerful and from Eastern Uganda. (Laughter)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I think you can hear for yourself that the measure for measuring the importance of a ministry in this country is determined by the number of ministers attached to it, according to hon. Wopuwa’s theory.

That should not be happening because this ministry handles a large chunk of the population of this country; it deserves more funding than it gets today. The funding to its activities should be meaningful. You cannot just give somebody Shs 300,000 to run activities in a sub county for a whole financial year. What do you expect that person to use the money for?

This ministry is supposed to take care of the youth and young people of Uganda. That is why we have a full Minister of State for Youth and Children. My sense is that the big problem that we have is the misallocation of resources to manage the affairs of the country. Yesterday we were here grappling on issues of where to put money with government fronting the idea of recruiting the RDCs to be in charge of children and youth yet we have a full minister. What does this minister now do when the RDCs take charge of children affairs? Maybe, we should change the title to “Minister of RDCs, youth and children”. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, let me make a short comment on traditional leaders. The report talks about Emorimor, who is the supreme leader of the people of Teso; we actually call him Papa Iteso. The observation of the committee is that Emorimor could not fulfill the conditions to access the funds. But what were these conditions? I think this is behaving like a stepmother who just smears some food on the lips of the child and then lies that the child has eaten when actually that child has not eaten anything. How can you say a full institution failed to fulfill conditions when you did not involve other stakeholders? We really think this is the extent to which government considers the people of Teso. 

I would like to appeal to government to remember that Emorimor needs this house and that the institution needs to be established and strengthened like the others. Remember we are a big group of people. If you do not hold these people with the regard that they deserve, they will respond appropriately at a time when you will need them.

When hon. Syda Bbumba was still the Minister of Gender, told us that the human resource of the national social security sector is managed by the Ministry of Finance; that all the funds are managed by a desk officer at the Ministry of Finance. I would like to ask the two ministries to harmonise their positions, liberalise the social sector to allow in many actors. This will allow competition to benefit Ugandans. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.25
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for producing a good report, although I have a few concerns. 

Whenever we go to our constituencies, women, youth and people with disabilities complain but I got excited when they said there had been an increase in the funding to their councils. But when you get to page 17, the committee report says that besides commemoration of the International Women’s Day, no tangible activities have been earmarked to uplift the social welfare and status of women yet we constitute the biggest percentage of the population of this country. Even when it comes to voting, it is the women who put in the most effort!

I would like to know, from the ministry, when are they going to begin understanding that women matter a lot to this country? I am asking this because even when the International Women’s Day functions are celebrated in a given district, women are made to contribute to it because the money that is usually released is not enough. 

I know that if this money is increased it can do a lot in transforming the lives of women. For example, they will be able to sensitise themselves about maternal health issues. They can also be able to sensitise themselves about cervical cancer. And that can only be possible if more funding is given to women councils. So, I would like to beg the Ministry of Gender to think about increasing funding to those councils.  

Secondly, let me say something about street children. The committee observes that most children on the streets in Kampala come from Karamoja sub-region and it is true. And one observation I have made myself is that these children are between the ages of three to 12 and they can hardly make any decision to bring themselves here in Kampala – unless they are born here. I want to add a recommendation that government should investigate further into not only MPs but maybe people beyond even Karamoja; it could be beyond Karamoja people. It should investigate further to find the people bringing these children onto the streets. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Magoola then hon. Nsubuga then hon. Kasozi.

5.28
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this paper. It is a good paper; it has given us a lot of information.

I would like to start with the street children. Something is wrong and is still going on. We seem to have failed because these children are on the streets everywhere; go to any town you will find these children eating from the garbage bins. You get sick when you see young human beings eating all those dirty things. Now who brings them onto the streets? Who can take them away from the streets? I think it is government. Government needs to take a decision to get these children off the streets. I know whatever we have tried has failed because we do it as if we are joking and two days after, these children are on the streets again.

The other point concerns the PWDs and the elderly. These groups have had a raw deal. What is there for them? I have not seen anything. Go to the elderly, I have seen many as I go around and they are asking: what is there for them? I do not know it. Government should come out to tell us that at each sub-county, the elderly and the disabled have so much given to them for their activities. I am sure we can create poultry activities for them because that is what they can do when they are not moving so far.

We can even create cottage industries. This is one of the many times I have advised government that they should create cottage industries for people who cannot walk long distances or for those who cannot walk at all but I have not seen anything taking place.

The women councils: I have failed to know whether the billions you send really reach the women. Go to the sub-counties, those people have not received even Shs 1,000 throughout the year. Where does the money go? Whether little money or much money; let the women receive it. 

My observation is that whoever is handling the money, be it the executive of the women’s council or the CDO, I think that money remains at the district. It is utilised for personal benefits but not for the women who are at the grassroots. 

I know we observe the International Women’s Day and do you know who goes to attend that day? It could be a coaster full of women. How many women go into a coaster? About 30! Is that the multitude of women in any district that should go and attend this function? The only one in the year where women should go and see what happens; activities or speeches; I really wonder!

I want to recommend that the money which goes for women’s councils be scrapped if it cannot be increased and be put to proper use because some districts do not utilise it for the people. I would like to recommend that the ministry gets all the money that it can get as long as it puts it to proper use wherever it is.

Child sacrifice: I want to advise that there should be no mercy to people who practice this. Let us put them to gallows because that is what they deserve if they are able to kill others. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga to be followed by hon. Kasozi then Dr Yekko then hon. Lyomoki. You are few enough; I have seen all of you.

5.33
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a very good report. I want to start with the financial performance for the ministry for last financial year. Under Vote 1003, that is, labour, productivity and employment, it is highlighted that the sector performed least that is 68 percent due to low absorption capacity of the non-wage component.

When you go to the challenges on page 9, you realise that the ministry has a ceiling on the wage. It is good the minister has come with the new staffing structure and I want to appeal to the Ministry of Finance to increase the wage ceiling because if it does not this Parliament will continue condemning the ministry for poor performance and low absorption capacity so we should actually decide where to put the blame. I want to urge the Minister of Finance to really make this ministry perform by increasing their wage ceiling.

I want to go to national libraries of Uganda. It is absurd that as we talk today, the ministry has the land title but the land has encumbrances and when you talk about land of recent, you do not need to note who is a squatter even if it is KCC, even if it is anybody. I want to urge the ministry that if the land belongs to the ministry, this business of handling people with gloves should stop. Parliament is fed up of lamenting. You should evict these tenants and use the houses rather than keep telling us that you are discussing. You cannot discuss with an illegal squatter!

As if that were not enough, when you go to the National Cultural Centre; National Theatre opposite Parliament and Nommo Gallery, we have been advised that they don’t have the title. What if somebody has the title and the following day they will be paid billions to give government the title? This is just an appeal. The ministry has brilliant ministers and the Minister of Lands should work hand in hand with them such that they can acquire a title because Uganda has lost a lot of money. You very well know the Kampala markets; what if these Kampala people also sell the National Theatre? Let us save government money by acquiring this title because the moment we do not acquire it, somebody else will do it on our behalf and we shall have to cough up some money.

About public community libraries on page 17, the minister has just told us that the committee was informed that community libraries are demand-driven. In an economy like Uganda where we run a cash budget, we cannot say that libraries will be allocated on demand. What if all districts make a demand? I would have loved that the ministry comes up with a programme such that these libraries are supply-driven. Even if it is one per district, we will know that such an MP from Buvuma will be assured that in 2013 there will be a library in Buvuma -(Member timed out_)

5.39  
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): I thank you, Madam Speaker. To me the Ministry of Gender is one of the most important ministries that we have in Uganda because it deals directly with the people of Uganda in their different categories: the children, the women, the youth, the workers and a cross-section of people - and that is why I think in his wisdom, the appointing authority decided to put five ministers in that ministry. I feel dismayed when we gather here to approve a budget of Shs 31 billion for such an important ministry that deals directly with Ugandans. 

When you look at the functions there, the ministry does work like community mobilisation and empowerment. Under community mobilisation, for instance, you have the community development officers – the people who go and help to empower our people. In this budget that we are going to approve, only Shs 300,000 has been given to the CDOs for their activities per sub-county for the entire year, and I am dismayed. 

When you look at social protection for vulnerable children, we have been talking about street kids, we have been talking about the elderly, the disabled and all these kinds of people but if you look at the money given there, you will feel dismayed. I do not know what is happening. I really request government that just as they think and have demonstrated that this is an important ministry by giving them so many ministers, let this be transmitted into the budget allocation given to this ministry. 

Madam Speaker, turning to the aspect of functional adult literacy, I was very happy when the report noted that we have over 1.2 million participants in Uganda and of these, 900,000 have passed their proficiency tests. When you look at the dropout rate, it is less than that of UPE. This means that our people have embraced this programme but when you read the report further, the committee notes that the instructors for these people who have embraced this programme are not paid. When I move around in my village, most of the FAL classes have closed because the instructors do not go to teach yet the demand is there. 

These old people who did not have an opportunity of going through these normal channels of education want to be literate but the instructors are not there because they are not paid and the report reflects it. Shs 4.8 billion is non-existent and I am dismayed that the committee just recommends that the ministry should ensure that such an amount is included in the next financial year. What is going to happen in this financial year? I would rather the committee had reported because this activity is so important. Let us find money immediately for the instructors, otherwise we are shooting ourselves in the foot.

Madam Speaker, I am very happy to note that the youth councils have finally got some money –(Member timed out_)

5.44 
MR JOHN ARAPKISSA (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. I also want to thank the committee and the chairperson for a good report. I would like to refer Members to pages 17 and 18 of the report under the national women council. You will find that Shs 200 million has been allocated to fight female genital mutilation. While in particular I want to thank government and you, Madam Speaker, for the part you played to have this money included in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development’s budget. This is actually the first time in the history of Uganda that the Ministry of Gender is budgeting for Female Genital Mutilation. This activity has always been sponsored by external donors and countries like Norway and through UNFPA -(Interjections)- well, for the Members, Female Genital Mutilation or female circumcision is a harmful traditional practice which involves cutting or mutilating the external genital parts of the woman for non-therapeutic reasons. In other words, she is cut not for purposes of treatment, but for purposes of traditional practice.

Although in the ministerial policy statement, on page 18, Kapchorwa District is mentioned, I want to tell you that it is also practised in Nakapiripirit District. This practice is continuing to spread to many districts and I think now they are over six or seven districts which are practising female circumcision -(Interjections)- yes, in Uganda. You have Kapchorwa, Nakapiripirit, Bugiri, I think Masindi and even internationally, migrant populations practice female circumcision. They continue with the practice where they migrate to. When the Somalis reach Canada, they continue with the practice; when they reach Britain they continue with the female circumcision. So, if the Sabiny and the Pokot migrate to Acholi, they will continue practising female circumcision in Kitgum and Arua. The Nubians also do it now. So, it is a practice which is on the increase.

I would also like to thank His Excellency the President for launching the Anti-female Genital Mutilation Programme in Amudat on 01 July this year. In Kapchorwa, they have an NGO called REACH which stands for Reproductive Educative and Community Health. For the last 13 years, it has been carrying out programmes to fight this harmful practice and so, now with the support the ministry is giving, I am sure they will do it much better and in a more efficient way.

I would like to inform you that Kapchorwa District is very supportive, in that in March this year, they passed a by-law which was assented to by the Attorney-General. The whole district plus the Sebei Elders’ Association are all very supportive of the fight against Female Genital Mutilation. 

I am also aware like you are that there is a Bill, which is soon coming to the House. I will ask you for your full support. 

And then lastly, now we are starting with Shs 200 million but maybe even next year we will need more. Please give us more. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.48
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers' Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work well done, and also the ministry for the work they are doing for the people of Uganda. 

This is a 27 page report. I want to thank Parliament for having created this committee because initially, this ministry was under Social Services and the last time it was under that committee, we had a one-page report about the entire ministry. So, the hope for the workers and the people under this ministry, the women, was that with this affirmative action from Parliament, other things like funding would improve. It is a disappointment as my colleague has said that this funding has not improved. We call upon those concerned that we should have a 27 percent increment just like Parliament is looking at this ministry. 

Secondly, on the methodology on page 3, four years ago we established a tripartite arrangement where the organisations and the stakeholders in this ministry, that is, the Federation of Uganda Employers and the workers’ organisations, are called upon to give their views, as a very important point in the budget and policy formulation. But I see a glaring omission in the involvement of these stakeholders to give their views. 

On page 18, the committee talks about compensation of Ebola victims. This is something that happened over two years ago from the workers’ communities and the communities which were affected from Bundibugyo. We have been following up this money and it has taken two years for compensation to be done. 

I think this is a very terrible disappointment, because the workers’ compensation provides that employers, including government, should insure their workers to the extent that when any claim comes under the Worker’s Compensation Act, it should be immediately handled. But government is the first employer to violate the law by not insuring workers. 

We have raised this matter with the ministry and said that it is a wrong approach because instead of waiting for allocation in the budget - when an occurrence happens and a claim is made, then you take a whole year to budget. There are only two possibilities; to follow the law by insuring all workers, so that when there is such a claim, they just get it from the insurance companies; or if you think that as government you want to save the money so that you do not insure, then provide the money in the budget so that whenever there is such a claim or something happens, you pay, instead of waiting for a whole process that takes two years. So, I think this year we cannot run away from this. I only see compensation of people who died two years ago without any allocation for anything that is going to take place during this financial year. 

When you look at the issues raised under Labour and Industrial Relations, we are in the East African Community and we are going to the stage of the common market. One of the issues that has been raised was the issue of productivity and trying to put in place strategies to make our workforce productive, and to make our people and the workers be able to survive in the common market. But I do not see any strategies to assist the workers to survive.

The other point is about the glaring omission, as my colleague said, of social security. How can the ministry succumb to illegalities? According to the NSSF Act, it is the Ministry of Labour to supervise NSSF, but they have succumbed to illegalities and the committee too has succumbed, and they are not mentioning anything. How can we condone illegalities by having the Fund being managed by the Ministry of Finance? And even the Ministry of Finance –(Member timed out_)

5.54
MS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to say something. I would also like to thank the committee for this good report. 

My comment is about women and youth councils, but more especially the youth councils. I am sure that youth have a lot of potential, but they are not funded, and yet their term of leadership has a time limit of between 18 and 30 years. When you reach 30 years, you cease being a youth. So, what have you done during that period when you were still a youth? 

The minister, who is now in charge of Finance, has ever served in the Ministry of Labour. So, she should know the difficulties involved in financing that Ministry. Therefore, I hope that she will be able to lobby the staff in Finance to see that this Ministry is properly financed. 

This makes me even think that maybe the number of ministers should be reduced to three so that some of the funds are put to activities rather than to ministers. They cannot even supervise because they do not have enough funds to supervise -(Interjections)- the region is also another issue but let me leave that. 

The other issue I want to talk about is child labour. We also need to make Ugandans appreciate and know what child labour is because the problem lies in how you differentiate between child work and child labour. Most people take child labour to be child work. What work should a child do as you train him or her? You find these children in the rice gardens and people think that is child work; that is not child work. So, this ministry needs money and all of us need to sensitise the people on what child work and child labour is.

The other issue that I want to talk about is FGM. I am sure many of you have seen me on NTV saying, “Lwaki onkalakata?” (Laughter) I was addressing the Sabiny in Bugiri District. Government should not give money to only Kapchorwa. I think we need more money to see that wherever FGM is being practiced, it is fought. And I am asking every Member here that when the Bill comes, we should support it. Members should not only make this law, but they should also ensure that the law is enforced. 

We should find something else for the surgeons to do so that they do not see FGM as their only source of income. That way they do not encourage others to go through such pain. 

I was asking those men that, now that you have migrated here, have you married women from here. They said, yes. I then asked them, “Which women do you prefer?” They said, “Definitely, these ones are very good.” (Laughter) I then said that if they are good and you have not scooped them, then why should you scoop me? (Laughter) I behaved as if I was one of them whom they wanted to scoop and I asked them, “Why do you want to scoop me yet you enjoy the one who is not scooped?” That is why you saw me on TV speaking in the area vernacular; good enough I knew the language. So, I said, “Lwaki onkalakata ng’oyenda ole atali mukalakate?” So when this Bill comes, please let us support it and see how we shall enforce it.

The other thing –(Member timed out_)

5.59
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you for this opportunity. I also thank the committee for the report. I want to seek clarification from the ministry on page 7 where they say that Local Government performed the following activities during the last financial year. They say that there were community-based services provided to the communities. I have never heard of any community-based service provided to my people - at least in my constituency and district. 

The second issue is also on page 7, where they say that they purchased piglets, goats and birds for people with disabilities. That too, I wonder because as you are aware, we have MPs representing people with disabilities, women and youth, and members of parliament who represent constituencies are always the ones who are asked for these services and yet these groups have representatives here in Parliament. 

There is an issue that is always left out especially when we talk about youth. In bringing up a young man or woman, someone needs to be built in body and mind. We need recreational grounds for these young people, but in this report, I have not seen anywhere where they have provided for recreation and sports facilities.

As representatives of constituencies, we always receive requests from the youth asking for footballs, netballs and other kinds of things, yet these facilities should be provided by government. When you go outside, you find areas gazetted for recreation and sports. All the facilities are provided for by government. In order to bring up the youth happily, we need recreation centres and sports facilities.

Another issue is that of the elderly. We have a problem in the villages. The elderly have lost their young ones who have in turn left orphans, and it is the elderly to look after these children. These people have no where to run and have no assistance from anywhere. 

I appeal to government to consider providing some services to these people because I think this is why corruption is rampant in Uganda, especially in the Civil Service. This is because, the moment a civil servant is worried that in future he or she might face problems, they decide to steal money and prepare for their old age.

In developed countries, we know that there are homes and although we are not able to have those homes, at least we should provide for these old people in the villages.

Last is the issue of street children. It is a shame to the nation to find children on the street, especially over the weekends. You find so many children wearing rags, without anything to eat -(Member timed out_)

6.05
MR GEORGE WILLIAM WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the good and exhaustive report. I just want to make a few observations on a few items. One, in many of the reports that we have discussed, there has been a problem of lack of recruitment in ministries. Almost every ministry is complaining that the structures have not been filled. Now that we have the Minister in charge of Public Service here, these service commissions should be compelled to do their work. We are told that the Education Service Commission has never conducted appointments of teachers since 2001. We are allowing these service organisations –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, we always want to correct records. In 2001/2002, we interfaced with the Ministry of Education and Sports until we compelled them to take on teachers. The first batch was 1,200, and for about four or five financial years, they have been taking on teachers but not in big numbers. Therefore, it is very wrong for him to say that since 2001, secondary school teachers have not been taken on.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, the information he has given has not helped me. I said since 2001, the Education Service Commission has not confirmed secondary school teachers. As Committee on National Economy, we went to Moroto S.S., Kangole S.S. and Nadunge S.S. and that was the complaint we found on the ground.

Second is the policy of housing traditional leaders. I think Government needs to come out clearly on this. How is it being handled? Is it not goodwill depending on the political situation on the ground? Are these houses being built for traditional leaders’ institutions or individuals? Is it going to be like Bulange or for the Kyabazinga? This is because in Teso, the elders are not hereditary. So, whoever is here today may not be the next Emorimor tomorrow. Let us have a policy.

On the issue of youth and women councils, we made a law when we were in Local Government to have LC elections. The elections could not be conducted because the Ministry of Gender did not bring the appropriate Bill so that the new law harmonises with the multiparty dispensation. Up to now, it has not been done. So, the youth and women councils are occupying offices illegally and the report does not say anything about this.

On gender focal persons in the ministries, we are being told that they are assigned responsibilities. Who decided who to assign? Is this process competitive or transparent? Why don’t we create a position where these people are formally recruited?

Lastly, I think we need to abandon the ad hoc way of doing things. We are being told that community libraries are demand-driven. I saw Kwapa and Bugiri. Why don’t we come out with a policy? In Mbale Municipality, we have books housed in a store and this was one of the oldest libraries in the country, but small places like Kwapa are getting libraries. Why not make it transparent? (Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the last three years, establishment of public and community libraries has been surfacing in these budgets. I wonder which libraries have been established since. It is like a design, that every year we are being promised that these libraries are being established. Iganga has been appearing for the last three years. There has been excitement all over the place, but there is nothing materialising. We feel as if the will is not there. I thank you.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Ministry of Gender. They have very good ministers but the problem I see is that many of the ministers, come from one region and, therefore, their bargaining position with the Ministry of Finance is constrained. I even saw the shadow minister is from the East, the chairperson of the committee is from the East, hon. Otaala is from the East - I think their capacity to bargain for more funding is limited. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.09
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think what the honourable member has just said is not accurate. Ministers from anywhere in this country have the same powers, including those from Eastern Uganda, and I want to put that on record.

As my colleagues have said, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has a very wide mandate, and indeed, all of us agree that resources should match this mandate for it to be able to perform adequately. 

But I am also happy that we in Parliament, a few years back, we were approving budgets of around Shs 10 billion. But today, we are approving Shs 31 billion. I thank government for this increment. Although it is still inadequate, I think there has been some progress. 

I also want to appreciate that for the first time, about Shs 200 million has been allocated towards activities of Female Genital Mutilation, and I particularly thank the Deputy Speaker for her personal effort. This money was because of her personal effort, not even the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. So, we thank you for your efforts towards elimination of FGM. 

I want to assure the Members that since I moved the Motion to introduce the Bill, we have since then processed it. I have just received a copy from the printers for proof reading and immediately we are through with the Budget process, I will be proceeding with the first reading of the Bill. So, I appeal for your support for the Prohibition of FGM Bill, 2009.

I also want to agree with hon. Wopuwa on the issues of cultural institutions. True, most communities cherish cultural institutions and leaders, and indeed Article 246 of the Constitution provides for the institutions of traditional or cultural leaders. But I think the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should come up with a law and policy to clearly define those institutions and the kind of support that the institutions should get from Government. It should be clear what kind of communities can claim to be traditional, because I see that because of the grants coming from Government, many communities are now coming up to claim cultural institutionalism. I hope the Bakiga do not come up to create a kingdom because we did not have kingdoms in the past. 

So, the ministry should come up with a policy and probably a law to guide these institutions, and clearly indicate the kind of support that Government should extend to them. Otherwise, the way it is being done now is ad hoc, and may cause confusion in the country. 

I would also like to interrogate the labour policy in this country, particularly with regard to the foreigners. I am have no hatred for foreigners, but we have received complaints that some firms from outside, particularly those of Asian origin, come and get employees with no qualifications to do petty work, which could be done by Ugandans. 

But I have also received complaints particularly by girls who are employed by Indian firms, that they are sexually abused and their labour rights are abused. So, I do not know what the Labour Ministry has done to help the Ugandans working in these firms. I have taken some of these complaints to the ministry but we would want a very clear policy. Why should we get investors to come to sweep in our buildings and be security guards? These jobs should be done by Ugandans so that we leave the foreigners to come in with expertise, and not to do the petty jobs. We want the labour policy in this country to be very clear, to protect Ugandans and provide employment.

On page 25 and 26, the committee urges Parliament to approve the commissioners for the Equal Opportunities commission. We did pass this law, the Equal Opportunities Act, about three years ago. So, I am not sure these names have been submitted to Parliament because our Committee on Appointments has been very active of late. So, I want assurance from the committee that indeed the commissioners have been appointed, and names have been sent to Parliament. We want this commission put in place and made functional so that it can do the work we want it to do. (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the issue of the Appointments Committee, I want to confirm that we received a number of names - we will now have to find a chairperson because she was recommended for another office - but because we are busy with the committee work, we were not able to sit. So let us finish the budget, and I will call a meeting of the Appointments Committee to deal with that matter.

6.15
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a situation where the cost of public expenditure outweighs the cost of service delivery, I think this means something is wanting on the aspect of institutional reform in this ministry. The recurrent expenditure is Shs 14.5 million and the development expenditure is Shs 12.7 million. So, in such a situation, we are running a delegated responsibility by the citizens of this country. If they know that the cost of paying us far outweighs the services they will get, then if it is a business, you would rather close it because it does not make sense. 

So the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has got to re-evaluate the strategy of making the vulnerable empowered. Otherwise, as it is now, there is strong justification that the vulnerable people will remain vulnerable as long as the budget for this ministry is mentioned by this Parliament as it is. 

I am saying so because most of what is characterised under the development expenditure is full of sensation and awareness. Not even specific targeted training. 

The committee also noted that the sector is duplicating activities of other ministries like Health, Education and Agriculture. So, essentially, we should not have programme specialists in this ministry, but we should have policy specialists who would focus on the issue of mainstreaming, to see how many youth will benefit from the agricultural budget. It should be a policy issue, so that we can consider, for instance, if there are six model farmers under NAADS, how many of them are youth. If you evaluate this choice of model farmers, you will find that none is a youth. 

So if we do not mainstream it from a policy perspective, you would have given a budget that the youth and the women are supposed to benefit from, but they will not because we have not made it a policy issue. So what is this ministry doing if they continue with this kind of focus?

Just like in Apac one time, the district was running an annual budget of Shs 250 million with 300 staff, while Action Aid was running a budget of Shs 300 million with eight staff. After all, Government has also adopted a strategy of offering services through contractual obligations. 

What is the challenge for us as a country, considering these experiences? It is not a question of re-inventing the wheel. The wheel is already invented for you. You just have to tie and then you begin moving.

I think you are sitting on lives of very important Ugandans. Fifty percent of the population is 14 years and below, as indicated, while 75 percent of the population is 25 years and below, and these are the people you are to invest in. 

We are talking about enhancing the productivity of citizens, and yet the human resource in this ministry that we are relying on is non-functional. So, how can they enhance the productivity of citizens of Uganda? That is why most enterprises in Uganda are now employing Kenyans instead of Ugandans. These people we are relying on in this ministry are the ones to change this unacceptable culture of Ugandans, yet again unfortunately, it is a non-functional ministry. 

That is why I love Idi Amin. If you had explained this thing properly to Idi Amin, he would have closed this ministry the following day, until it is evaluated and appropriate measures developed. We now need a radical approach in order to change the situations that are letting down especially the youth, the women and the people with disability. I think this should be the focus of this ministry. 

The government had made a commitment in the early 80s, of constructing Apac Youth Centre. There is evidence that Government contributed Shs 200 million to that project, but I do not see it coming anymore. Where is the challenge? There are also youth there and they need services. Government has already made substantial investment.

Recently, some people went to survey that land. I ordered the youth to let them multiply themselves by zero in the area -(Laughter)- because that land is still for the youth project. Why is government silent about this? I would request the minister to really do something.

In terms of the draft employment policy, I think there is no focus on the export labour, like Ugandans going to -(Member timed out_)

6.22
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I salute all of you. We have noted with concern the lack of concern by the committee that made this report, for the inclusion of the youth councils in the election that brought us here. As mentioned by hon. Obua earlier, the youth councils have never held their elections and they are asking questions as to when these elections will be held.

I am, therefore, asking the minister this question. I am translating a question which I was asked to bring here on the International Youth Day celebrations for Moyo District hosted in my constituency in Gimara sub-county. The youth asked, “When will the elections to the youth councils be held?” 

Secondly, I noticed with concern, the lack of orientation of the youth into the new multiparty dispensation. The enabling law that would have enabled the youth to hold elections under the multiparty dispensation is not there. And because of that, we have run into a very serious problem, in that, if somebody from the Opposition comes up with activities to promote the welfare of the youth, to augment, replace or substitute what the government has not done, that person is fought.

I will give you an example. Madam Speaker, you know you are still one of the kind-hearted persons who love the activities of the youth and women. You were invited to come to Obongi to launch the construction of a community resource centre which has a community library, as one of the components. We did extensive organisation among members of parliament here, and among civil society organisations since the Obongi day of 2006. UNHCR gave money, but the sad news is here. Due to this lack of orientation of the youth in politics as reflected in the Daily Monitor of yesterday, 1 September 2009, page 9, NRM councillors in Moyo District shot down a project of the youth which even the Speaker made a contribution to, and to which Shs 200 million was allocated from PRDP to build a library in Obongi. This was just because the person organising this is a member of the Opposition.

And it did not stop there. My colleague, hon. Anne Auru, who was elected on the Independent ticket and sits on the side of NRM, was viewed as a person who is not NRM. When she came up with this initiative to put a printery to support the office of the DEO, and to support the youth in the production of papers - to prepare the young people for examinations - which was also allocated money in the properly planned system, it was also shot down because she is said not to be NRM. That she is an Independent, yet she had been doing work for NRM.

As a ministry, how do you orientate people at lower levels on the basis of multi-partism? If NRM cannot come with a programme like this one, but somebody who is an Independent and working for NRM people comes with such a good programme, should your councillors shoot it down? 

I would like to lay on the Table a proposal that we, members of Obongi Community Resource Centre have prepared. It has all the things that you talked about here, including recreational grounds. And I can inform you that we held the International Youth Day celebrations at that venue. I hope it will help Uganda. I now lay the Obongi Community Resource Centre concept paper on Table for your information.


Again for the purpose of making people understand –(Interjections)– yes, I am helping the minister. I would like to lay on Table a DVD with video footage on the work that has been done in Obongi, to help the youth in the rural areas who are often forgotten. Our witnesses are here and Madam Speaker is one of them. When you go to Obongi, the way she came, you will ask yourself whether that is part of Uganda. When you get people who think positively for these isolated Ugandans, coming up with initiatives like these, and NRM cadres at the lower levels shoot them down – I beg to lay this DVD on the Table. It is code-named “Uganda at two Perspectives”. It is about rural problems and progress, and programmes in Obongi County, Moyo District. Please watch it.

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude my presentation by saying that it is true we started the affirmative action policies and practices, which placed Uganda over and above other East African countries. When you look at the representation of youth in Parliament, you realise that Uganda beats those other countries –(Member timed out_)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was constrained to rise because the way I am seeing things move is not good. Where Opposition is the majority, there is usually a problem. But also where the ruling party is the majority, there are problems. Help me understand this. Are there any selected accounts where collections from taxes paid by people who belong to the ruling party are deposited? Or are there any other such accounts where only taxes paid by people in the Opposition are deposited – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedure about that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The procedure I am raising –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us have hon. Aol –(Laughter)– you are smuggling.

6.29
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. My focus is going to be mainly on street children, but let me start with the elderly. 

I recall that last financial year there was something to do with support to the elderly. And some of us decided to sit quietly and see whether during this financial year, this programme would roll over to our regions or districts, especially those that were completely devastated by the 23-year old war.

To my biggest surprise, when I looked at the planned activities, I did not see the elderly being catered for in here. Can the minister let me know when the elderly people will be catered for? We would like to see this programme roll over to rural areas in the North –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, hon. Aol, for giving way. Let me also thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. The information I want to give to the House is that last year, when the Committee on Equal Opportunities presented a report on the petition by the elderly persons, the minister informed this Parliament that under the Social Welfare Programme to Support the Elderly, the ministry had planned to support each elderly person in Uganda by giving them an allowance of Shs 18,000 per month. I would like to say that we are still waiting for that because it was supposed to be done immediately. We are getting concerned because it has not come yet. What happened to this social welfare support?

MS AOL: Thank you my sister for that good information. When I looked through this report, I did not – we have a Commonwealth Youth Centre in the North. This centre is very big, but its operationalisation is still a big challenge because of lack of funds. I was wondering whether it is the Ministry of Gender or that of education that is supposed to handle it. I want to ask the State Minister for Youth to clarify on that. We have hope that this centre, if handled properly, can help our youth a lot in terms of keeping them away from things like thuggery and alcoholism. It can keep them busy.

I happened to visit Koblin Centre in Karamoja – on page 23 of the report there is something to say that there is going to be renovation. But I am wondering - if I got it right, then I am still wondering whether that centre deserves just a renovation. I am saying this because when we visited it under the auspices of Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children, it looked so wanting. If this centre is handled properly and we take the children on the streets there, we give them some few kilograms of beans and maize, they can stay there safely. Otherwise, there is no way we can keep the children there when the facilities and structures are not in place. Why do you talk about renovations when the structures are not there? (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have three Members remaining on this side, but I also notice that our Moslem colleagues are fasting. So, can you allow me to release three of the Moslem Members so that they can go quickly? Otherwise, everybody will contribute. Let me get the Muslims first. 

6.35 
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker. I just have a few observations to make on this report. I want to start by talking about exportation of labour, which I think is under this ministry. 

A few weeks ago, our papers reported how Ugandans are suffering outside the country, especially our women being physically tortured in Iraq. I know that we have business companies here that act as middlemen between the Government of Uganda and the outside world in recruiting these people. I want to know from the ministry whether before giving these companies work, they have an agreement with them. I want to know whether these companies take the lives of the people they recruit seriously, and whether they give them job descriptions so that when they are going out, they know what to do. 

I also want to know from the ministry whether they critically scrutinise and vet these companies that recruit our people and send them outside the country. I even read in the papers that the women who are stranded in Iraq want to come back to Uganda but they cannot come back because they do not have money for tickets. I heard that their passports have been withdrawn and these companies, which were responsible or who even paid for the tickets to take them outside the country, said they do not have money to return them to Uganda. So, I want to know what the ministry is doing about it. I do not even see it mentioned in this report yet it is critical.

I also want clarification about our babies’ homes. I want to know what monitoring mechanisms the Ministry of Gender has for these babies’ homes that we have in Uganda. I want to know how many babies there are in all these babies’ homes, how many babies have been adopted within Uganda and outside Uganda, and how many babies have died within these babies’ homes. 

In their report the committee said that they have a grant policy to help the poorest of the poor. I want to know how they are going to identify the poorest of the poor for whom that grant is intended. I want to know whether in the process of identifying these poorest of the poor they will consider all the 90 districts of Uganda. I want to know the method they will use to select those people that they are going to help – (Member timed out_)

6.40 
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. 

Let me refer to page 23, in regard to the youth councils. About two days ago in my constituency I talked to the youth and they were complaining about the absence of data. They wondered whether there has been any evaluation of the youth. Is it a permanent trend to be a youth since even people who are 40 years are still youth? When do you evaluate to ensure that people who exist in that category of the youth are the actual youth? These people wanted me to answer that question but I have to beg you to help me. 

They also talked about the gaps in their executive councils. Have these gaps been filled or when do you intend to fill them? Some of the former occupants have died and others have exited out of the category. 

I also want to find out how we are spending this money that has been budgeted for the youth. What economic activities do you have in your annual budgets? Tell us your achievements so that we do not think that this money is just spent on seminars. 

I would also like to refer to page 14, which mentions the FAL programme. As hon. Kasozi indicated, there is demand for this programme from the public but it has not been promoted. Very few people know about it and as such, we are not using it. I wonder how we are going to account for it when it ends if we have not promoted it so that people can use it within the time given.

On page 20, I do not know whether the committee made a mistake but it grouped people with disabilities with the elderly but they made comments on the elderly only. They said that these people are not considered. What is happening to the people with disabilities? How are we catering for them? Even in the SACCOs and Prosperity-for-All programme, they are not singled out to be assisted. So, how are we assisting these people economically since we know that they cannot move as freely as everybody else? 

I would also like to comment on street children. They are not children but babies of about two years. Who dumps them there? Are we not ashamed? Are we not accountable for that kind of situation? I would like government to see to it that babies are not dumped on the streets. I would like to know what government is doing in as far as this is concerned. 

I would like to talk about accountability by the councils. The Ministry of Labour should give us a work plan so that what happened last year does not happen this year as well. These budgets should be targeted at certain activities that are progressive so that the status of our people changes. All we say is that there is an increase of this and that from this to that but for what purpose? (Member timed out_)

6.45
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to also thank the committee chairperson for the good report and thank the entire committee for the endeavours they made to increase the youth councils’ budget. 

I will comment on street children. You all know the pain I feel when I speak about street children. I would like to remind this House and the government, but particularly the Ministry of Gender, that five months ago hon. Obua and I moved a motion in this House on this very important matter. We are waiting to hear your feedback on this very important issue by the end of this month. 

I want to talk about the youth councils’ budget that has been increased to Shs 1 billion. We appreciate and we thank the government for this. However, I want to inform you, hon. Members, that the youth population in this country is 76 percent. With an increase in the number of districts, you will realise that this money is not enough. Therefore, we still demand for more although we appreciate what we have got. 

I also want to appeal to the Ministry of Gender to liaise with the Ministry of Finance to change the guidelines on the usage of this money. This money should go into tangible or visible activities other than meetings. We also want the Ministry of Gender to monitor the activities that are undertaken by these youth councils. 

On page 24, the committee addresses adolescence and sexual reproductive health. We commend the efforts of our development partners in delivering services to our young people. These young people are Ugandans so they should get programmes and services from the Government of Uganda. There is need for the Government of Uganda to endeavour to raise counterpart funding to promote these initiatives by our development partners. We cannot expand this programme if we do not get counterpart funding from the Government of Uganda.     

I want to talk about the expiry of youth and women councils’ leadership. I want to bring to the notice of this House that youth councils’ structures and women councils’ structures have never expired. They exist by virtue of the laws passed by this august House. It is only the committees that expired two years ago. I want to inform the House that I have a gazetted Bill for the amendment of youth and women councils. I will refer the House to the Statutory Instruments No.16 and 17 that seek to amend the youth councils to fit into the multi-party dispensation. So, youth councils’ structures exist but it is only the leadership that expired. I want to appeal to the minister, especially the minister in charge of youth, to speed up this exercise so that we can have youth councils’ elections in place.

This might be a bit selfish, but it is true that the Ministry of Gender is very congested and it is high time government decongested the Ministry of Gender. It is handling all departments and people but it has little resources and no space. As I speak now, the youth council department has been reduced to a desk. You can hardly find space in the youth council department. We have submitted our request to the government to grant us a fully fledged ministry of youth so that we can decongest the Ministry of Gender.

I want to conclude by saying that when hon. Mutuluuza was on the Floor, he was lamenting that the youth were asking for services from them. I want to inform Members of Parliament that youth are part of your constituencies and therefore they must benefit from your constituency programmes.

6.50
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with a group which the committee has not mentioned. There is a vulnerable group in this country, the juvenile offenders - the young people who commit crimes. I wish this committee had covered them. 

In many districts in this country, we do not have separate detention facilities for young people. So you find that juveniles who commit crimes are locked up with adults. These people will grow up to become hardcore offenders because all they will learn from the adults is how to commit crimes, and this is happening in very many districts. This ministry that you are talking about is concerned with social development. How can we allow our children to develop in crime? I think next time the committee should take up that issue.

Secondly, I was very happy to read on page 16 that there are 1.2 million people on the programme of functional adult literacy, with 900,000 passing very well. Where I come from, this programme has been non existent for the last three decades. In the North, that programme is not there. I wish the committee could give us a table showing where these people are - which districts they come from - so that we know where to redirect efforts. We need to know if some parts of the country are not being covered. We need to know where the 1.2 million people are so that we spread out from there.

Thirdly, on cultural leaders, hon. Malinga I want to say that there is nothing against the Emorimor. The treatment that the Emorimor is getting is the same for everybody. Last year, the President directed the Prime Minister to direct the construction of 54 houses for cultural and traditional leaders in Acholi. Later on, they changed and said that they will get 30 iron sheets each. Last week I was at home and they went to collect the iron sheets. They again changed and said that they must first of all build, put the roof structure and when they are ready to roof then they get the iron sheets. These people have called a meeting and want to petition the Prime Minister. How can we have a government where one minister, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, is handling one category of cultural and traditional leaders and the Prime Minister is handling another? What kind of government is this? There must be a policy on this matter. The government must have a policy so that we get everybody getting the same treatment and going to the same place.

Lastly, I think the government must be honest. Dishonesty on the part of any government is very dangerous. Some of us in this Parliament pay our drivers Shs 300,000 per month plus other benefits like accommodation, food, safari day allowance and so on. For a national government to open an office at a sub-county and say the budget for that office is Shs 300,000 for 12 months is the worst degree of dishonesty. A government cannot behave like this. There is nobody in that government who does not know that this is not enough –(Member timed out_)

6.55
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to limit myself to the achievements of the ministry as cited in the report. Some of these achievements are wrong; they are negatives and should not be recorded as achievements. 

One of them is succeeding to resettle 1,570 children in Kampiringisa. Some of these children were picked from the streets begging but they have been taken to a prison of young people, which is turning beggars into thieves. Kampiringisa is a remand home for juvenile offenders; it is not a settlement place. So, regarding this, let us thank the ministry for turning beggars into thieves because that is what they have done.

The other point is that some of these children were picked from the streets –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISABILITIES (Mr Suliaman Madada): Madam Speaker, Kampiringisa is used as a transition centre where we get children from the streets, keep them for a temporary period and take them back to their areas of origin. Is it in order for the honourable Member of Parliament to say that we are turning street children into thieves?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, when I was still practicing law, I understood that Kampiringisa is a remand home for juveniles. Has it changed?

MR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The other achievement is that the ministry has succeeded in taking 1,242 street children to Moroto. As we stand here today, these people are back on the streets. So, I think let us agree that we have been moving in stagnant circles as far as trying to resettle these children is concerned.

Our government has failed to understand the pull factors in Karamoja. They have failed to understand the adults who are transporting these people from Karamoja to Kampala. They have failed to arrest those organisations that are making money out of these street children. They have failed to deal with the people who are housing these children in Kisenyi, including collecting between Shs 500 and Shs 1,000 per child everyday. Who is supposed to do this? So in short, let us agree that we have failed to settle these children. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has failed to handle these children. Why don’t you be honest so that we give this mandate to another ministry?

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like clarification from hon. Kiyonga. What is the Member of Parliament from the area doing as far as this problem is concerned? You have the role of oversight; you have to see that the people in your constituency do not become a menace because you have information that you have not shared with government. 

MR KIYONGA: Part of my role is to tell you now, but you are not taking it in good faith. We know women who are making up to Shs 2 million per month and sending it to homes where they borrow these children at Shs 20,000 per month. We have given you this information so let the intelligence do the rest. Do you want me to become a policeman? Take this information in good faith, hon. Minister, if we are going to solve this problem. 

We have colleagues in government who are saying that these Karimojong have become a menace. Those children are Ugandans and when people come from abroad, they do not see them as Karimojong but they see them as Ugandans. So the shame is not only to the Member of Parliament for Karamoja.

7.02
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for the good work they have done. I would like to bring to the attention of this House a very special group of vulnerable people who have not been mentioned. There are women offenders who are taken to prison and go either pregnant or get children from the prison. 

I visited a prison in my constituency in Mbarara District and I was shocked to discover that these children have no special diet; they feed on posho and beans. Remember the mothers do not have a good diet. So, I think the ministry should get interested in knowing about the plight of these babies, breastfeeding mothers and crawling children. It is not their fault that the mothers are offenders.

Secondly, there is export of labour, actually trafficking of women disguised as export of labour. I want to say that this has been in the papers for many years. Research has been done and it has been found out that women are taken to countries in the East, not necessarily Iraq, and as soon as they arrive their passports are removed from them and they are used as prostitutes. Those who take them make money out of them, and many Ugandans are mentioned. I even have a book that was published about women trafficking in Uganda. It is such an issue in our country. 

Thirdly, I would like to mention something about the provision of social rehabilitation services to the abandoned, the sick children, the youth and the PWDs which is mentioned on page 9. I would like to know who is in charge of this. Abandoned children are picked up and it becomes the responsibility of the person who has picked up the child to look after them. I want to know where this money is and where these abandoned children are taken care of.

I would like to thank the ministry for the FAL instructors, but I am also interested in the Shs 1.2 million. I would like this to be disaggregated - how many women and how many men. In my district, these FAL classes benefit women more than the men. I do not believe all our men know how to read and write, but I think they do not want these women to beat them in class so they remain at home and remain uninformed and ignorant. So, can we have affirmative action for men to attend these FAL classes?

Finally, I would like to talk about the vulnerable groups and the unemployment in our youth. All of us are aware that there is a lot of redundancy in the way our youths spend their time: playing pool, consuming drugs and wasting their lives. It is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to let this Parliament know what plans they have for these children. Can’t we have the district councils find work for them? 

These youth are not redundant because there is no work to make them busy but I think our education system has made people believe that after P.7 and S.4, you should not make your hands dirty. So, we must do something as Parliament and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, otherwise it does not help for the government to pay them when they are physically strong and mentally alert. 

I want to thank the ministry again for the women councils. While we ask again that this money be increased, we want the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to be clear on what this money is going to do. Some districts get this money and it is known by the gender officer and the chairpersons of women councils but all the other women in the district do not know about it. When a Member of Parliament tries to inquire, it is called interference -(Member timed out_)

7.07
MR ELIJAH KYETUNDA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the ministry and the committee for this report.

Despite the successes and challenges that there are in this report, I would like to also say that as early as 2002 there was an Act of Parliament regarding the children and also the child offenders. A children’s court and also a family and children’s court were even established. However, down on the ground, in most of the courts there are many challenges. 

Here is a court established and here are juvenile offenders; an offender is brought to court and he or she is not supposed to be imprisoned or remanded with adults, but there is no resort. You do not have anywhere to take the child, only to be told when you are in Arua or Kasese or Bundibugyo that the remand home is in Kampiringisa here in Wakiso. How do you have that child offender transported from Bundibugyo or Arua to this place? What children’s courts do is just to set these offenders free. Some parents have taken advantage of this, and this has resulted into the escalation of child offences - and some of the offenders have even graduated into criminals at the end of the day.

I would like to challenge the ministry to see how this problem can be handled. It is not as small as they might think. It is a very big problem down there in those children and family courts. 

There is also this problem of labour. I think it is incumbent upon the Ministry of Labour to see how these companies are employing our Ugandans. It was realised that government workers could not implement government programmes by running our companies and factories, and that is the reason privatisation came in. I do not know whether there were no rules of the game of privatisation when they privatised these companies. I have received several complaints from Hima Cement Industry. This is a company that was privatised but as we stand now, it is running with very few Ugandans. 

I was very happy during the last celebrations of the youth when the honourable minister was very clear that we are facing an unemployment problem in this country. You find even a small job that is supposed to be handled by a Ugandan is being done by an expatriate from Zambia, Kenya and elsewhere. What are the rules of the game in this country? Must we be hand-tied in this country and leave every resource to the foreigners whom we have termed “developers” and “investors”? I would like to know how we are running this and how that problem can be solved. Otherwise, the youth are going to continue being unemployed and yet our country has foreigners being employed.

I also have a problem with the Ministry of Gender; I do not know whether they are not educationally oriented. We have youth training centres as pointed out on page 23 of this document. In my constituency, we have Mubuku Institute. It was rehabilitated I think over six years ago but year in year out, nothing has happened. We, Members of Parliament, as ex-officio in the district council, have even gone ahead to request that this institution be surrendered to the local government so that we can be able to see what we can manage and what we cannot manage in that institute, but the ministry has remained adamant -(Interjections)- I do not even know whether they know where it is even though they send money there. I wonder whether they always go there to see what is happening on the ground -(Member timed out_)

7.14
DR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would also like to thank government for eventually compensating the Ebola victims in Bundibugyo. At least I have seen Shs 500 million this financial year. The families of these people who died while on duty at least are going to get school fees for their children. They have been suffering a lot. 

I would also like to thank government for compensating our doctors who died in 1998 on River Mayanja in Wakiso. It is better late than never. At least -(Interjections)- I hope government is going to pay.

I am going to talk about the minimum wage. Many people in this House today have spoken about exploitation of our workers in this country. Exploitation of workers is becoming too much. I will also re-echo what my colleague said that the foreign investors are number one on the list of exploiting our people. You cannot imagine that a graduate who has walked the streets of Kampala for long and has failed to get a job lands in a factory and is paid only Shs 150,000. These people make sure they work from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. or sometimes to 6.00 p.m., just for Shs 150,000! They are exploiting our graduates and our people too much. If a graduate in a factory can earn Shs 150,000, what happens to an S.4 or P.7 leaver or even a sweeper in that factory? The Ministry of Labour should look into this and help our people. Government has failed to come up with an employment policy and a minimum wage. 

Even some of us, me excluded, are exploiting our workers in our homes. I do not know how much we pay our maids. You find that people are still earning Shs 30,000 or Shs 20,000 a month, although they are getting free food. 

It is really bad for this country to continue exploiting our people. That is why we end up with thieves - these security guards and cashiers. In the newspapers in Kampala, everyday you find people who are “wanted”. This is because they are paid so little and they end up doing things that are so bad like killing their employers, breaking into safes and taking money, and waylaying people at night. It is just because they are earning extremely very little money that cannot sustain their families. We need a minimum wage for Ugandans.

I remember at one time we had a programme for exporting labour, especially nurses, to some countries in Europe. I also remember that a lady called Nabagesera was involved in this, but I do not know where this programme ended. We still have so many unemployed people in this country roaming the streets. Government has educated these people from primary, secondary and to university but they have no employment. I do not know what the ministry is doing to ensure that these people who we cannot employ in this country can get employment elsewhere -(Member timed out_)

7.17
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for producing a good report. However, there are a few issues that I would like to point out.

First, there is something about the construction of a house for the Emorimor. Is it government that is constructing that house? If so, is it now the duty of government to construct homes for cultural leaders? If that is true, what criteria are they using in selecting the cultural institutions to benefit? I am asking this because I need to know how the Emorimor came into the budgeting process. There are so many of us who have cultural leaders who have not benefited from this. Should we also have a house for the Ssaabaluli built, because we already have land with a title? So, what are the criteria? –(Interjections)- you know very well what the Constitution says about cultural leaders; he is in place legally.

I also would like to point out something about the money for interest groups. In the report, they say that there is an increment in the budget. Basing on that, can I know whether you are also going to increase the money that you have been giving to interest groups especially those in districts? I am asking this because I have noticed that the money that is sent to such groups is so little that they cannot use it to do any tangible things. I can report that people with disabilities in my district got only about Shs 2 million for a whole year. To me that is little money for a whole district to run the activities of people with disabilities. To make things worse, this money comes in bits. That is why its impact is usually not felt by the beneficiaries and they keep complaining that they are not being catered for. This time, if there is any increment in the budget – I hope it is not meant only for wages – these people should be considered so that they can do tangible things with it.

The next thing I would like to talk about, are the community libraries. I was actually wondering what these community libraries are going to be for. What is going to be put in there? Will you construct buildings and place books there or are you going to use them to show films to the people? What are they going to be used for? Can you also tell us how you selected the sites? I just need to know the criteria you used because I have not been informed of the presence of a site in my district. I am only reading about this from the report. 

How are you involving us as leaders from those districts? I am asking this because ministries bring things that feature in their budgets but they never get implemented and yet they keep featuring every financial year. I hope this time round, this project will be implemented. You should not stop at documentation. You have been allocated the money, so let the minister tell us what the community libraries are going to do and how leaders will be involved. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.21
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I just want to seek clarification from the ministry on what child labour and child work means. I am asking this because there are issues in our households; you find a little girl or boy of about 12 years who should be washing dishes or mopping the house telling you that they have “a right”. Something needs to be done. We have children who are becoming exotic for nothing in an African environment. We need to train our African children in an African perspective; they must really understand that work at home is not necessarily abusive or a bad thing.

I have issues with plantation agriculture as far as child labour is concerned. If you walk to any of these tea and sugar plantations, you will find that the quantity picked determines how much you will earn that day. This has forced many parents to go to the plantations with their children to help them pick more tea. That, to me, is not child labour. That is why I am calling upon you to go and verify these issues. 

In Kakira and Lugazi sugar factories, where most of my people from Arua work, you find some of these children cutting sugarcane despite the fact that the sugarcane leaves are very destructive to their bodies, and they work without protective wear. I have also established that most of our sugarcane investors do not provide safety gear for their workers. Those workers do not have things like gumboots. So, what is the ministry doing about such?

There is also the other corporate aspect of abuse of workers, where we have promotions based on sex, not merit. We are seeing this and we need to investigate it. A young girl will come from the university but three months down the road, she is already sleeping with the managing director of the company and the next thing will be that she gets promoted, not on merit but on the power of something else. This is very unfortunate. We are killing the fundamental things relating to merit. I would like to assure you that this is happening even in Kampala. Walk into these multi-national companies like banks and so forth, you will be surprised; these things are happening. That is why I am asking the ministry to open up and investigate such issues.

The other thing that I would like to talk about is the lack of an employment policy in this country. I remember we had a draft policy of 2003 but, I am told, the President has instructed the ministry not to implement it because he is fearful about the placement of a minimum wage. He thinks this is going to frustrate the investors. To be honest with the ministry, there should be something done. Please, craft this policy and bring it on. Please, let us take the bull by its horns. Which country on earth now does not have a minimum wage policy, particularly in the great lakes region? Rwanda already has one.

The last thing is about building palaces for royals. Hon. John Arumadri is a royal from Madi-Okolo, but he has never put in –(Laughter)– a requisition. I can assure you I am also a royal. Everybody is claiming to be a royal. In my opinion, since the olden days it used to be the subjects to construct palaces for kings., if you love your king, why should you burden the country to build a palace for him? Contribute and build a palace for your king! If that is done, we will save these resources and they can be injected into many other meaningful things like funding activities for the unemployed youth. I think that will make sense. Otherwise, otherwise we shall always come here when elections are approaching and say that the palace in Mengo needs renovation, and we must set aside a pledge of Shs 500 billion for it, when the youth are unemployed. Ugandans must learn today that if you love your king that much and dearly, you should contribute and build that king a palace. Do not come here and bother us that, “I have a king who needs this.” Why should you look at your king as a souvenir if you cannot build a palace for that king? That king is irrelevant if he cannot be housed by his subjects, and we should just throw them out. They may not actually be of merit to us –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before hon. Masiko comes, I just want to give hon. Abia information concerning us, the royals. If you go to Busoga, the Chief Magistrate’s Court of Iganga was the palace of the Chief of Kigulu. The markets belonged to the kingdom of the Kyabazinga. If you go to Kamuli, the Ssaza headquarters were the palace of the king. It is the State, which has got our property, and so they must build. (Laughter) 

7.26 
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I just have four issues to address in regard to the report that has been given to us. But allow me to thank the committee for a report well written and well presented. 

I just want to comment on the Equal Opportunities Commission and I am grateful that at last, we are having the commissioners in place. However, it has been observed that there is no Vote for them. I would like the minister to tell me how these commissioners are going to run their business without this Vote. If they could help and tell me where exactly they will get the funding, I would be comfortable, or else let us appoint them towards the end of the financial year so that they do not become a burden, and we do not raise their expectations. 

It is impressive that at least the money for community development has been increased a bit. I do believe that we cannot have any meaningful social transformation without community development activities in rural areas in our country, because that is where the majority of the population reside and work. I hope that this time round, the money that is going to be given will facilitate the community development officers. 

In my district, for instance, we had only two community development officers working. The rest have not been in place, but anyway, the ministry has now recently sent money to recruit so that each sub-county can have a community development officer. I hope they will be facilitated, otherwise we will be wasting our time if we think that we are going to develop our communities with these people in place, unable to move out and do their work. 

On the issue of gender equality on page 16, as has been observed by the committee, indeed there has been gender mainstreaming in the ministries. The observation we have had is that even these gender officers in the ministries where they have been put are the least funded, and least catered for desk officers in those respective ministries. So, mainstreaming the gender issue, especially for equality reasons, has really made it worse. They have even disappeared from the ministries. I hope the Ministry of Gender will take this as a serious issue; to coordinate the work of these gender focal point persons in the different ministries, so that you track what they are exactly doing, and you will report to us in Parliament about the measurable outputs that have been achieved by these focal point persons in the different ministries. Otherwise, we shall not see them as useful at all. The mainstreaming component will just be useless to us if we do not get a comprehensive report on the activities they are doing. 

I hope you are aware that in the Audit Act that we have now, one of the roles of the Auditor-General is to carry out a gender audit. I presume that these gender focal point persons in the different ministries will support the Auditor-General in carrying out this gender audit, and we hope that we shall be having annual reports on the gender audit. I presume the Ministry of Gender should have a particular interest in this, so that we get a comprehensive report as far as gender auditing is concerned. 

On the issue of child labour, with the advent of UPE and USE in this country, we should really try to do away with child labour. It is rampant as the committee has already said. Children have been disappearing. I would like to give an example of one of the sub-counties in my district. I have got a sub-county where the boy child has disappeared from the upper classes of the primary section, that is, from P.4 to P.7. The boys in the sub-county account for only a third of the enrolment. They have been taken out there to do lumbering jobs - felling trees, and the practice has taken root in that area. That is why I was very much interested in the Human Trafficking Bill. I hope it will be operationalised so that we at least capture some of these people who are taking part in removing children by coercion from their parents, and from their places of residence, to work as servants. It is so pathetic that most of these children die in the process of felling trees, and in the lumbering, and most of these deaths are not even reported. So, the ministry should take up this issue with a lot of interest, to ensure that the boy –(Member timed out_)

7.32 
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairperson for the report. My first point is that people have been saying that this ministry is being given little money. My thinking is that people do not understand what the ministry does. That is why even the Ministry of Finance cannot allocate money to you. During my time of working, it took me time to understand what you people were doing –(Laughter)– so, you need to explain to people so that they know what you are doing and then you will get money. 

You must also tell our development partners. I know very many of them come to you but you must persuade them to mix seminars with something concrete on the ground, then people will understand. You educate us, and then you will get more money.

Secondly, I was very happy with the libraries. That way, our people will get knowledge, and as you know, when you have knowledge and you use it, you become powerful. I commend you on the libraries that you intend to put up, but you forgot that Luweero also needs one. I suggest that you make an amendment so that you put a library in Luweero as well. 

The youth are very active and inquisitive. You have to see to it that you engage them in vigorous activities. They are interested in games. In my days, we did not do drugs; we would not do alcohol; we had teenager dances; we would go and jump about from 2 O’clock to 7.00 p.m. but these days this is not done. People go to watch videos, “Ki Nigeria” and watch people killing each other, and that is why things are going bad. I think you had better concentrate on getting games for these kids, so that they are kept busy. That way they will not go into drugs, alcoholism or homosexuality. 

Lastly, it is very unfortunate that this ministry is doing very little for the elderly. What we are enjoying today was done by the elderly. We need to look after the elderly; we need to pay back, because without them, we would not be having tarmac roads. We would still be having murram roads. All these things that you see here were done by the elderly. It is incumbent upon us to look after the elderly and give back to them, and ensure that they enjoy life in their elderly state. 

We should remember that we shall all get elderly at some point in time. One time when we were working, some of us were pushing for pensions and some people opposed the idea. But when time came for them to retire, they did not have pension and they started panicking. So, the elderly are very important people because they are the ones who have made Uganda what it is today. We must do something for them to enjoy life. Thank you. 

7.36
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. In relation to the strategic objective (d) on page 2, that is, to protect vulnerable persons from deprivation and livelihood risks, which objective is supported by vote function (d) on page 3, which is, social protection for vulnerable groups - I thank the Ministry of Gender for the effort that it has put to support the Karimojong street children. The ministry managed to return some of them to Karamoja.

However, the ministry developed a very good proposal but many activities remained on paper. While I was still asking myself why this situation obtained, I may think that it is because of inadequate funding to the ministry. Many of these activities were very good, and if they had implemented them, I think we would have really succeeded in resettling these children. 

On the surface, this budget seems to be okay. The funding has been increased and UNICEF has increased its support from Shs 1.87 billion to Shs 5.45 billion, which is something substantial. I would, therefore, think that there is going to be great improvement, and I would propose that the ministry meets other partners so that a comprehensive plan is put in place for these people to be returned for good and never to return.  For those whom we find to be helping these people return to the streets, like my colleague mentioned, we should be able to deal with them. We shall all try to support this. 

On the other hand, I also advise the ministry to be very vigilant when moving children to these homes. Some of these homes are in Kampala; the ones in Kampala that we visited need to be attended to because, although you may think that the children are being supported, this support is accompanied by exploitation. We visited three homes and I advise the ministry to check them again to find out whether there has been any improvement. I have no time to state in detail what we found there, but the situation is very deplorable. 

For Koblin, my colleague mentioned something good. Koblin does not require renovation, but rehabilitation. I appeal to the Ministry to note that. Thank you very much.  

7.39
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you. I thank the committee for the report. On page 18, the report talks about labour and industrial relations. I implore this House to agree with me that this function of inspection and supervision at the workplace is a failed function. 

I have had time to visit some of the steel industries in Uganda. Our people are getting amputated; they get deformed and no one comes to their rescue at all. I wonder what the ministry is doing about this. There are some factories that are being run by Indians and I have noted that there is modern slavery that has come in. Indians get into their offices with shoes on, but the Africans working there are told to remove their shoes. 

DR LYOMOKI: Madam Speaker, I want to give this information to show the type of inhuman conditions that our workers face in some of these Asian-owned factories. A week ago, we were called to one of the factories because the workers had wanted to strike. What we found there was that an Asian employer had locked one of the workers in the toilet. The other workers broke the toilet so as to get their colleague out. The reason the Asian gave for locking the worker in the toilet was that the worker went to the toilet before time. So, we told the worker to report the matter to the Police but when the worker reached Police, the Police refused to record the statement. The Police told him to wait for the Asian to come before he makes his statement. But the Asian never turned up and the Police told the worker to go away. This is the situation that the workers are facing in this age. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Member, for that information. In this report the ministry tells us that local governments have not yet presented their reports of 2008/09. We feel that they are relegating their duty because the labour offices at the district are not facilitated. 

The district labour officer in Iganga is given Shs 500,000 only in the budget, to take care of the Labour Day celebrations. This is an officer without transport and no stationery. I wonder how he can execute his duties. It is high time the ministry got serious. I am sorry to appear a little tough.

When it comes to distribution and allocation of public libraries, on page 15, I am surprised they are telling us that these libraries are demand-driven but when it comes to public libraries, they are quoting Bugiri as a beneficiary. When you come to community libraries, Bugiri is again surfacing. Is this really being demand driven when we have little resources with serious demand? I think we should split such that everyone gets something. Unless our people did not thoroughly scrutinise this, I feel that this is not fair distribution of the national cake.

There is also need to improve the facilitation of probation officers. Last week, Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children was traversing the central region. The biggest concern that all probation officers were raising was facilitation. You find that somebody has been sexually abused or there has been domestic violence, and the only place to run to is the probation office when somebody has not received justice from the Police. But even these probation officers cannot manage. 

If a child is defiled, they say, “We cannot go to the scene or come in because we have no transport and fuel”. If there are plans to improve, let us be serious and say we are ready to fund the probation offices seriously, and not just saying we have intentions of improving.

Last is on the state of Kampiringisa Rehabilitation Centre or remand home. The forum also visited Kampiringisa, but the situation there is pathetic. When the minister came here, I felt bad because I think he has taken long without visiting the institution. We were there last week, but the facility is overwhelmed with enrolment. As per last week, the institution had over 400 children and they are surviving on one meal a day. These are Ugandans suffering out there. I pray that government scales up their efforts in such facilities that are housing our children. We are all parents who should feel this burden and give the necessary funding. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Twenty eight Members have contributed to this report, so I think everybody has had an opportunity to speak. Can I ask the ministers to share the remaining ten minutes? 

7.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues, members of parliament and ministers, for being very patient when we were deliberating on this very important matter. 

I would like to observe that most of the colleagues who have raised issues have appreciated the fact that the budget of this very important ministry has risen from Shs 22 billion in the last financial year to Shs 31 billion this financial year. I think this is a very good gesture from all of us. 

As ministers in that ministry, we would like to pledge to continue working very closely with Parliament so that we keep on enhancing our budget every financial year, for our work to be made easy.

I would like to be protected from hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The first concern was raised by hon. Johnson Malinga and I would like to say that I am going to respond to concerns from Members then my colleagues, the Minister for the Elderly and the Minister of State for Labour, will also clarify some issues, which I may not have completely articulated.

The first issue is that the committee, according to hon. Malinga, has not raised the issue of NSSF in their report. The NSSF has now been entirely transferred to the Ministry of Finance and as such, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development does not have any stake in NSSF.

Hon. Malinga was also concerned that –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as far as we are concerned, the law has never been amended to say that NSSF is in the Ministry - in fact, the Ministry of Finance is housing NSSF illegally. Hon. Omach, you are there illegally. So can you tell us how far you have gone to deal with the issue of NSSF because legally it is yours?

MS ALUPO: Madam Speaker, I would like to beg your indulgence to enable hon. Madada, when he comes on the Floor, to respond to this. I would like to continue responding to the next issue, which hon. Malinga raised concerning the role of the Ministry of Youth and Children in relation to the RDCs and patriotism.

Hon. Malinga, I appreciate your concerns that you really want to see me working and you want me to have a lot of work. However, I do not see any conflict of interest in relation to the work that I do as the line Minister of Youth and Children, and the other issue that you deliberated upon yesterday concerning patriotism, in relation to children and youth.

Hon. Malinga also raised the issue of the Emorimor and the palace. I want to give him information that we are very in touch with the Prime Minister of Emorimor Irige. We have also been in touch with some members of parliament from the Teso region, and particularly Hon. Elijah Okupa. We have been exchanging information, but as of now, we still need the Emorimor to fulfil the conditions of providing us with the title deed in the names of the Emorimor, and also to provide us with the approved architectural drawings, structural plans and an encumbrance-free location where we are going to build the palace.

Even when the king of the Adhola requested for the same facility, he provided for those requirements, fulfilled them and that is why the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development went ahead and provided him with the money to build the palace in his area. 

I would like to answer the question which was raised by hon. Sarah Nyombi, and I think it was asked by so many other colleagues. This question concerns the national women councils and the national youth councils, and the councils for PWDs - how they get their money and how we monitor and evaluate the activities they do. 

The funds for these councils are sent directly from Ministry of Finance to the local governments, as a conditional grant. The money is received on a district collection account. The councils themselves develop work plans according to their plans. The money is sent on a quarterly basis and before the councils receive the next imbursement, they must always first account for the funds received in the previous period. 

Having said that, we know that there have been gaps, especially in the way this money is sent, and in accountability. So, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has developed guidelines for the utilisation of these grants. The ministry is also going to improve on the monitoring and evaluation of these funds. 

Hon. Sarah Nyombi also raised the issue of street children. In the ministry, we have a policy of orphans and street children where these street children fall. It is this policy which guides us in the ministry to ensure that we remove these children from the streets. We do not work in isolation; we collaborate with other Government ministries and donor partners. So, we appeal to Members to give us support, because removing these children cannot be done by one person. Like some Members have already told us, these children are brought by adults. 

Hon. Magoola also raised the issue of street children; this issue has its genesis in many factors which are socio-economic, like poverty, domestic violence and children getting attracted to other behaviours like going to watch movies and copying what they see done there. That is why I am saying that it needs collective effort.

Hon. Nsubuga was concerned that the performance of our ministry last year was better than that of this year. On this issue of labour productivity, I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to let hon. Otaala articulate it. 

I would like to go to the very important issues which hon. Kasozi raised. He appreciated that the budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been increased, and I thank him. I invite him to continue being a good ally to the ministry so that we raise the budget even more. 

He also raised the issue of the Functional Adult Literacy Programme. This programme cuts across the whole country. That means that this programme is operational throughout the country. At an appropriate time, we shall bring here the progress report and other details of FAL, because I cannot go into the details now. But it is a very good programme. When you see the people who have gone through it - they have embraced the programme and we have value for money. 

So I request all of you to encourage people to participate in this programme. It enables them to mobilise themselves and to sensitise themselves on so many things like HIV/AIDS, and income-generating activities. I want to appreciate the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and the partnership with Parliament for having gone that far in implementing the FAL programme. Hon. Yekko Arapkisa – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, I hope you are not going one by one; because we may stay here until tomorrow. Many of them spoke of the same things and if you go one by one, we shall not leave here.  

MS ALUPO: I wanted to say that what hon. Yekko raised was raised also by hon. Sarah Nyombi concerning the councils. I am very happy that the members of parliament have understood that the ministry is working very hard and that is why they are very satisfied with my response. 

But I want to touch the issue of child labour. Many of us do not know the meaning of child labour. According to the child labour policy, child labour is any activity which is socially, morally or physically dangerous to the child. And also, it is any activity which keeps a child out of school. So, even if it is an activity which is not dangerous to the child, it is still child labour. 

You will realise that many people ignorantly send their children to fish, plantations, motor garages and carpentry workshops thinking that their children are going to make money, but not knowing also that, that is child labour.

We have a fully-fledged policy on child labour that guides us in ensuring that child labour will one day be eradicated in Uganda. Most of the issues which are in our ministry are the issues of the people and, therefore, they call for collective responsibility. 

I also want to reiterate what Hon. Winnie Masiko said about the Bill that we laid on Table in this Parliament concerning human trafficking. When you move a child from Moroto to the Kampala streets that is child trafficking and it is one of the clauses in that Bill. So, I would like to encourage this House to work towards implementing and operationalising that Bill, so that some of these traffickers can be trapped before they think of moving the children from point A to point B. 

Having said that, I would like to allow my colleagues to come and supplement my responses, and I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity.

8.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISABILITIES (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker and colleagues, Shs 1.5 billion is provided for the Equal Opportunities Commission. That answers the concern of not providing for that area.

On the issues to do with older persons, I want to announce to the nation and to this House that two months ago, Cabinet approved a policy on older persons. It will be launched on 1 October, on the National Day for Older Persons in the district of Namutumba in Eastern Uganda. Following that, a national action plan is being developed, and a Bill on older persons is also in the offing -(Interjections)- older persons. Please appreciate that in the United Nations language, we changed from elderly to older persons.

My colleague has already talked about the functional adult literacy. I want to let you know that this is one of the programmes that are being appreciated by many actors, and we are now working with other Government agencies. About one week ago, the Electoral Commission launched a voter education programme with the functional adult literacy. It is being funded by the European Union. We will be moving around the country. In addition to writing and reading, we will also be empowering people in their political and economic participation using functional adult literacy.

On the issue of the role of the ministry, hon. Byandala has properly put it that there is a lot of confusion on the mandate of this ministry. In fact, this is why many questions are raised as to why little funds are given to the councils. When you look at the structure of this ministry, mandated under the Constitution from Article 31 which talks about affirmative action, this is the agency to enforce and ensure that affirmative action is taken. So, our biggest role is advocacy; when we put money in the councils at the local government. It is not all, but we want to empower those councils and councillors to be able to lobby for money from the other Government sectors such that the youth benefit from that fund.

On the issue of disability, it is true that there is a lot that has been done. I need to let this Parliament know that the Department of the Elderly and Disabled is only about 10 years old, and as we talk today, we have a national policy on disability and we have an Act. In terms of benefit, as we talk today, under that Act, there is a clause ensuring that when you employ 10 and more persons with disability, there is a tax reduction. So, many companies today are employing persons with disability under that clause, because our ministry is supposed to create an enabling environment for the vulnerable groups to be able to participate in government programmes.

You will note that there is an increment in the enrolment of persons with disability in education, including university education.

Hon. Zirabamuzaale mentioned how persons with disability are benefiting. We recently launched a programme of Shs 300 million for SACCOs of persons with disability, based in Iganga, and called IDIPA. There is also another SACCO in Hoima that is also about to benefit from this money. All we do in the ministry is to mobilise the vulnerable groups in order for them to be able to tap into the Government programmes. 

A number of issues have been raised, but because of the time constraints, we cannot be able to explain everything. I want to assure my colleague, the acting Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, that the ministry and Government have placed the Iteso as priority. Of all these cultural leaders, not many people have even had this opportunity to have these houses constructed for them. Therefore, considering that there are many cultural leaders and now Teso is already on the programme, that is already giving priority to this area. So, I want to assure the people of Teso that this government is for them.

We now have a breakdown on the monies that will be going to the councils, including women councils, in all areas. Shs 97 million has been provided as seed capital for income generating projects for women in the councils. So, we will be providing all the details that we have. 

I would like to wind up and invite my colleague, hon. Otaala. I also assure all the people who are talking about the community libraries that we have taken all these concerns and we will go back and put them in our planning. Thank you very much.

8.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable colleagues. There are just three issues for me to clarify. One is on the performance of the vote function for labour productivity and employment. We appreciate the proposal from hon. Nsubuga that the Ministry of Finance should raise the ceiling for our ministry. Indeed the Ministry of Finance has already raised our ceiling and we are doing this in phases. This year alone, we are going to receive 38 new staff, and this will help us to increase our absorptive capacity. And we believe that in the subsequent years, we shall be able to fill the remaining establishments. 

On the issue of NSSF, I want to clarify that there are proposals right now in which we are considering to liberalise the social security sector, and we think one of the issues that we are going to address is the permanent home for NSSF. I want to inform the House that the policy issues regarding NSSF still rest with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development notwithstanding the Executive directive for the day-to-day management of the Fund being in the Ministry of Finance for technical reasons.

On externalisation of labour –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, social security is a function that any serious government should consider as a priority. In all the policy statements, nothing has been mentioned about NSSF. It is not in Finance, neither is it in Gender. We want to get assurance from the minister on who is now responsible for the huge amounts of money that the poor Ugandans have contributed - who is taking care of the security of the elderly who have taken all this time contributing this money which Jamwa is picking at will?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think the minister was saying that there is an executive order. You are looking at the victim - the one who lost to NSSF. I do not know how much more he can say. The person to ask is here; the Leader of Government Business will have to explain to us before we conclude this debate where the NSSF lies. Please conclude. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The minister talked of technical issues. We would be very glad to know what those technical issues are. Is it true that Finance has angels, and Gender and Labour has criminals or non-performers? We want to know those technical issues.

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I talk about technical issues, I mean financial management. (Laughter) I now move on to the next issue, which is externalisation of labour. The issues that were raised here were about the alleged mistreatment of some of our ladies who have been exported to various countries. I want to clarify that we have well over 12,000 people in Iraq, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Southern Sudan and Yemen. All these people remit back home about US$7 million every month. We only recently had a problem with one batch of girls who were exported as domestic servants; we have realised that it is difficult –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, can I be protected?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, we have realised that it is difficult to monitor workers in peoples’ homes. So, we have put a ban on further exportation of domestic servants. In fact, out of the 150, only 14 girls complained. We have made arrangements together with the International Organisation on Migration and exporting companies, to bring those girls back. I want to allay your fears, honourable members, that this project on externalisation of labour is a worthwhile project; we should explore it further.

That is the reason you find that in this year’s budget, we have Shs 0.5 billion to enable the ministry continue exploring other opportunities, including for high level professionals like nurses, doctors, teachers and accountants. I know we are now getting these orders, but I think the few mistakes should not be used to tarnish this very good programme.  

My colleague, hon. Lyomoki, talked about budgeting for the Federation of Uganda Employers and the workers’ organisations. I want to inform him that yes, we work as a tripartite; but then when it comes to budgeting, they have their own sources of funding like the check-offs. These check-offs are where you get funding for the unions and the labour centres -(Mr Lyomoki rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

DR OTAALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Finally, let me talk about abuse of workers internally here. We have been receiving complaints from some of our workers about mistreatment, especially from the Indian employers. We are taking up this matter very seriously. We have summoned some and reprimanded them as provided by the law. On a wider scale, in order to curb this matter once and for all, we are soon arranging a sensitisation workshop to appraise all employers about the various provisions of the labour laws. When this is done, we think everybody will begin to respect such laws of the country.

I thank honourable colleagues for their contributions and I pray that our ministerial policy statement and budget be approved. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank all of you for staying power today. We have stayed very long but done a good job. I also want to thank the ministers for their responses. But I am particularly happy that government responded to our very strong recommendation last year because I remember last year we told the Ministry of Finance that in the next financial year, if they did not improve funding to Ministry of Gender, they would be in trouble. It is good they have responded, but we need more. I want to thank the Members for those strong recommendations.

I now put the question that this House do approve the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members –(Interjections)- no, not today; I don’t think he is ready. I want him to go and do the research and come back with a serious answer.

Tomorrow, I would like us to start at 10.00 a.m. so that we can finish early. The House is adjourned to 10 O’clock and if I get here at 10.00 a.m. and I have only three Members, I will start. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 8.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 September 2009 at 10.00 a.m.)

