Friday, 9 September 2011

Parliament met at 11.28 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We could not start at 10.00 a.m. because I looked at the numbers and they were not like this, but thank you very much for coming early. 

Hon. Members, today is Friday and it is a day for our Muslim brothers and sisters to pray. The business of the House is affecting that and it also affected it last week. I made a statement last week during the celebrations when we pushed them to sit almost up to the time they were going to go for prayers. I am asking members of the Muslim community to bear with us this Friday because we have business that is urgent. We apologise for the inconvenience we keep causing every Friday when there are urgent matters to deal with.
 
There is business that we agreed to finish by Wednesday. Early last week, we received Schedule 3 of the supplementary appropriation document which was laid before this Parliament. We referred it to the Budget Committee. I thought by now the Budget Committee has looked at it, but they have not; they should and be able to guide us on Monday about the status. This is because that is what will feed into the final supplementary appropriation Bill which we need to pass before we go to the new appropriation Bill for this financial year.

Yesterday, we had a situation here when I adjourned the House. I got a phone call from the Clerk to Parliament, Mr Tandekwire, expressing displeasure at the references made in the House about his machines breaking down and yet no machine had broken down. That the reports were ready, but for some reason they never came to the House and this is not good. It gave the Office of the Clerk a bad image as well as the Office of the Speaker. No, such adjustment on our time should be made without the consent or the authority of the Speaker. I should express my displeasure on this matter which happened yesterday and this should go as a warning to all those who were party to this that it should not happen again. At least let the Speaker know what the situation is because I have the prerogative to adjourn. I can adjourn if the reasons are justifiable, but to go around and have things happen this way is not only unprofessional but also bad manners.

Hon. Members, the other thing that I want to talk about is on the Finance (Amendment) Bill. The debate that was very strong in the House here was on the Shs 50 million issue, when one is doing transactions on land. Yesterday, I had a meeting with the Speaker who has just returned to the country. These same matters were raised by people outside this country. They are going to start investigating other things other than what should be the role of the Uganda Revenue Authority. This should come out clearly because that Shs 50 million provision is actually not in the Bill; it is nowhere in the law. This is supposed to be some administrative thing that should be conducted by Uganda Revenue Authority in its ordinary course of work. It is nothing special, but it has caused such a stalemate in this House that we have not been able to pass the Finance (Amendment) Bill up to now. I want the honourable minister to come out clearly to guide this House that the issue of Shs 50 million is not in the Bill, and will not be in the Bill, and cannot be in the Bill. 

We should relax, pass this Finance (Amendment Bill) and continue with business, because that is what is stopping this Bill from passing. The Shs 50 million that is reported by the committee is not in the Bill. It is an administrative thing that they discussed with the Uganda Revenue Authority, and that ended there. It cannot be in the Bill and will never be in the Bill. Members, when these clarifications are made, we should move forward with matters that are before us so that we can conclude this business.
 
PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET

11.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Timothy Lwanga): I would not be right to start delivering this report without commenting on what you have said about what happened yesterday. My assumption is, “I was misinformed by the support staff.” As far as I knew, we had 20 reports produced and the machines were not able to produce the rest. At that time, I interacted with the Shadow Minister of Finance and we agreed that if it becomes complicated, we can ask for adjournment for one hour, but the Speaker’s decision made me comfortable. Obviously, I did not think that I was qualified to oppose the decision of the Speaker. I think we were all disappointed, but the good news is that we have a report and that also gave me a chance to reconstruct the figures. 

The House directed the Committee on Budget on Thursday, 1 September 2001, to harmonise budget allocations to all sectors in accordance with Section 147(c) of the Rules of Procedure. The Committee on Budget has scrutinised the estimates and it is my pleasure to present the committee report.

Terms of reference for the Budget Committee

The terms of reference for the assignment were as below: 

Rule 147(3)(c) of the Rules of Procedure provides that the Budget Committee shall: “Carry out such other functions relating to the National Budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament or any law.”

On the basis of the above, the Speaker directed that: 

i)	The Chairperson of the Budget Committee convenes a meeting for the committee to consider:

a)	Matters that were raised in the course of the debate in the consideration of the ministerial policy statements on the budget that needed resolution by way of translating them into actual estimates of expenditure;

b)	Whether some of the budgetary provisions that were given did not follow the orders given by the President on reduction of expenditure on purchase of vehicles, seminars and workshops, and travel abroad.

c)	Whether such instructions issued to accounting officers by the Treasury on the reduction of 30 percent on votes relating to some expenditures were followed; and 

2 a) 	To look at issues raised in one above – that is a, b, c – 	with a view of harmonising them and allocating funds for such activities in the budget; 
b) 	In cases where guidance on priority areas were not followed, then reallocation of funds be made; and 

c) 	That the committee reports its findings to Parliament by Thursday, 8 September 2011. 

Methodology

The budget committee received presentations from the sessional committees based on committee reports. Responses were provided by the ministries and reallocations were subsequently made where necessary and indeed harmonised. 

Scope of Work

The committee considered budget cuts as per the terms of reference, taking into consideration the instructions in the circular by the PS/ST dated 25 May 2011 on the budget estimates for the financial year 2011/2012. In this circular, some votes were protected against the 30 percent cut owing to the nature of their functions. These include: Statutory, the Presidency, security, missions abroad and diplomacy, social services, infrastructure and Local Government. 

We have got a table of savings and here, I want us to make some corrections. On line one, you have the Ministry of Education and Sports, and instead of Shs 4.1 billion, it is Shs 4.5 billion. For the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, just cancel that figure; it doesn’t exist. Under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it is Shs 14.924 billion, and at the bottom, the total adds to Shs 45.4 billion. The committee found Shs 45.4 billion as savings.

I will go on to show the savings and the reallocations where necessary. We started with the Ministry of Education and Sports, which is vote 013. The realised savings from the sector was Shs 4.54 billion and the committee recommended that this money be reallocated within the sector to cater for funding gaps agreed upon in the sector. The committee further recommends that the $ 8 million component which was for the Civil Service College under the Ministry of Public Service, be transferred to the Uganda Management Institute for implementation.

For the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, there was a 50 percent cut on advertising and a 30 percent cut on consumptive items. The committee on ICT, therefore, made a saving for the ministry of ICT of Shs 1.2 billion. The budget committee recommends that this money be reallocated to the e-governance programme.

In the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the savings realised from the sector amounted to Shs 19.87 billion according to the committee, and the committee recommended that this amount be reallocated within the sector as follows:  Shs 6.5 billion for land suitability mapping; Shs 2 billion for dairies development; Shs 4.8 billion for the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre Data Bank; Shs 4 billion for the animal diseases and pest control programme; and Shs 2.5 billion for the fisheries sector.

After the committee came up with these reallocations, we had presentations from the Ministry of Agriculture in response to what the committee had come up with, and on further consideration, it was observed that the above amount of Shs 19.87 billion was for donor-funded projects and, therefore, the budget was not adjusted –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, at the beginning, the chairperson made corrections on the savings, and under agriculture, he told us to cancel that figure and replace it with zero; and now he is reallocating; which one do we take? Is it procedurally right for the chairman to ask us to put zero and yet here he is reallocating Shs 19.87 billion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, would you like to explain that?

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, the committee felt that since it had been reported as a saving, and actually the committee on agriculture had gone ahead to reallocate this money, it was good knowledge to Parliament to know that these other commitments, which would have been otherwise catered for, and as I have explained –(Interruption)

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Budget Committee. With due respect, is it procedurally right for my chairperson to present a position different from the committee’s position? It is true the Minister of Agriculture came; we had already made submissions and discussed. There is no way the Budget Committee could differ, because according to us, the Sessional Committee on Agriculture had discussed and presented its recommendations. In any case, for us to alter - because all recommendations we made and what we came up with was in lieu of the report by the Sessional Committee on Agriculture. 

So, in so speaking, we agreed that we cannot change much. It can only come from the Plenary and we refer it back to the Sessional Committee on Agriculture if any change is to be made. But in other words, to be altered by the Budget Committee as per yesterday, was to put a vote of no confidence in the Sessional Committee on Agriculture. (Applause) 

DR EPETAIT:  Information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For information, he has to accept. This was on a procedural point, hon. Member.

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, I am indeed disappointed by the honourable member, because when we were in Entebbe, she was not there, but she attended the meeting yesterday -(Interruption)

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Order, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I call for calm in this debate? We have a long day ahead so let us conserve some energy. 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for my chairman to deny my presence in a meeting yesterday, where I signed my presence? It is true when this report was being compiled over the weekend, I was not around; but I caught up with the committee yesterday. I participated in yesterday’s meeting and deliberations and I was reporting to this House what we agreed on yesterday. I appended my signature on the attendance list of yesterday and on the consensus sheet after. It is really wrong to deny my presence in the meeting and impart on what I did not participate in a decision of. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you raised the point of order?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Is it in order for the chairman to make me absent in a meeting where I was present? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, the honourable lady has brought it to your attention that she was very present in that meeting and whatever she is saying is based on information that she was able to participate in deciding. So, Mr Chairman, proceed with that knowledge.   

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Under 4.1, the chairperson of the committee is reading that $ 8 million for the Civil Service College under the Ministry of Public Service be transferred to UMI. 

When the committee on Public Service and Local Governments presented its report, which I did present to this House, this august House did recommend that my committee meets together with the Committee on Social Services and the Committee on Infrastructure and we resolve and come up with a way forward on this. I know that I have talked to my colleague chairpersons and we have not yet agreed on a joint meeting for the three committees. I am wondering whether it is procedurally correct for the Chairperson of the Budget Committee to come out on a matter like this unilaterally and reallocate money of the Civil Service College without our consent.
 
MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what was the recommendation from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government? What was the recommendation on this particular issue?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My recommendation on this matter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the recommendation you made to the House here?

MR MAGYEZI: The recommendation in the House which was approved was that there should be a meeting of the three committees -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the recommendation you made to the House?

MR MAGYEZI: That the joint meeting of the three committees should come out with a way forward on this matter and we have not yet had that meeting. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, you did not recommend that to the House. That is what the House decided. What did you recommend as a committee to the House on this matter? What was your recommendation on this $ 8 million?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, you recall that on the matter of the Civil Service College, the recommendation of the committee at that time was that all activities pertaining to this college should wait until we get land allocated for this college, and in that discussion, the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services pointed out that he had additional information from UMI requesting that they take over this college and then in your ruling, which was I think the guidance we took, you said that the three committees, social services, public services and infrastructure should meet to come up with a way forward. That was what I took, Mr Speaker. (Dr Epetait rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are dealing with a particular - you are not a member of that committee, hon. Member. No, wait because the issue here is that whether the chairman is procedurally correct to make a recommendation that was not made by the committee? That is what I am investigating now from the chairperson. What did he recommend, because the chairman is saying the recommendations that they made here are extracted from the reports of the sessional committees. So, that is what I am seeking to confirm before I give guidance on the matter. You were not part of the meeting; so, can I have us first sort out this matter then you can give your information.

The recommendation was that the $8 million be kept until land was found for the Civil Service College. It was not to recommend that it should be transferred to another institution. [Hon. Members: “No.”] That was not the recommendation of the committee. 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, that is the correct information. You are totally correct. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Mr Chairman.

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, I think I want to give some information. The terms of reference of the Speaker to us were to look at issues raised in (1) above with the view of harmonising them and allocating funds for such activities in the budget.

We had almost all the chairmen of all the committees and when we discussed, we had presentations from the sessional committee chairpersons and then we had a response from the ministers and their technocrats. In this particular case we are discussing, the issue of land came up and the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, pointed out to us that actually there was no need for land because there was free land and that the land that they were taking over actually was government land and, therefore, there was no money required for that. 

But at the same time, it was harmonised and agreed that this particular institute be transferred to Uganda Management Institute and that was what was harmonised. What I am reporting here, Mr Speaker, is what was harmonised by the committee. 

The only objection to this would be if what I am reporting here is not what we agreed at the meeting. My job here is to report what transpired and was recommended by the committee. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, continue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the clarification I want to seek is that the people who spent a long time with the ministries were the sessional committees and the Committee on Budget was just referred to go and harmonise the figures with the sessional committees. How come the chairman went ahead and started changing what the sessional committees had agreed upon? But the chairperson is –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon., for giving way. This debate was about the fact that there were two recommendations that came in this House. The one from the Committee on Public Service was about what the chairperson has clearly put, while the one from the Social Services Committee was of the view that the Civil Service College be transferred to UMI. This was also passed by the House.

When it went to the Budget Committee, which was looking at the money, the one from Public Service is saying, no action, while the one from the Social Services Committee is saying that money should be re-allocated to UMI. I can see that the chairperson and the Budget Committee had to take action. Whatever side they have taken, I think we should not say that they did something against what we discussed here because there were two recommendations.

As a committee, we are going to discuss together with the Committee on Public Service to harmonise, but I can see that there is a dilemma, because as we wait to discuss, a decision has to be taken as to where the money goes because we are going to pass the budget.

So, I think that is the debate that we should handle, but not trying to say the chairman passed something different. We should agree on how we move because we cannot leave that money hanging; you must put it somewhere. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Chairman of the Public Service Committee, relax. Mr Speaker, I know how we passed this money; it was a loan in the Eighth Parliament and there were conditions that we put on it. If the House agrees that the Committee on Public Service and Local Government meets with the Committee on Social Services to harmonise positions, I think it would -(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, in 2008, the Minister of Finance came to Parliament with a loan request and in that request Parliament was categorically informed that $ 8 million would be passed on to UMI for the Civil Service College. Based on that understanding, Parliament approved the loan. I see that we are tending to bend what had been agreed upon.

Public Service, for the last three years, has been clinging on what does not belong to it. There is no more negotiation, in my opinion, on this. This is an arrangement that had been agreed on. We debated that loan for almost two hours and within the committee, it took some time, but when it came to the House, the $ 8 million in particular was passed only on condition that it goes to UMI. UMI started making preparations for the whole programme, only for it to be high-jacked by Public Service. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in other words, the recommendations now harmonised by the Budget Committee would be correct?

DR EPETAIT: Absolutely, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that means that if the committee was doing it, it would say we agree with the recommendation of Parliament of 2008. You are aware that the Committees on Local Government and Public Service have been investigating that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, don’t you think that is now the decision we need to take as Plenary? They have made a recommendation; we have not reached the stage to debate their recommendations. So, can we move forward on this?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the point of procedure I want to raise is that the chairperson was presenting a report to this House and it appears members of his own committee are challenging their report. Because of that, the House has now started debating the report even before it is presented. I wonder whether it is procedurally fine to go on in this manner or the chairperson could have been given time to go and re-consult his position with members of his committee, because at the moment, the authors of the report are challenging it on the Floor. In fact, it is as if the members of the committee are alleging that the chairperson is presenting something totally different from what they discussed in their committee. That is the enquiry I wanted to make.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a report that is ready for presentation. This august House will have the opportunity to discuss this report and take its own decisions on the recommendations made. I see no harm at all in the chairman presenting this report and then we debate. If the information should be from a member of the committee saying, “That is not what we agreed,” it would come by way of debate and giving of information. Still, we are procedurally very correct. Mr Chairman, please proceed.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am looking at our Rules of Procedure; the one which is quite obvious is Rule 161 - the functions of the sessional committees. They are quite elaborate, but (d) mandated the sessional committees to examine critically Government’s recurrent and capital budget estimates, and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House.

I also want to call to memory Rule 147 with which you assigned this specific task to the Budget Committee. I think it was based on 147(3)(c), which talks about carrying out such other functions relating to the National Budget as may be assigned to it by Parliament or any law.

Mr Speaker, I just want to presume that the two are not in conflict, to the extent that the Budget Committee does not usurp the powers or the work that was done originally by the sessional committee. This is where I seek clarification.

If you look at the terms of reference that we gave to the Budget Committee, one, if I may paraphrase, was to look into matters needing resolution; not matters that were already resolved, but matters that came to the House and probably seemed to be hanging and needed to be resolved further. That is my assumption.

Two, paraphrased again, was to check the adherence of sectors on the government guidelines, which had given them areas where to make cuts. I think in (b) and (c), more or less the import is the same.

I am looking at this report as it is being presented, and I am seriously wondering whether all the issues the committee is presenting now were unresolved matters. I think, to the best of my recollection, key among the unresolved matters that came, for instance, from Social Services Committee - if you read page 47 of their report, they had one unresolved matter – teachers’ salaries. On health, pages 47 and 48; dying mothers needing the recruitment of more health workers. 

The procedural concern I have is, looking at the presentation up to this point, it looks like the Budget Committee is re-writing everything the sessional committees did in this House. Are we proceeding correctly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it was this House that set the terms of reference for the Budget Committee – to go and look at all the discussions that took place and try and draw lines, which would bring this House into a better understanding of the funding gaps, issues raised and if monies could be found to deal with some situations. That is how the matter went back to the Budget Committee. The report being presented, to the best of my hearing and my earlier reading of the same, is consistent with what we had requested them to do. They have not adopted anything because they had no capacity to do that. They are bringing it to the Plenary to take decisions. If I recall correctly, we adopted all the reports of the sessional committees and after that, there were issues that were not resolved and those are the ones we referred to the Budget Committee to harmonise. Now, in harmonising, they are coming out, sector by sector, to see what they were able to consider and then make recommendations on what they think this House should take decisions on. I think it is procedurally right. Shall we proceed and finish this report and later have a debate? Chairperson, please proceed.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope I will now be allowed to present the report, as you have directed, and then let them debate it. This report was not written by Tim Lwanga; it was written by the committee – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, proceed.

MR LWANGA: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development: Vote 012. A total of Shs 3.16 billion was realised as a saving from this sector. The committee recommends that budget savings of Shs 2.943 billion be re-allocated to development of the National Land Use Plan, which has a funding gap of Shs 3 billion. Shs 213 million should be re-allocated to surveying and demarcation of wetlands, while Shs 7.39 billion should be re-allocated from Uganda Land Commission to the Land Fund.

On Votes 005 and 011: Public Service and Local Government respectively, these are the savings which were realised; from the Ministry of Public Service, Shs 1.64 billion; Ministry of Local Government, Shs 2.53 billion and; Regional Governments Shs 2.34 billion – I am on page 5 – yielding a total of Shs 6.51 billion. The committee recommends that this money be re-allocated as follows: Wages of local government staff, Shs 5.5 billion; Local Government Finance Commission, Shs 510 million to review the grant allocation formulae and sensitisation of local leaders on local revenue mobilisation; and Public Service Commission, Shs 500 million, to cater for the recruitment of KCCA staff, the graduate recruitment exercise and online recruitment system.

For Vote 014: The Ministry of Health

There was a 30 percent reduction on consumptive items; 50 percent reduction on advertising budget; and a halt on purchase of vehicles using Government resources. Here, a total of Shs 5.57 billion savings was realised. The committee recommends that this amount be re-allocated to facilitate recruitment of health workers at lower levels.

As for Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, a total of Shs 17.214 billion was realised from non-priority areas and savings from the various vote functions in the sector. The committee recommends that the savings be re-allocated as follows: We have a table giving justifications – UBOS, Shs 1.534 billion to cover the funding gap of community information systems rollout, the census of business entities and plan for national statistic development implementation; Office of the Auditor-General, Shs 6.75 billion to cover a funding gap for staff structure, sample audit impact assessment study, funding gap in the value for money and forensic IT and energy audit; National Planning Authority, Shs 2.3 billion to cover the unfunded Spatial Plan and the wage shortfall; Ministry of Finance (Soroti Fruit Factory) Shs 3.0 billion to reinstate the previous budget allocation of Shs 5 billion; and the Ministry of Gender – on this case, we recommend that funds for the Youth Entrepreneurship Scheme, which were in the finance ministry be transferred to the gender ministry where the youth affairs belong. We also recommend that this ministry develops a clear training framework and these funds be competed for by all training institutions. 

On Votes 015 and 022: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage respectively, the committee did not realise any savings. This was due to the merger and separation transition arrangements, where the finance ministry did not provide the breakdown of funds for the financial year 2010/2011 for the two ministries.

Regarding Vote 003: Office of the Prime Minister, we realised a saving of Shs 4.5 billion after subjecting the expenditure to 30 percent and 50 percent cuts on adverts, seminars and workshops. The committee recommends that this amount be re-allocated as follows: Shs 4.2 billion should be transferred to the full-scale rollout of barazas and Shs 300 million should be allocated to sensitisation on the access to Information Act.

For Vote 001: Office of the President, the committee re-allocated Shs 1 billion (meant for the construction of RDCS’ offices) to Vote 107: Uganda AIDS Commission.

As for Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, a total of Shs 3.014 billion has been saved from the sector and the committee recommends that it is re-allocated to cover identified gaps in their order of priority. Such funds can only cater for the wage bill, Kiswahili Council, and Occupation Safety Health to the tune of Shs 2.7 billion, leaving a balance of Shs 335 million to cover the rest of the other priorities.

On Vote 107, 119 and others: Institutions under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the savings realised from the Justice, Law and Order Sector was Shs 1.9 billion after 30 and 50 percent cuts. The funds were reallocated within the sector as follows: Shs 1.3 billion to the Law Development Centre to cater for the completion of the auditorium; Shs 0.3 billion to the Judicial Service Commission for the recruitment of Judges from 50 to 82, and the inspection of courts from 24 to 100 annually; and Shs 0.27 billion to the Uganda Human Rights Commission for acquisition of court recording machines for nine regional offices.

The committee also made general observations and recommendations. The committee observed that although Government had good intentions to foster budget efficiency through reduction in wastage by instituting a 30 percent cut on consumptive items and a 50 percent cut on advertisement expenses, this was never adhered to by most of the spending agencies. Government should enforce regulations and instructions whenever instituted.

The Budget Committee took note of the crisis of the teachers’ salary and recommends that Government should consider setting up a salary review policy and implement it across the board. There should be a streamlined system for reviewing salaries of civil servants periodically. The committee recommended that this should be taken as a priority – in fact, a major priority item for the financial year 2012/2013.

The committee noted that despite Parliament’s earlier recommendation that Government restructures its programmes and departments with a view of minimising costs as a result of duplication of roles and the mandate to foster efficiency in service delivery, there are still many institutional programmes placed in ministries and agencies that lack capacity to implement them.  

The committee strongly recommends that these programmes and all institutions should be moved to their rightful home for easy supervision and monitoring. The institutions and programmes misplaced according to what we found out during our deliberations were:

1.	Uganda Development Corporation and the projects under it. It is currently under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and it should be transferred to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives;

2.	Investment Authority under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be transferred to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives;

3.	SACCOs under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be transferred to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Here we are talking about activities regarding SACCOs, which fall under cooperatives;

4.	Presidential Initiative on Banana Processing under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; we recommend that this one should be transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;

In conclusion, although the committee identified some savings through enforcing the cuts as specified in the budget speech and in the Budget Call Circular, plus our terms of reference. These savings could only be reallocated within the same sectors or votes due to gross underfunding of critical activities in the respective sectors. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much for the report. We will now open debate and I will put an initial timeframe of two hours, and I will give each Member contributing five minutes. I will ask the shadow minister to start the debate, but before that, there is a point of guidance that was being raised by hon. Cerinah Nebanda.

MS NEBANDA: I thank you so much. I am seeking guidance. I am a member of the Budget Committee, but when we were in Lweza, you gave us some terms of reference; and when we were debating here in Parliament, the Social Services Committee brought a concern about the teachers’ salary and they recommended that the Budget Committee should go sit and see how we can raise the 20 percent. 

Why I am seeking guidance from you, Mr Speaker, is because when we went to Lweza and I raised this matter with the chairman, he said that you gave him terms of reference and that the concerns about and recommendations of the Social Services Committee about the teachers is not in the terms of reference that you gave him. I tried to tell him that - if you look at reference 1 (a) where you raise the matters that were raised in the course of debate on the consideration of the ministerial policy statements on the budget that needed resolution by a way of translating them into actual estimates of expenditure.
   
I think the recommendation of the Social Services Committee falls under that term of reference. But he says that it is not in the terms of reference that you gave to the committee. When we start from the beginning of the Budget Committee, that recommendation of the Social Services Committee was not considered at all. When we received –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My reading of the report on page 8 at the top, bullet 5.2; the Budget Committee took note of the crisis of teachers’ salary and the committee recommends that the government should consider setting up a salary review policy. I suppose this is because they considered it and they could not have come to this conclusion without even thinking about it.

MS NEBANDA: Mr Speaker, why I need your guidance is that from the beginning of the matter, as we were even getting the cuts, the recommendation was not considered. They say that the matter of teachers was going to be looked at as any other business. My concern is that if Parliament recommended that we take it as a serious matter and then the committee says it was looked at as any other business, I then need guidance from you because I am confused.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee has reported on that issue and that means they considered it. Hon. Baryomunsi – he was still on a point of guidance also and then we start the debate.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much. We were here when the debate took place and when this matter was referred to the Budget Committee, but I seem to get whispers from some members of the committee that there has been a change on what they agreed upon and I am not settled as a Member of Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you are not on that committee, why do you not let the members give information on it?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Can I first seek your guidance on the matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I have already guided you on that if that is the issue you are raising. If you are raising issues about whispers, let the people who whispered now put it on the record because you cannot say it because you were not there.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Much obliged. But why I rose was that when the chairman yesterday said the machines broke down, I was confronted by some Members by virtue of being a commissioner. I led them to the plant down and the people there said they had not been given that information and the machines were working; and then those rumours started coming in, that it appears that the figures and the information in the report were to be doctored. So, I just want your guidance; that Members need to be settled and the chairperson needs to clarify so that those kinds of suspicions do not come as we debate this report. 

There was also discomfort that the meeting at the Serena was funded by the Ministry of Finance and yet the Commission has enough resources to fund committees. I think we must redeem the image of this Parliament –(Applause)- so that if we are doing the work of Parliament, we ensure that the image of Parliament remains very clear. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you honourable commissioner. Earlier in my communication, I made a statement about the issue of what happened yesterday regarding the report. We heard that the photocopier had broken down. I received this report yesterday when I was sitting here and from what the chairman has read, the text he has read is the same as what I received at the time they were telling me the photocopier had broken down. So, there should be no fear that anything has been changed because I received this one yesterday.

Everybody was here when I received this report and I announced it yesterday and said, “I have a copy” but Members said they did not have copies, so we could not proceed with the debate. There should be no fear that there are some changes or anything like that.

Secondly, the issues you have raised about how the committee had to meet in Serena under funding from - you see the situation we are dealing with was such that they had to go there immediately and whatever arrangement was made at that time had to be made immediately to enable the committee sit and deliberate. If there were debts incurred by the Parliamentary Commission, the Parliamentary Commission can only settle those debts. That is what we can direct; that the Parliamentary Commission settles the debts that were incurred as a result of those meetings, because it is clearly under the budget of the Parliamentary Commission. If somebody else paid it, he or she only lent that money, but that responsibility is for the Parliamentary Commission.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedure follows what hon. Baryomunsi raised. On average, a Member of Parliament is paid, with all expenditures, about Shs 200,000 a day and the purpose is for a Member of Parliament to come here, make laws, represent his people and do oversight.  Parliament should be one of those institutions to show a good example in good governance. It would be very good for us, before I raise my procedure, to really know who is this member of staff who misled our chairman, because some people could be hiding behind Parliament. As you have seen, hon. Baryomunsi said that money is supposed to be paid by Parliament. They want to make Parliament look opaque so that people can benefit from that issue. 

You recall the Prime Minister said, “You are not knowledgeable.” I think he was saying we are not knowledgeable that the machine had broken down. These are the issues. Is it procedurally right to go ahead without the chairman - he has apologised - to tell us which staff misled him? Because, the Clerk, the owner of the administration here has said the reports were there. Who is this person who misled our chairperson? If we get him, I think disciplinary action should be taken by the Parliamentary Commission quickly. Otherwise, we shall be doing a wrong thing. (Applause)

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, those reports were ready yesterday after we had adjourned. In fact, some people got them yesterday. My information is that some of them were actually distributed to some people who went with them home yesterday. The information I gave is the information I had. [Hon Members: “Who?”] Please, for God’s sake, listen to me. The information I gave is what I had. Not only that, but I think you have confirmed that nobody doctored the figures, and it is a pity that I cannot challenge the honourable commissioner on the rumour that he has heard, but rumours are very dangerous because they spoil peace. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwebaze please; and after you, let us go to the substance of the debate today.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, mine was a simple point of guidance on the administrative matter of Parliamentary Commission and Finance. I think the matter was raised by a Parliamentary Commissioner and the Leader of the Opposition who is a member of the Parliamentary Commission. The Commission is chaired by the Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on whether this is not a matter for the Commission to discuss because as a chairperson of a committee, all he wanted was a meeting to take place and transact business. So, the rest is administrative and if there are overlaps of who did what in terms of organisation, that is a matter for the Commission to look at.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is precisely what I have said. Any bills incurred in the course of the meeting of the Budget Committee should be addressed to the Parliamentary Commission. That is what I said and the Parliamentary Commission will settle those bills. Can I now go to the debate of the report, please?

12.28
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, let the shadow minister make a statement.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am here in two capacities -(Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Procedure

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear the procedure. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to you and the Member who was going to take the Floor, this Parliament has a name to protect. The testimony of one of the commissioners over what went on yesterday cannot be left hanging. The Speaker chairs the Parliamentary Commission. You were disappointed by what happened and the gap which has been revealed puts this House to question. The procedure I am seeking is, should anybody continue with this debate in the absence of an apology from the chairperson of that committee which messed up yesterday? Why doesn’t he apologise to us and we proceed instead of simply speaking over what happened?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, please take your seat. I was part of the people who gave information about the condition of the machine. We received that at the same time when we were given this information that the copies could not be enough. For that reason, I said, “They have said the reports cannot be ready because of a fault.” I sought your indulgence -”Can we proceed without the report because I have a copy?” I waved a copy yesterday. The Members said, “No, we cannot without the report.” That is what happened. I had a copy of the report. You are placing an unnecessary burden on the Chair. I think this is a matter - I told you, it was raised by the Clerk and it is a matter that will go back to the Commission. That does not have to be discussed by this House, but some action will be taken to go to the details of this thing.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to assure my colleagues and the Members -

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I have gone through this report and as you know, chairpersons of committees are ex-officios of this committee, and I attended that committee throughout. When I look at the first report, which of course may not contain everything, it has certain fundamental points raised by the committee. 

For example, we had a point on the failure of the government to allow Parliament to look at those sectors that they had tried to protect like the Presidency, Security etcetera, but I do not see it in this report. I have the original report here and when I compare it with this one, I find some gaps. So, I am now suspicious that this report might have been tampered with, and I think the reason why we could not continue yesterday was because they had to make some changes. I have sent him a note and he says he does not see the difference. I have discussed with the Government Chief Whip to show him what I think went wrong; I think we need some sort of investigation on this matter so that we can all move together.

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, hon. Sabiiti was in the meeting and I believe he was in the meeting yesterday as well – hon. Sabiiti, can you point out the fundamental difference between the report that we produced and the report that you have?

MR SABIITI: For example, in the original report, 5.2 reads as follows: “The committee noted that whereas it was rightly noted that the continued allocation of huge amounts of funds towards consumption items was wasteful expenditure and thus needed to be stopped forthwith, it was a contradiction to apply the policy of cuts in these areas selectively. 

The committee was surprised to note that most of the high spending agencies had been protected from the said cuts, yet huge sums of money have been allocated to the same consumption items which the minister had identified as areas of wastage, for example, all statutory bodies, Defence, Social Services, and Infrastructure among others. There is need to apply regulations consistently.”

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think an impression should not be created that there are two different reports, yet there is supposed to be one. I think what hon. Sabiiti is talking about; when they met to harmonise, there was a draft report done by that harmonisation team. That draft report contributed to the material of the final report which the chairperson has presented. 

So, I propose that in case hon. Sabiiti or any other Member feels that whatever was part of the draft report was not reflected, then as we debate the report, let those gaps be brought in as amendments to the report and we have them included. But we should not create an impression that the report presented here is an edited copy. This is one report as presented by the Chair. But there had been a draft report on the work that was going on in Kyankwanzi. I wanted to clarify that because we had a discussion with hon. Jack Sabiiti.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, you told this House that yesterday you received a copy. But some people also received copies from the members of the parliamentary staff who had printed them, and they said that copies had been printed and no machine had broken down. 

Now, when you look at the copy we got yesterday, on page 5, under item 4.7 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it is indicated that a total of Shs 16.79 billion was realised as savings. There is also another report which shows that it was Shs 17.214 billion saved. When you look at the first report on page 3, in the table, the allocation to Ministry of Education and Sports is Shs 4.54 billion and on another copy it is indicated 4.5 billion. When you look at the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the indication is Shs 3.62 billion yet in the other copy they indicate Shs 1.92 billion. 

So, the information I would like to give is that there are two copies of the report and I do not know which is which. The person who gave me this copy also gave a copy to the Speaker. We have two copies and most likely the Speaker has been denied a second copy; he would be having a second copy as well. 

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, there is a bit of mathematics here. What you were talking about the Ministry of Finance, the total saving is Shs 17.21 billion; we take off Shs 2.29 billion, and we end up with Shs 14 billion point something, which is appearing on the report. So, really, that mathematics adds up. And when you talk about the Ministry of Public Service, the summation is different; you add up the total and then divide it out. 

Now, the original copy you are looking at is a draft copy, not the consolidated copy. The draft copy, is the same that hon. Sabiiti was looking at. But at the end of the day, we have a consolidated copy which is giving consolidated figures, and when you add up the figures, they are exactly the same. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask hon. Ekanya, the shadow minister who actually attended these meetings, to guide us on these matters?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to plead with my colleagues –(Interjections)– we need to stick to our Rules. The House resolved that the Budget Committee handles this matter and Parliament also continues. It was the wisdom of the members of the committee that since we needed all accounting officers to clarify to synchronise with the minister – and we worked up to 11 O’clock. 

Members need to note that to use only two days to go through all the sessional committee reports - they are thirteen - was not easy. And we did that with the Hansard of this Parliament and other staff; it was not easy work for us and our staff. So, yesterday, to cut on the expenditure, the chairman dictated that all members had to checkout. Members continued working up to evening and we said that the following day, we were going to meet in the Parliamentary Chamber. And all Members were requested to turn up.

Now, Mr Speaker, some Members did not turn up; our staff worked all night to make a draft from Entebbe. The draft came – we were making changes, which they would pick and go back to the computer to place because you gave an order that the House was supposed to sit in the afternoon. That is why there were some technical errors in facts and statements. But you may want to learn that some of us stayed up to the end. Where is hon. Frank Tumwebaze?
 
Also members of the committee stayed up to the end to ensure our signatures are not abused. But because of the pressure that was put on the staff, they went on to reproduce the draft through photocopying. Otherwise, we stayed up to the end of the meeting because the chairman had insisted that all members consent to that document. That is why the report came in late with some photocopies of the draft and I think that is what brought some confusion. Actually, when the chairman was given the two copies, the final report and the draft, he sensed confusion. 

What I can also say is that some of the pages of the draft report were wrongly stapled, which prompted the chairman to refuse to present such a report. He said we had to reconcile these issues and that was about the time the House adjourned. I want to plead with the Members that this report was not doctored. (Applause) I am saying this because, Mr Speaker, I took an oath to defend the Constitution and tell the truth. I – (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I have clearly identified an area, which I am sure was in the draft; it was not supposed to be expunged from the report. So, may I seek clarification from Ekanya –(Interjections)– sorry, hon. Ekanya – is it in order for the hon. Member to say this report was never tampered with when actually the information, and which information is very vital, was expunged from the report that has been presented?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what the shadow minister is saying is that whatever changes happened were done by the committee in the Conference Hall here. The final report, therefore, is what was agreed upon by the committee. So, the matters that were expunged from the final report, whose copy I have seen and from the information from him, were dealt with by the committee which made those changes. It is also clear that members of the committee signed that report after they agreed that the content was correct. So, there is no order violated. The hon. Member is perfectly in order.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like I was saying, I want to plead with the Members that as the Speaker has said, it is us the members of the committee you should crucify because we stand by what the chairman has presented. And Mr Speaker, you can ask all members of the committee to stand and see if they can vote against the chairman. Because this is our report, please crucify us as a committee and not the chairman alone; this is a report of the committee.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The guidance I am seeking – yes, this is a report presented by the chairman of the committee and it is supported by our shadow minister, but I do not see the signatures of the members; the report has no signature of any member –(Interjections)– where are the signatures? Actually hon. Frank has even said that some of them did not sign it and he chose to walk out. Already, one of the members of the committee is disowning it –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: With due respect to my former teacher, from pages 9 to 10 of the report, there are 13 signatures. And as you know, the Rules of Procedure say that for a report to be produced, at least one third of the committee members must sign it. Now that it is more than one third of the members who signed this report, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to insinuate that the chairman and other members of the committee did not sign it, so making the report fake?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member does not have a copy that has the page onto which signatures were appended and that is possible. But like I have already said, the information that I have is that that report was signed by 13 members of the committee. So, if that is the background upon which you were seeking guidance, I have made it clear. Otherwise, if you had acted in a different capacity, I would rule you out of order. It could be true that the copy of the report that you are carrying may not be having a page onto which members signed, which came about because of a human error. Yes, hon. Nabilah.

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You had indicated that you would rise on information and I had allowed you to contribute on that ground. Now you have changed and are now rising on a procedural matter?

MS NAGGAYI: Yes, Mr Speaker, because this is a procedural matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MS NAGGAYI: I am rising on a point of procedure because we usually see Members challenging their own reports; this is not the first time such issues have come up. It is not the first time that Members come to the House and get shocked by reports from their own committees.

Mr Speaker, our procedure is that a member of a committee is not allowed to debate reports from the committee to which they are members. But we also know that procedurally, members just sign one sheet of paper which is normally not put together with the main report –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that what you do?

MS NAGGAYI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh! That is unfortunate because that is not what is supposed to be done. You are supposed to read that report and confirm it before you sign it. So, if you have been signing papers that are not part of the report, you have been acting in error, hon. Member.

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Speaker, allow me substantiate what I am talking about. It is very easy for someone to pluck off that page and get another report, photocopy it and you have it. That is why members are complaining behind the scene.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I am one of the members of the Budget Committee of Parliament. I would like to affirm to the House that those committed members of that committee who spent their time to really work hard to ensure we get a report to this House, were extremely keen to ensure whatever we deliberated comes out in the final report. That is why we appended our signatures accordingly. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, because one of the members alleged that what was in the draft report was doctored, allow me take that member through the process of coming up with a final product. What we did is clearly indicated –(Interjections)– yeah! I am giving information -(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We want to thank our Budget Committee for the work they did. However, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for Members we sent to work to be paid money by the ministry of finance. All Members of the Budget Committee signed for Shs 1 million. Is it procedurally right, when Parliament has its money, for our Members to be paid by ministry of finance?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that raises a matter of privilege and a matter of that nature can only be handled by a committee of this House. I will leave it at that. What I am going to do is to ask the people who have appended their signatures here to confirm whether this is the report that they signed: 

Hon. Christine Achayo  
Hon. Monicah Amoding 
Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya 
Hon. Jovah Kamateeka
Hon. Sara Kataike Ndoboli
Hon. Margaret Komuhangi 
Hon. Jennifer Mujungu 
Hon. Patrick Mulindwa 
Hon. Fred Mwesigye
Hon. Ann Maria Nankabirwa 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: With due respect, Mr Speaker, I rose at the beginning of the debate on this report. When my chairperson was presenting, I rose up on the issue of agriculture. True, it is here as we agreed, but when he stood up to present, he was telling us to ignore this figure. And when we went –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am asking about what is in the report. Is it correct?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: With due respect, Mr Speaker, I want you to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not asking you about what the chairman said. I am asking about the report. Is the content of the report what you signed? 

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: I cannot answer, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ongalo Obote. Hon. Members, this report has been presented. There are issues – order! The report has been presented. I will now ask the honourable shadow minister to respond to the issues. 

12.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues. As the shadow minister, I looked at the terms of reference and the circular issued by the President. Hon. Colleagues, if you have the terms of reference –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.  

MR EKANYA: If you look at the terms of reference, (b) states whether some of the budgetary provisions that were given did not follow the expenditure, and (c) whether a circular instruction issued to accounting officers by the Treasury on the reduction by 30 percent and 50 percent was followed. 

I went and did an analysis on the entire budget to confirm whether ministries and Government departments complied with the circular from the Secretary to the Treasury and that of the President. After doing that analysis, we discovered that no institution complied. I have some few copies that should be circulated to Members. 

This House was concerned about the issue of teachers and other priority areas. My focus was based on wastage and consumptive areas. If you do that analysis – because of time I will just give you the total. From the entire budget, we can save a total of Shs 600 billion, if you looked at all Government departments. For example, the unprotected institutions: Ministry of Public Service, we can make a saving of Shs 328 million; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we can make a saving of Shs 17 billion; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we can make a saving of Shs 213 million; Ministry of Agriculture, we can make a saving of Shs 50 million; Ministry of Local Government, we can make a saving of Shs 20 million etcetera. In total, we can make a saving of Shs 600 billion. According to the analysis and calculation, the teachers of -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it exactly Shs 600 billion? Why don’t you state the figure that you have? Shillings 600 billion is too exact to be real. Why don’t you state the exact figure?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. We can make a saving of Shs 605,253,284,881. 

Why did the Opposition focus on that? We got information that, for example, it is easy to increase salaries of primary school teachers, secondary school teachers, tertiary teachers, and health workers, including KCC, by 100 percent. You need Shs 683,062,000,000 to increase it by 100 percent. If you are to increase it by 50 percent, you needed Shs 341 billion. That was one scenario, Mr Speaker. 

I, therefore, thought that this information was very necessary because this was the directive of the President, which was signed by the Prime Minister that froze the purchase of vehicles, reduction of travel inland and abroad, advertisement, newspapers, and seminars. 

Please, can the Prime Minister get a copy? That was one scenario. 

The second scenario was reviewing the entire budget. If you make a deduction of the entire budget, that is Uganda funding excluding donor support; if you make a cut on non-wage and development, you could make a saving

1.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Amama Mbabazi): I am a bit lost because I thought we were debating the report of the committee of which hon. Ekanya is a Member -(Interruption)– no; there is double business in the committee. The rules are that if you are a member of committee, you either subscribe to the report of the committee or you do not, and you write a minority report -(Interruption)- no; there is no shadow business here because you cannot break  the rules. I got lost at first when he stood up. I thought he was -(Interruption)

MS ABIA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi Patrick, in order to suggest that there is no shadow here when in actual effect there is a whole Shadow Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is raising critical issues concerning the budget, and more specifically the plight of teachers as requested by you? Does it not cloud his conscience that there is an immoral facilitation of the members of this committee which is generating a lot of issues on the Floor of Parliament.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister was citing the rules, and the rules are fairly clear on what happens in committees and when committees report. He also talked about how people who dissent on the unanimous decisions taken by committees should air out their views on areas of disagreement. 

This is usually contained in a minority report. When a Member of a committee signs the report, it means that he agrees to the content of the report. That one is taken. So, the honourable Prime Minister is perfectly in order to raise this issue. 

The exception we are making here is that the Minister of Finance will have an opportunity to speak on this subject in the general debate. This is a process of general debate. It is permissible for the Shadow Minister to give his contribution in debate; allow Members debate and then the Minister will conclude by making responses to those issues. That is how I have guided and we should proceed that way. 

MR TINKASIMIRE: Mr Speaker,  I have heard your ruling and I have also been listening to the Shadow Minister for Finance. Following your ruling, I expect him not to disagree with the contents of the report. Even if he is speaking as a Shadow Minister of Finance, he is still the same person who signed the report. I would, therefore, ask that since he is the same person commenting, we should expunge every record from the Hansard that disagrees with the contents of the report. We need his submission as a Shadow Minister of Finance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Ekanya, did you bring these observations to the attention of the committee? 

MR EKANYA: Hon. Speaker, this matter was discussed, but as you know our rules, the committee takes decisions by voting. We are bound by collective responsibility. If you oppose the decision of a committee and members decide by consensus or voting - it is just discipline that you do not disagree because you have been voted out. Next time you will also bring an issue and members will support you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules are clear on this. I am sure hon. Ekanya you will see the conflict. If this was being raised on behalf of the Opposition, then somebody who did not sign the report could have been more appropriate to raise it in the debate.  Someone else would be more appropriate other than you who actually agreed to the contents of the report. Someone from the Opposition or a shadow minister could have raised this matter other than you who signed the report. I do not think it is appropriate for you to continue commenting on this matter. I am going to have somebody else from the Opposition raising issues in the course of this debate.

You were precluded after having signed and agreed. These matters were not debated or agreed upon by the committee. Even if they were voted on by the committee; they took a decision which you did not disagree with. The substance of what you are presenting is showing an alternative to what the committee actually recommended. It would not be proper for hon. Ekanya, a member of the committee, who signed the report, to come and disagree with it. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of a committee member, who happens to be a shadow minister, came up very seriously in the Eighth Parliament, which became a procedural issue for a very long time. But I remember it was finally settled when they said it is okay for a shadow minister to sit on a committee so that they can follow what happens there, but also still retain the right to comment on the issues that come within their docket. So, I get confused, because that is what happened in the second half of the Eighth Parliament, following the procedures that we have, Mr Speaker. 

I am confused because hon. Ekanya is a Member of the Budget Committee, and also a shadow minister, but as a shadow minister, he has a responsibility to make a comment like you had ruled before. This means - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have listened to you. When we made the exception in the course of the discussion on the ministerial policy statement, a clear distinction was made. When the honourable shadow minister rose, he was responding to the ministerial policy statement and not to the report of the committee, and that was very clear. 

We gave him a slot and the reason was that the time when the ministers presented their ministerial policy statements should have also been the time for the shadow minister to present a statement, and both statements should have been discussed by the committee, and the committee reports on the two sets of policy statements. But it did not happen; and I ruled here that in the spirit of accommodation, we would make the exception to allow the shadow ministers make their statements as responses to the ministerial policy statements and not as responses to the committee reports, and that was very clear. 

So, I see no contradiction in the way I have ruled, and I see no contradiction with what I ruled in the past. The ruling is upheld and it will continue to be the ruling. If there were other rulings that happened before this House in the Eighth Parliament, this ruling overrules them to that effect. 

Therefore, the ruling is and it should be understood properly; if the honourable shadow minister had not signed the report, in which case he may have reserved some rudimentary right to say something, but because he actually even signed and he is the one who even came and defended the contents of the report, it will not be proper for him to continue in that line.

1.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I think it is important for Members to understand this rule on the basis of which you made your ruling. It is Rule 178 of our Rules of Procedure and it reads as follows: “(1) Any Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.”

(2) The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at a time of the consideration of the committee report.” 

It is very clear that even if you had not signed, the only way you could make your dissenting voice heard as a member of the committee is if you had written a minority report and you were given the opportunity –(Interjections)- because the precedent we have here is that this House in the past, knowing that there is someone with a minority report and has delayed the consideration of the main report, they give them time to go and write their minority report in order to be in conformity with this rule and to have the Member to address this House on that. 

So, it is very clear and you have a right to dissent if you are a member of the committee, whether you have signed or not signed. But of course you cannot sign one report and present a minority report at the same time. But even if you have not signed, the only way you, as a Member, can address this House on the report of your committee, is via a minority report, and there is no other way -(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I can’t challenge your ruling, but I think we need to go back to our record. Hon. Ssekandi and hon. Kadaga, now the Speaker, in the Eighth Parliament directed hon. Peter Nyombi, who is now the Attorney-General, that because our rule does not comply with the constitutional provision and the Administration of Parliament Act, which creates the structure of shadow ministers, it was, therefore, directed by this House and a ruling was made and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs was ordered to amend the Rules of Procedure to comply with the Administration of Parliament Act and the Constitution, which creates the Opposition and the shadow ministers. But because we went to campaigns, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs then did not manage to bring that amendment. 

So, the practise, which has been – and that happened because of the way the rule is and from the clarification from the Prime Minister - is that if I don’t sign the report and I am a shadow minister, then I have to present my minority report. But I am the Shadow Minister for Finance; so, it is not a minority report of Ekanya, a member of the committee. It should be the Opposition’s position. At what time, therefore, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have made a ruling on this matter and my colleague, who I respect because we have been here since 1996, clearly came up during debate and said he did not want his signature to be abused; so he had to follow the report and he signed. That is clear that he was in consonance and agreed with all the procedures and the outcome of the report. This clearly defeats reason, because we have been following this matter since morning, for the same Member who was in the same meeting to come up and purport that he has something different. 

Secondly, he even made a statement here when there was a disagreement about the report. He said he did not want his signature to be abused, but he followed the report until it came out. 

Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue debating the report for that matter, when it is very clear that hon. Ekanya agrees with the report from his signature and from the statement he made earlier on, and you have even ruled that we should go ahead and debate the report? Is it procedurally right for us to continue going forward and backwards on the same matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have made a ruling on this point. What I am going to do is to sit and in the course of our deliberations, provide a detailed and well-reasoned ruling on this subject for a simple reason; the matters being raised by the shadow minister. If it had been ruled like that before, that ruling needs a review because if you sit in a committee and deliberate, you raise all the issues and nobody denies you any opportunity to raise any issue, and you compile a report and you agree to that report, it would be highly irregular for the report which you are party to, to be presented and you come out and you start opposing it. It would be very irregular. Shadow or no shadow, it would be irregular. 

That is why the only allowance I was making is that if it was the view of the Opposition on the debate, that is now a general debate and they wanted to make a contribution to the debate as a position of the Opposition on these issues; it would be easy if it was somebody who had not signed the report and not been part of the report. That is very clear and we should not continue with this line. (Applause)  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this is a deal gone bad.  How do we proceed from here for the future? If we are to stick by the rules - I just want to be guided - at what point do the shadow cabinet make their responses to the committee reports? In most cases, the Shadow Minister for Finance always presents the alternative view, and when we go to the committees it is unfortunate or fortunate that the shadow ministers are members of the committees. But if they were to go by the proposals they make in the presentation of the alternative budget -(Hon. Lyomoki rose_)- Could you be patient a bit, hon. Lyomoki? I am still building my case. I do not know what clarification you are asking for.

Mr Speaker, the guidance I want is that, if we encourage shadow cabinet ministers, because they are disagreeing on one or two things to produce a minority report, how many reports shall we have in this House? So, I just wanted to be guided on that - 

THE DEPUTY SPAEKER: I have already ruled on the issue.

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, we are here doing very serious business for this country. The Member in his response or whatever he is saying, he mentioned there is a deal which has gone bad. (Laughter) Is it in order for a Member to equate whatever we are discussing here to deals that are going bad? And what is the deal without substantiating? Is it a deal outside this House or a deal in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think “deal gone bad” was a figure of speech and it is permitted. 

Hon. Okupa, let me make one statement on this issue. It is the final statement please. What I have said is fairly clear. If the shadow minister is a member of the committee and disagrees with what has transpired in the committee, because he is there not as shadow minister, but as a member of the committee, it is within his or her right to file a minority report. But if there is a view of the Opposition on the matter in the sector, then there will have to be an innovative way for the Opposition to handle this so that there does not appear to be a conflict. 

The situation we are dealing with presents a conflict. I am sure the hon. Ekanya himself feels it because he is the one who stood here to defend the content of the report, but he is also being pushed by his portfolio as shadow minister, to lay some other facts on the ground on these matters. So, if it is coming from another section or a member of the Opposition, it would be okay. Yes, hon. Katuntu? On the same matter?

1.27
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought my voice as the Shadow Attorney-General should be heard on this point. We seem to be rotating around the same point unnecessarily. 

Mr Speaker, I do agree with you entirely that actually the position you have stated is what our rules dictate and it is also in these rare moments when I agree with the Prime Minister. I agree with you on this. 

I think as Opposition, if I am heading a portfolio like I do on the committee I sit on, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I need to present the Opposition position in that committee. Should the committee disagree with it then I am obliged to write a minority report. If I do agree with the committee position why should I even write a report or why should I present an Opposition position? We do not have to disagree all the time. There could be circumstances where the Opposition actually agrees with the committee 100 percent. So, what position would you be presenting? I do not even see a lacuna in the rules.

My view is that we have wasted a lot of time on this. We should proceed and I think the Opposition, after consulting, we have other honourable colleagues who will present the Opposition position other than hon. Ekanya, who out of error, appendaged his signature and he is bound by that signature -(Interjections)- and it was in good faith. He agreed with the contents of the reports, but actually, the position of the Opposition is slightly different and as you rightly put it, Mr Speaker, he is in a very awkward position. I do request, Mr Speaker, that you allow the Leader of the Opposition to present our position and we move on. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I had given two hours and we have used one and a half hours of it. Basically it is on - I am going to allow the debate now to continue. I had picked the hon. Ekanya, but I am going to ask hon. Nandala-Mafabi to – I gave five minutes to each Member. We’ll see how to extend the time.

1.30
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that there was an error, but my finance minister should have been the one responsible for this work. I will need a few more minutes because I need to deal with more issues which would have been dealt with by my minister, and then also the position of the Opposition. But my colleagues will make their contribution also.

Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that this report is not taking into consideration some of the issues that were raised by Parliament. Before I come to the figures and how they would arise, on page 8 of the report of the Committee on Social Services, which is headed by hon. Lyomoki, who is a representative of the Workers, he said, “The committee, therefore, recommends a phased increase in the salaries of all teachers beginning with an increment of 20 percent this financial year. To achieve this, the committee proposes the reallocation of Shs 29.938 billion from wasteful expenditures at the ministry headquarters for wages for teachers to partially cater for this provision”.

That was the chairman of the committee. The report was brought to Parliament and adopted. When you look at the committee report of Budget, which he signed, on page 4 - Okay, which you attended -(Interruption)

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable for giving way. My information is that the chairman of the committee and the committee, went through a difficult time to accommodate all the ideas, and after lengthy discussions, we reached a consensus. The teachers’ salaries were discussed and we said we cannot discuss and include things that were not in the terms of reference.

MS NEBANDA: Thank you so much. I want to inform my colleague, because we sit on the same committee. The chairman of the social services committee did not sign this because he saw that the recommendation that he made in his report was not being catered for as we were discussing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the chairman of the social services committee is an ex-officio and cannot sign. That is why even the name might not be there.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Hon. Lwanga is my old friend. You recall when we were discussing the corrigenda and he brought it wrongly. After some time, we will need to talk and see how to deal with some issues professionally because some of the things you are doing are not being done professionally.

The committee recommended Shs 29.938 billion. The chairman of the committee who is representing the Workers has not come up to say anything. Did he bring this report to close our eyes and he goes behind and turns against us, and yet it was adopted?

Mr Speaker, you will see that these are big problems. I have another report here and I am just quoting a few of them - (Interruption)

MR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Social Services came up with recommendations which were passed by this House and I presented them as Chair. Another committee of the Budget went further and analysed issues and came up with their report. Now, the honourable Leader of the Opposition is trying to insinuate that I, Dr Sam Lyomoki, has kept quiet when he was the first one to start contributing. Is it in order for him to speculate and insinuate that the Member of Parliament for Workers’ will keep quiet on this matter? Is he in order? Is he in my mind to start speculating that I am going to keep quiet on this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you are now informed that hon. Lyomoki will be speaking on this matter later. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very grateful that hon. Lyomoki will come up and speak, but it would have been one of the minority reports, which I would have been happy to see here.

On page 55 of the committee report on Trade, Tourism and Industry - and you have these reports - the Woman MP for Kayunga even got up and said we have Shs 105,484 billion, which has been misallocated for capacity building of SACCOs and capacity strengthening of SACCOs. This is money being allocated for the same item. Soroti Fruit Factory, which has again appeared, says now we have reinstated the value to Shs 5 billion. What happened to the previous billions, if you read the Budget report?

So, Mr Speaker, you will see that there is Shs 105 billion already here and nobody talks about it. What they talk about in the report is that at the ministry headquarters, we got nothing yet we told them in Parliament that there were issues. I will conclude on the reason why people kept quiet at the end.

We have got summaries of reports here and I will start with Ministry of Foreign Affairs. For the year 2010/2011 - and this is the budget which ended recently - we gave them 100 percent and they spent 50 percent. Ministry of Justice - and I am now quoting examples to give the reason why I am developing a point - spent 82 percent on non-wage. But the one which performed very well was court awards, 52.3 percent. And you know why the court awards performed very well, because that is the area of eating and cheating the people of Uganda.

I have ICT, where IT and Information Management performed 68.4 percent; Communication 72 percent; Policy and Planning 77.6 percent. You can see that they never reached 100 percent. UNRA performed 85.7 percent; Ministry of Local Government on recurrent, 52 percent, and on development 82.4 percent. It is donor money which went at 86 percent and tax is at 100 percent. Their average is 82.7 percent.

All ministries in Uganda have never performed at 100 percent. That signifies that even if we give them 100 percent of the budget, there will always be some money or parts, which will not be spent. That is why I concur with the Shadow Minister of Finance that making some cuts on non-wage is very important. When we totalled this up, we discovered that over Shs 1.4 trillion was not spent in the previous budget, yet if we are looking for 100 percent for the teachers, we need only Shs 682.6 billion. If we talk of 50 percent, which hon. Epetait agreed to, we will need Shs 341 billion.

Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: He run away from the cold. I thank my brother hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving way. I just wanted to give information to him and to the rest of the Members of the House that for a very long time since 1998 - before hon. Nandala-Mafabi was born - this Government has pursued a policy of cash budgeting. That means that even if we budget and allocate certain amounts of resources or monies, the outturn will be a reflection of the amount available for expenditure and, therefore, released by the Treasury.

So, when you see that a ministry or a vote holder did not spend all the money that was budgeted for, it is not because they failed to spend it, but it is because, in most cases, there weren’t enough resources to release and disburse to them to spend. That is the explanation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, my brother, the Prime Minister who ran away from circumcision, has fallen in a bad trap –(Laughter)– because in Bugisu, we circumcise and that is why he went the other side. If it is true we are dealing with a cash budget, then there would be no arrears in Uganda. The moment you say there are arrears, it means that is the approved position; we have authorised you to go and spend, but because we could not give you enough money, arrears arose. (Applause) You have fallen in a trap of a person who went to school. (Laughter) 

In 1998, which he is talking about, I was working in the Ministry, and so I am conversant with these things. It is very bad for us to protect some areas – because these areas are also talking of advertising, workshops, buying cars and seminars. Then you say you leave some while removing others – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please prepare to roll it up in two minutes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is the Leader of the Opposition and I should be given some respect; I am the Prime Minister this side. Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have two minutes, sir.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Speaker. It is wrong for you to switch me off. It does not augur well because if you cannot switch off the Prime Minister and you switch me off, it is not good. I plead with you. Mr Speaker, it is wrong for us to remove some areas to be protected and others are not protected. If we have decided to do a cut, we should do it all over.

The other issue is: How are we sure that the submitted budgets were submitted after the cuts or not? What was the base period where we are using the figures of last year to apply the percentage or having given them the money? We told them to carry out cuts? If it is true that these figures already had cuts and yet we have identified savings, it is the ones we should allocate to areas we believe are more deserving, and those are the salaries of teachers. (Applause)

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, my honourable brother, for giving way again. Just quickly – again for the benefit of those who may not know - in the course of the performance of a budget, there are lots of things that may happen. For example, there are very many court awards which can never be predetermined in terms of amount. And, therefore, sometimes when you see arrears, it is not because we did not have a cash budget, but  there were decisions, say by court, imposing a duty on Government to pay and because it is a cash budget, and yet Government does not have the cash, it does not pay, hence you get arrears. That is the explanation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI:  Mr Speaker, I hope hon. Lwanga will listen to this. We know what we call “contingent liabilities”, which you cannot foretell with certainity, and we always record them somewhere and when they crystallise, we make them part of our liabilities. Court awards could be one of them because when you are in court you are not sure whether you will win or lose. But there are ministries where you find pensions, which we are all aware of. So, you cannot use only court awards, because it is in all ministries. Thank you for giving those examples, but go and study “contingent liabilities” and you will understand what I am talking about. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I want to rush through this; we have got an analysis made by Members. There were scenarios that were drawn. For example, one percent, where we should raise Shs 45 billion; 1.5 percent, Shs 67.9 billion; three percent, 135.18 billion; seven percent, Shs 315.42 billion; eight percent, Shs 360.47 billion.  This was an analysis by our Budget Office and Members of the Budget Committee are privy to this information. They are saying that if we decided to go non-wage, we would save Shs 360 billion, which could help us to cater for the teachers’ salaries at 50 percent.

If we rushed through, looking at page 4 of the Budget Committee’s report, on the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, they say we have saved Shs 1.2 billion, which should go to the e-governance programme. I want to tell you Members that we approved a loan in this House of $ 106 million, part of which was to deal with e-governance. So, what is this e-governance you are talking about, yet you have not even rolled out in one sector.

Looking at agriculture, we have Shs 19.87 billion yet the chairperson says it is zero. So, where did it go? This money is available.

On page 5; looking at Public Service and Local Government, he says that the committee recommends that money be re-allocated for wages for Local Government staff. Members, wages are a first call on the Consolidated Fund; you can never budget and leave out wages. It is criminal. So, this is just trying to cover our eyes so that we assume their wages are not budgeted for. I know that wages are budgeted for 100 percent.

MS MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The information I want to give you is that on the issue of Local Government, if you look at the circular sent out by the Secretary to the Treasury, there is a problem – and even the local governments are complaining. What happens in local government is that there are traditional wages and then a wage component which goes with unconditional grants. 

Recently, the finance ministry instructed that the unconditional grants be specified clearly, indicating which part is for wages and which of it is for operations. With that condition, many of the local governments are either going without operations budgets or even the monies allocated to them are not enough for the wages. That is how it came in.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, my sister for that information, but we will tell you that because of problems in Local Government on pension, we asked Public Service to take over the pension of the local governments. Even this one, if there is a problem, Public Service should be able to take over. Otherwise, salary is a priority and you have no authority to say you are appropriating for wages. In fact, it is illegal for us to appropriate for salary because it is a statutory deduction.

On page 6, which is talking about UBOS being allocated Shs 1.534 billion, I have added and the total comes to Shs 1.129 billion. Where is the difference of Shs 405 million? You will see that some of these figures, I think, were being put here for purposes of coming up with a report. Where is the difference? 

Going to Soroti Fruit Factory, you are saying that the Shs 3 billion is for reinstating the previous budget allocation of Shs 5 billion. What happened to the earlier one? We budget on page – Mr Speaker, if I may take you back to page 55 of the report; it says, “2010/2011 Shs 5 billion, 2011/2012 Shs 2 billion.” Now, where did the Shs 5 billion of the previous year go? Now you are talking about reinstating. This means that Soroti Fruit Factory will end up with Shs 10 billion. Is that fair and yet there is only a signpost so far at the factory site? 

Mr Speaker, on barazas, I would imagine they would be better dealt with by teachers than people going there to stand there holding bimeeza. Why don’t you take this Shs 4.2 billion for teachers – they could even hold better barazas than the people you are talking about. (Applause) (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you. I was actually also going to stand on that matter of the barazas. We had them here in Uganda - CBS, Radio One - had them and they were free. Everybody was free to go there, talk and continue with everything. We do not need that, but we only have to reinstate them. The fear came from the side of Government and we are giving them sense on those biezas and they were everywhere in Uganda. So, why do we need them when teachers are suffering?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much for the information. Page 7, under Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Shs 3.014 billion; again the issue of funds – they are talking of a wage bill –(Interjections)- please, what are you talking about, a wage bill? Minister of Finance, what is the wage bill ? The wage bill is already catered for. 

I agree that the committee was under difficulties. I am sure that my brother, the Prime Minister, should have been there –(Interjections)- was the one directing. (Laughter) But at the end, I will deal with that.

We now go to page 8, where it says that the committee should streamline the civil servants’ salaries. I think this is a very important thing. I am going to quote a very live example. National Medical Stores is the one that deals in drugs. An office messenger and a driver in National Medical Stores earn about Shs 1 million, while the doctor who writes prescriptions for drugs gets Shs 600,000. The one who carries a box to the truck gets Shs 1 million, and yet the one who prescribes and studied for five years at Makerere gets Shs 600,000. 

I am of the view that let the medical doctors become office messengers of National Medical Stores and the drivers and office messengers become doctors to prescribe drugs so that they get Shs 600,000 –(Laughter)- if that is what you want because I think that is where we are going wrong –(Interjections)- I know Eng. Nasasira is very intelligent and he knows – so, I want you to go and see the salary structures –(Interjections)- yes, salary structures. 

By the way, I am planning to be a leader and I am determined, because if I am going to be a leader, I will not accept whereby people who have gone to school are under paid and those who have not, are overpaid. (Applause)
 
SACCOs are a big problem. The minister in charge of co-operatives has failed. Finance has also failed and I think Parliament should find a way of how to deal with it. But if you feel there is a way to deal with SACCOs – I think SACCOs are well managed when they start with the people. I want to conclude like this –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I thank my Leader of Opposition. I was waiting for you to come to the Ministry of Lands and Housing. Under the Ministry of Lands and Housing, there is money which is provided for buying land for a traditional leader. You cannot be a traditional leader if you do not have land. Shs 7 billion is provided and we said this money should be moved out. We cannot buy for traditional leaders land. If you cannot have land, cease being a traditional leader. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: A traditional leader must start from somewhere and one of the assets you have on earth is land. If you have those ones who want to be bought land – these are traditional leaders you are bringing from London to Kampala to make them traditional leaders. We do not agree on those ones. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to conclude like this; that we truly have the resources and we can get money to pay the teachers. If we sat down and took on a percentage, we can get the money to pay teachers, and if we all agree as Parliament that we only take 8 percent of the non-wage because the funds are there, we shall get Shs 360 billion to pay teachers. (Applause) We agreed that the Committee on Budget had a problem, especially when they were eventually told to sign somewhere. When they were told to sign for the Shs 1 million – you initially had a very good report –(Laughter)- but that is where you got the problem. (Laughter)

This matter, Mr Speaker as you said, we do not need to take it to Rules and Privileges, but get a few Members of Parliament to constitute and deal with the matter finally. [Mr Wamanga-Wamai: “Information.”] 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Hon. Leader of the Opposition.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I thank you very much Leader of Opposition for giving way. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I wanted to give the Leader of Opposition is that when I was visiting the Parliament of Tanzania, the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Energy tried to solicit for money from electricity companies in Tanzania to bribe members of the Committee on Energy to pass the budget in Tanzania. The PS was suspended because the Members of Parliament brought the issue on the Floor of Parliament that they were being bribed by the PS of Ministry of Energy. As I speak now, the PS is suspended and inquiries went on.  

MR LWANGA: I have attentively listened to my brother and also a very good friend of mine for years – hon. Nandala-Mafabi. He has done his homework very well, but he has failed the exams. We went to Lweza because we had to do what we were instructed to do. As far as the funding of our stay there and any allowances that may have been paid, was none of our business –(Interjections)- now, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to imply and insinuate that we were bribed? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, in the circumstances, I ask you to substantiate what you said.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am happy that the chairman has said that the paid allowances and accommodation were none of their business and he had mentioned that there were some allowances, but does not know the source. When he says they were none of his business, I am telling him the source is the Ministry of Finance –(Interjection)- the Prime Minister is saying that all the money comes from the Ministry of Finance. This one should have come from –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Opposition, the order that has been put for me to rule on is that your statement implies that the honourable members were bribed. Bribery is a serious allegation and that is why I am asking you to substantiate because if you are only making a figure of speech, then you will have to withdraw the word, “bribe.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If you want me to bring evidence, just give me time and I will supply the signatures. I want you to tell me today how much I am paid when I go for a workshop. Is it that when I am in workshop – a Parliamentary Commissioner is here and I am a member of the Parliamentary Commission, but we have we never passed a law that when you attend a workshop, you are supposed to be paid Shs 1 million? (Applause) I want you to tell me that and then I will do it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that statement was not made by the Speaker, but by you. The honourable member has asked me to rule on a Point of Order, where you have said that they were bribed. So, you cannot throw it back to the Speaker. Substantiate

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the true story - even one Commissioner got up and raised the issue -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of bribery?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He said they were paid - I said they were paid Shs 1 million. Whichever they were paid, I have not said bribery. I said they were paid Shs 1 million, and Shs 1 million for -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My ruling is that there was no statement that there was any bribery and neither was there any bribery, but the honourable members went for a meeting and came back. We need to be clear on these issues. What the honourable commissioner raised was whether it was proper for this bill to be footed by the Ministry of Finance and I have ruled on that. 

I said, whatever bill has been incurred at this place where the meetings took place, those bills should be directed to the Parliamentary Commission because those people were transacting business that was directed to them by the Parliament of Uganda and, therefore, the Parliamentary Commission.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this goes for all institutions, and we are coming out with a clear directive later. Whether they are NGOS, ministry departments, private individuals or foreign governments who give monies or whatever they are to individual Members of Parliament or as a group or as anything else not through the Parliamentary Commission, we will be giving a strong guidance on this. (Applause)

What we want is to protect the image of this House. We have said it before that the Ninth Parliament is the Ninth Parliament. (Applause) There is no other Parliament and there will be no other Parliament as the Ninth Parliament except this one. So, all of us have a responsibility to be respectful to this House when we stand to raise matters in the Chamber of this House. We need to respect and take responsibility and defend the integrity of the House. So, the statements we should be making here should not bring us to public ridicule. We owe it to this House and we owe it each one of us that we should respect each other and respect our responsibilities to this House. 

If there are matters that need to be clarified and there are matters that you think can impeach on the integrity of the Assembly, there are processes through which you must go rather than come here before we have known it. Maybe they are not true, but the public has captured it and it turns out not to have been true. So, we need to go to the details of them before we bring them to the Floor of Parliament. I would urge Members to collectively protect the image of this Assembly. Can we proceed with hon. Nandala-Mafabi? Please conclude and we continue with the debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling and we need it to be written and that will be very good. I want to conclude by saying, Members, we have the resources and we can get the resources. It is us who pass the budget; it is us who appropriate the money and it is very important that we should appropriate money taking into consideration the teachers’ plight. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. A Point of Order was raised -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was guidance.

MR KWIZERA: No, a matter was raised. This issue was a bribe and it is also important to know, if the committee was in a hotel, who paid? Is it the Parliamentary Commission, because it is in our interest to know who paid them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have made a statement on that. I said if there has been any expenditure incurred, which I am sure there has been, those bills should be channelled to the Parliamentary Commission. Anybody rising on debate is the one I will see.

MS OSEGGE: I need to be guided. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not very comfortable by the fact that an issue touching our moral standing has been raised and we are just sweeping it under the carpet, given the fact that it could have influenced the outcome and the result of this report, and we are just ignoring it and pushing it ahead. I seek to be guided on this. While we want to protect the integrity of this House, I think it is better as an accountable House, to put this to public scrutiny. If it is true that Shs 1 million was signed for, under what circumstances? It is not right for us to ignore this-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, before I rule you out of order, I have said the matter raised, which talked about bribes, is a matter of privilege. There is an appropriate committee of this House that handles that matter and it will handle it at an appropriate time and report to this House. I said that very clearly.

2.09
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Colleagues, with the issues about Rules of Procedure, the terms of reference given to the Budget Committee notwithstanding, we should realign ourselves by refocusing to the original spirit that drove this august House to call upon the Budget Committee that brought us this report here, to go and sit down somewhere with leaders of the appropriate sectoral committees or ministries. 

The spirit was to go out there, examine the sectoral budgetary allocations and find money which could be allocated to the Ministry of Education to pay the teachers. In summary, the word was, there is a likelihood of money being redundant in every sector ministry. “Go, look for it, get it and reallocate it to pay the teachers’ salaries”. Now we cannot dismiss everything. This is the spirit -(Interruption)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker is it in order for the honourable Member of Parliament to continue diverting from the terms of reference issued by the Speaker to the Budget Committee. It is clear; the terms of reference were read yesterday by the Speaker. Even this morning, the terms of reference were re-emphasised. Therefore, is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the Member to continue diverting and wasting your time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been very clear on this matter, that the issue that made us to refer this matter to the Budget Committee was larger than the payment of teachers’ salaries. The teachers’ salaries could be one of the issues that did that, but there was a bigger picture we were looking at and the basis of us referring this was because there were statements made by the President in the State of the Nation Address; statements made by the Minister of Finance when she read the budget, and also guidance given to all accounting officers on how the budgetary process should go, and instructions were given on what areas to cut funds from. 

That is why we referred this matter to the Budget Committee to look at it again; to see whether there are areas of wasteful expenditures and then directly advise this House on areas to allocate it.  Of course, several matters were discussed here and that is why it was referred there. But not only on one issue, there were several other issues that were captured; that was one of them.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. On the issues of salaries of teachers being one of the issues, I want to pick it up from there. The report indicates here in the Table on page 3, budget savings. There are savings indicated here sector by sector. In fact, they confirm the original speculation that there could be savings. Now, what are we going to do with these savings? 

The recommendations they made are for this House; this House is bigger than the committee. The question is whether to follow their recommendations or divert. I stated in my presentation that we thank the committee for practically showing us that there are savings. Now, this august House should move to reallocate these savings, one of them being the teachers’ salaries (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I am very sad; and I address this to the Prime Minister; I am sad to note that the ministers heading the different sectors do not support each other. The complaint about the teachers could be treated as a complaint to the Ministry of Education. But if your brother is complaining that I have a problem here, add me something small to pay my people, why do you refuse, if you really want to support the Minister of Education out of those problems?

Therefore, these ministries do not operate as components of the same system; each one operates individually. You do not help each other, that is why you have failed to govern this country properly.

Mr Speaker, I have also observed with concern –(Interruption) 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Fungaroo, for giving way. Since you said that we are here as the bigger committee of Parliament to appropriate these funds, I think we should not beat around the bush. The issue is the teacher’s wages. But I know it takes into account very many other sectors. 

I have already realised funds here; there is Shs 4.5 billion that is meant for Barazas and most of the other MPs continue to receive more funds. Let us continue with the drive; even if their wages are increased by 3 percent, we will have demonstrated goodwill. What we desire here is the goodwill;

to show that we all support them in the cause of increasing their wages due to the poor pay they get. There is Shs 4.5 billion here earmarked, “Office of the Prime Minister”, on page No.6: Shs 4.5 billion for Barazas – these Bimezas. Let that money be earmarked for increment of the teachers’ wages and other priority sectors.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, we are progressing. Mr Speaker, there is another area where we can get money. If you go to the Office of the President - unfortunately, the Presidency has been ring-fenced. But it is you who ring-fenced it. This House is bigger than the committee and we would like to revise that. 

Let us go to the Presidency and to the Ministry of Defence for money. When I presented the response of the Opposition as Shadow Minister of Defence and Security, one of our recommendations was that the money which was used for the jets should be recalled and used to handle this pressing issue, which can even bring about insecurity. Let us go to Ministry of Defence, get some money there, go to the Presidency and get some money from there and go to the Ministry of Health for some money as well. 

Mr Speaker, I believe, if we use the methods used by the poor women in Obongi; there are some words which may not be in the English dictionary –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is a quarter past two and I propose that we take a break of thirty minutes; this matter is important. Let us come back here at exactly 3 O’clock; that would be forty five minutes. 

(House was suspended at 2.17 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.00p.m the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

3.04
MR MUJUNI VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I note with concern and a lot of disappointment that our budget committee did not do us justice. I went to the constituency over the weekend in Rwampara - as we talk, everybody in Uganda is watching you and I. 

The other day you were vividly clear that at least something should be done. Even from the memorandum they drew, the teachers are waiting for a positive response. It would be a lot of injustice for us to come out of this budget process without at least some form of positive response to the teachers’ demands.

Mr Speaker, I, therefore, propose that even the Shs 7.39 billion that appear on page 5 of the report, which was reallocated from the Uganda Land Commission to the Uganda Land Fund to clear investments which are not even specific, be transferred to cater for teachers’ salaries. 

When I was still very young, people used to call me a pastor. The Bible says that your child cannot ask for a fish and you give them a snake. It is an insult to the institution and the profession of teaching – and this morning I was saying to my chief whip, that for God’s sake, where are the priorities of this country? Where do we find our priorities? If we can do all this and we now say that the re-allocations that were done – can we fail, as an institution of Parliament, Mr Speaker, to raise at least Shs 170 billion through re-allocations?

I am proposing budget cuts in the Ministry of Defence, the Office of the President, and also the Parliamentary Commission, to take care of the plight of the teachers.

I agree that we need a comprehensive salary structure; indeed we need it across the board, but in the event that it is only the teachers who are demanding - we should pay attention to them. 

The other day – I don’t buy the idea that when we increase the salaries of teachers, other civil servants will also strike. I am of the view that whoever strikes after the teachers should be handled in the next budget; the teachers striked before the budget. That is why I am saying we should pay attention to them in this budget, for Heaven’s sake. I am not ready to go back to Rwampara when there is nothing done for the teachers. What will I tell them? That Parliamentarians are getting a lot? That the Presidency is getting a lot? That the Prime Minister is doing Barazas? I will not support that.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I want to raise it before you here that when a dog loses its sense of smell, it is about to die. We all know where we have come from; we are a product of teachers. I wonder why you cannot pay attention to the teachers.

As I wind up, I would like to say that this country needs direction, which must be given by Parliament. You know that Parliament has three fundamental roles; legislation, the laws we have made; appropriation, which we are about to do; and oversight. We can do the others later, but appropriation is now and the time is here. (Applause) You either frustrate this country by appropriating badly or rightly. No other institution should be an excuse. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.26
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County, West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 4 of the Report of the Committee on Budget, see item 4.1 at the top. It is about the Civil Service College, which is under a bigger programme called the Public Service Reform Programme under the Ministry of Public Service.

I notice that the funding for this programme is a loan from the World Bank and it is to be implemented by the Ministry of Public Service. I do appreciate the request and demand by the Ministry of Education and Sports, to have this college under the Uganda Management Institute. However, there are several other key players in this project notably, the donors, Ministry of Public Service and others.

Mr Speaker, any change must conform to the contract agreement for this project. Therefore, I am proposing we go back to our earlier resolution on this matter that the committees of Parliament that are relevant to this matter: Committee on Public Service, Committee of Local Government, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the Committee on Social Services should meet and agree on a common way forward.

I personally talked to the Chairperson of the social services committee, hon. Dr Lyomoki, while at Lweza and we agreed to hold a joint meeting on this matter with all the other committees. But I got a bit surprised when I got here only to find a decision had been taken unilaterally to move this project to UMI. In that regard I am appealing to you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, to accept to let us subject it to a decision of the relevant committees of Parliament.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on page 5, under the Public Service and Local Governments, the wages of local government staff imposed – some Member earlier questioned this matter. This part talks about wages of staff in post - those who are already serving. 

The figures we have are as follows: The requirement for all local government staff in post is Shs 135 billion. But what we have in the budget today is Shs 129.5 billion. That means we have a shortfall of Shs 5.5 billion. Unless we actually fill up this money, we are only looking for a supplementary at the end of the day. That is why I am proposing that with whatever money we have saved from the seminars, workshops within our sector – we take these as priority number one. We allocated Shs 5.5 billion towards payment of wages of local government staff in post. I hope the chairperson of the committee can humbly agree to our proposal that we stick to this recommendation.

Finally, on the issue of the teachers’ salaries, I would like to say that since yesterday and the day before, I have been getting numerous messages on phone from my constituents. One is about the Mabira give away and it seems to be a very uniform message saying, “Our Member of Parliament, please…” The other one is about salaries of teachers. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, if I know that I am here to represent these people from the Igara West Constituency, I cannot ask, but recommend that whatever little we put as an increment, let it be 5 percent or 10 percent, for goodness sake, let us make a difference as Parliament. (Applause) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.28
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I only want to inform my colleagues that as we talk; yes we are happy that teachers have agreed to go back to the classrooms. However, truly speaking, there is no teaching and learning taking place in all the schools in Uganda. What is happening is that teachers have shifted to what they call “plan B.” They go to the schools because they have been forced to go back there. They get there, sign attendance lists, but there is no teaching going on.

While I was in my constituency, I asked some pupils who are P.7 candidates whether they were being taught or not. They boldly told me that teachers were going into the classrooms and telling them about inflation. They are not teaching. A teacher will enter a classroom and begin saying that the prices of commodities are too high. They tell such stories in classrooms. Teachers are not teaching, Mr Speaker. Let us find a way of saving our innocent pupils. 

Right now we are left with only two months for Primary Seven candidates to sit exams. For some of us who come from villages, I am very sure that if we continue like this, our children will never pass PLE. Let us find a way to give teachers money. Let us motivate our teachers. With these few concerns, I am really too annoyed and cannot talk much. Thank you so much.

3.32
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you. Mr Speaker, as you will appreciate and kindly bear with me, I am not a person of figures, but principles, and I will not dwell on figures so much but principles. 

This country has had times of war and the budget on Defence is simply increasing even when we are not at war. That is one option of getting some money to subsidise the salaries of teachers. 

Most of the government offices provide tea to themselves, samosas and so forth. That is a budget that can go to subsidise the salaries of these teachers. 

The President’s Office and State House have an ever increasing budget, including supplementary proposals always. We can use part of that money.

My honourable colleague, hon. Nsereko from Kampala Central, talked about the barazas that have been allocated over Shs 4 billion. We had freely provided barazas through community radios. This Government clamped them down and closed them. We have a free service and yet we want to pay for it using Government money. 

There is also something that is not talked about. We have not even talked about our own salaries. We could sacrifice part of our salaries and make sure that we invest for the future. (Interjection) My Speaker, would you ask my colleague to give information later because this is a very critical time. Mr Speaker, a budget is proposed to pay us to own new vehicles. We could suspend that and get them next year or never at all. (Applause)

We used our own vehicles during campaigns; we traversed the same constituencies –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, statements that you make should be clear. Right now, I am Chair of the Parliamentary Commission. I am not aware of a budget of the Parliamentary Commission for buying cars for Members of Parliament. 

MR SSEGGONA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker, and with your guidance I will not pursue that line. I hereby withdraw that for the record. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I normally do not interrupt speakers on the Floor, but this is so important that it prompted me to do so. For the honourable member to say that in this budget, there is money to pay for a new vehicle for every Member of Parliament and yet we are saying we don’t have money to meet this and that and the other, is at best calculated to incite the public against Parliament. 

So, it is not enough to just say you withdraw for the record. It must come out very clearly that what you are stating is not true and you must say so and apologise for trying to put the image of Parliament in disrepute. Is it in order?
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon., you are completely out of order. Please, kindly withdraw. I am Chair of the Commission. I don’t know about that information. I have looked at the Parliamentary Commission budget, but there is nothing like that. Kindly withdraw and apologise to the House. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you for your guidance and wise ruling. Just before the Rt Hon. Prime Minister rose on a Point of Order, I said I withdraw the statement and I hereby do.

Having done that, I would like to continue with my presentation. Mr Speaker, we have had a committee of Parliament reviewing the budget and we have heard from Members on the Floor of this Parliament that a facilitation of Shs 1 million was offered to them as a facilitation to do this work for two days, and that was an allowance. The same are recommending that teachers be paid that meagre amount of money for a month.

As a way forward, as a guarantee of quality in education, I think we need to look at all budget aspects, reduce the monies that are offered elsewhere and I suggest, including our own salaries and allowances, so that we are not seen as selfish people. (Interjection) When I say ours, it means inclusive of mine. I suggest we cut our –(Hon. Mulongo rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you for the protection. In summary, I suggest as follows:

1.	For barazas, that money goes to salaries.
2.	Part of Defence and Security, that money goes to salaries for teachers. 
3.	The President’s Office, State House, KCCA – Mr Speaker, one of the items that are being talked about in KCCA is recruitment of new staff. KCCA already inherited staff of the former KCC. If you want to get them out, you must spend. You pay them terminal benefits. We have seen a budget of about Shs 500 million for recruitment. I guess this is to do with advertising, interviewing and so forth. (Member timed out_)

 3.40
MS IDAH NANTABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of Opposition in his presentation, referred to my submission that I made last week in response to the teachers’ plea to increase their salaries. Last week you guided this House and said that we should look at areas of wasteful expenditure and re-allocate that money to the Ministry of Education to increase teachers’ salaries. 

In my presentation, I highlighted projects that are going to be undertaken by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which I felt had been duplicated. I cited areas of wasteful expenditure in these projects. 

The Leader of the Opposition talked about SAACOs, which I pointed out last week. Let me substantiate on how I think some of these areas have wasteful expenditure. I compared notes of the 16 projects; one of them is investment and private sector development. It is project 16, found in the report of trade, tourism and industry on page 55 as he noted. I compared it with project number 11, which is for small and medium enterprises. In the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, there is a break down and this same project has Shs 9.7. SMEs have Shs 1 billion.

I want us to compare item number one under the Shs 9.7 - I am comparing investment and private sector development with small and medium enterprises. This is item number one: “Effective publicity and advocacy for SMEs undertaken”. Then item number one of SMEs is: “Effective publicity and advocacy for SMEs undertaken.” 

Item number two: “Four SMEs policy document reviewed and reports thereof produced.” Item number two: “Four SMEs policy documents reviewed and reports thereof produced” - same activity in different projects! 

Item number three: “Interagency task force establishment in investment and private sector development”. In SMEs it is “Interagency task establishment”. Another item that follows is: “Two NEC meetings held.” 

Item number five: “Four types of brochures, flyers (ETP, SME, WEN, business linkages)”. Same item on SMEs is, “Four types of brochures, flyers, ETP, SME, WEN, business linkages”.

Item number six: “Simplified SME registration process. Item number six on SMEs is also: “Simplified SME registration process”. 

Item number eight: “One well-equipped development advisory centre set up”. Then under SMEs: “One well-equipped business development advisory centre set up”.

This is a breakdown of the Shs 9.7 billion that is going to be spent on the project investment and private sector development.
This is the breakdown of Shs 1 billion that has been allocated for SMEs and also the Shs 9.7 billion for SMEs. These are the same activities in different projects!

The last two items are: “Forty business councillors recruited and trained.” The same is there for SMEs. The last item is, “Two thousand SMEs trained and equipped with entrepreneurship skills.” The same is true for the other project. 

One project has Shs 1 billion and the other Shs 9.7 billion. They are the same activities but they are going to be undertaken under the different projects. If Shs 1 billion can cover this proposed budget of this project, why do we need to rename and allocate other amounts on each item? Why do we need to allocate Shs 9.7 billion on the same project renamed? 
More data -(Member timed out_)

3.47
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): We had a long debate last week following a motion that I moved about increasing teachers’ salaries by 100 percent. During that debate, amendments were moved, and I consented to them. I beg to quote an extract from the Hansard on what the Prime Minister said: “In the discussion the President had with the representatives of the teachers, he set up a committee and it identified a total of more than Shs 50 billion after the ring- fenced areas. Now, maybe those people did not do a thorough job. What the President had said is: ‘Look at the entire budget if there is any more money.’” 

In principal, that statement alone, gave the picture that yes, Government was concerned. His Excellency the President was also concerned about the plight of teachers; no wonder he went an extra mile to meet the executive of UNATU. He wanted to look for ways to raise money and settle the plight of teachers. Indeed, the Committee on Social Services also had identified some Shs 29.9 billion as a way of trying to look for resources.
 
Parliament in its wisdom directed that the Committee on Budget goes back to the drawing and looks at all areas to see how we can make reallocations. I am surprised at what the Budget Committee has come up with. They did a good job, identified areas where we could make savings, and came up with a trivial recommendation on the way forward for teachers.

On page 8, “The committee took note of the crisis of teachers’ salaries. The committee recommends that Government should consider setting up a salary review policy and implement it across the board.” The last sentence amused me, “Government should take this as priority item for financial year 2012/13.” They are even undoing what the Ministry of Education had attempted to propose. The ministry was saying perhaps we shall look at it next financial year. Indeed, even the Speaker said so! Now the budget committee trivialises it and says, “Consider it as a priority in 2012/13.” My God! We are putting at risk the future of millions of children who are out there being taught by demoralised academic staff. What quality are we nurturing for this generation! It is in the interest of all of us, because there are cries from Kinkizi, Omolo and Ngora. All the teachers are doing their best because we have not been giving a way forward.

I propose that the funds that have been identified be allocated to teachers. We needed to reallocate, but to our surprise, when the committee came up with intra-sectoral reallocations - honestly speaking, for the teachers to go bare -(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Epetait, for giving way. I am a member of the Budget Committee and I attended the said meetings to the end. Unfortunately, when you look at the page where members signed, you will not see my signature and the main reason I did not sign the report was because of that issue. My conscience was telling me that on Thursday, when Members had a heated debate on the issue of the teachers, all Members left knowing that the Budget Committee had gone to look into the issue of indentifying money from all other ministries and other sectors, for the teachers. But when we reached there, the terms of reference were twisted to something else that some of us could not understand. But definitely we had to remain part of the meeting because the Budget Committee –(Interruption)  

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the way we are debating and the information we are giving, this Parliament passed the indicative figures in April and the Member was part of that, and according to the budget cycle, every sector plans for its activities within the budget year and it is the best way of budgeting. Is the honourable member in order to deny what she passed in April and say we get money for health or any other sector? If education did not plan for it, it cannot happen. Is the honourable member in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we sat here and made reference to the Budget Committee to look at what you are calling, “What was done in March.” If we were agreeable to what was done in March, there would have been no point making reference to the Budget Committee. Hon. Kakooza, you are the one who is completely out of order. (Laughter) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Finally, that is the information that I wanted to give you. Otherwise, the issue of the teachers has got to be taken seriously. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, hon. Member, for the information. As I was winding up, I did say that if we take the direction in which the Committee on Budget is trying to guide the House now, we will also have to let down the President, because at the time when the President met the UNATU Executive, he said that maybe those people did not do a thorough job; let the entire budget be reviewed. The spirit was to see a way forward to address the plight of the teachers. And so, now that the committee has identified areas, I thought that would be one starting point to add on to what the Committee on Social Services had also identified. And indeed, I would like to support the proposal of revisiting a cut on the non-wage component so that we raise it by at least 50 percent –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, looking at the number of people who want to contribute and looking at the time allotted of five minutes that I had initially allotted for this debate, I think we should agree that we reduce on that time if as many Members are going to contribute. I will go back to my magic two minutes.

3.56
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices that have been raised, regarding the teachers’ predicament. I will start by asking, what is our national value? Just like in a home, when you are faced with challenges, you reallocate facilities that are at your disposal. We thank the committees and we thank the Members that had pointed out areas, which we could readjust.

In my constituency, the situation is even worse, that teachers have absconded from teaching and have become charcoal burners. Teachers have voluntarily withdrawn from the classrooms and have become secretaries to the LCIs in the villages because at that level, they can write good English and are paid some allowances. Teachers are no longer interested in teaching and, therefore, what kind of generation of children are we raising if they are not getting adequate lessons? 

I request that this gallant House reconsiders and we commit ourselves to increasing teachers’ salaries. It may not be substantial enough in this budget, but we need to commit something to show that we have taken a step. Thank you. 

3.58
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to comment on the report of the Budget Committee. I want to commend their great work here. I want to contribute out of logic and I will avoid emotion as much as I can. On the question of teachers’ salaries, there is no public servant in Uganda that is more important or is more neglected than the others. I wonder whether when we talk about values of a country, we should ignore civil servants like doctors. I am looking at a possibility of us setting a very bad precedent in this country, where we must wait for a group of civil servants to strike for their salaries to be increased. Should we wait until doctors and nurses strike so that we can talk about their salaries? What I am saying is that, let us adhere to the State of the Nation Address by the President, who has proposed a pay reform policy and we look across the board. 

The other day a Member said we had saved Shs 4.5 billion - what is Shs 4.5 billion to all the teachers in Uganda! It would be very unrealistic. If you are to raise teachers’ salaries by 50 percent, you need over Shs 300 billion. If you are to increase it by 100 percent, you need over Shs 600 billion. Are we being realistic, hon. Members? So, let us take emotions out of this and let us look at our resource and plan well and commit ourselves as Parliament that in the next financial year or on subsequent debates, we look at a pay rise for all civil servants in this country. Otherwise, even doctors will rise tomorrow to go and meet the President and come to this Parliament - nurses will also come. What precedent are we setting for the country – (Member timed out_)

4.00
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for seeing me. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for their report in the two days that they have taken off, and I would like to inform this honourable House that this work done should have been done in April during the indicative budget. That is why the Budget Act has given us an opportunity, as Members of Parliament, to scrutinise the budget and reallocate because at that time, you are able to reallocate from one ministry to another. I remember in the Seventh Parliament, in the Social Services Committee, we managed to move money for training nurses from health to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It worked! 

I would like to urge this House that we give more time for the indicative budget so that we finish this work at the right time. You see how much time we have wasted here because of a job which was not done. That is one.

Then secondly, the issue which prompted these people to go was the issue of the teachers. Even if we are pretending that we did not think about it, it was discussed in this House. At first we said we should give three percent; but then we said it would not work. Then we sent the Budget Committee there to look around to see if the money is not there. I do not mind, they did the right job. They found some money, which could be used, but unfortunately we reallocated it within the ministries. 

I am suggesting that the issue of teachers is really a crisis. We must accept it. At least the nurses have got lunch; they are given Shs 60,000 a month for their lunch. The doctors are given their lunch. They have their houses. The Police have their beans and even posho given to them for lunch. The soldiers have their uniforms, but the teachers have nothing! That is why we are saying, this little money we have allocated, if you think we should not consider it as a salary, let us put it as lunch. Even if it means - let us say five percent for lunch for teachers so that they feel their issue has been addressed. Then we shall see the issue of establishing the salary review policy, which will take a very long time. (Member timed out_)

4.03
MR KRISPUS AYENA-ODONG (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise in the utter belief that we are reasonable men and women in this House and as it were, reasonableness does not dwell in the clouds, but it dwells in the minds of those whose conduct the matter at hand is supposed to be regulated. I do not think it is actually necessary to argue as to whether or not we have a desperate situation now, given the issues of teachers in this country. 

I remember, Mr Speaker, once upon a time, before I went to the bushes of Garamba to persuade Kony to come out of the bush, there was a year when Government came out to direct –(Interjections)– I did. Go to the records. Let somebody challenge me on this. I remember that one year there was a time that Government came and directed that there should be budget cuts of 23 percent across the board, in order to save a desperate situation at that time. I am not persuaded by the argument, which I consider to be rather sham, that if you must consider the issue of teachers now then we must consider the issue of everybody including civil servants. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, you remember that there is that illustration in the principle of cooperatives, where two goats were pulling each other. One wanted to eat grass on one side and the other one wanted to eat grass nearest to it. None of them managed! Eventually they decided that it was sagacious for one of them to agree with the other to come and eat this one first and then turn on the other one. So, in this case, I think all reasonable men will agree with me that at this time the teachers have come up with a serious case. We go for them -(Member timed out_)

4.06
MRS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A journey of a thousand kilometres starts with a step. Since it starts with a step, we are on teachers. Even when we asked the Budget Committee to go and do work, it was mainly for teachers. We considered all other sectors. We think that it is important for our medical personnel to be paid well, but this is starting with teachers. We have given our children into the hands of teachers and we want their potential to be completely exploited. How are we going to exploit the potential of our children if we are going to close our eyes and ears to the teachers’ plight?  

We are going to start with the Prime Minister. He owes an apology to the teachers. We do not need to be so arrogant when we are trying to negotiate for something. And even the Minister of Education really has to apologise to teachers. (Applause) Stop RDCs coming up that they are going to recruit teachers. Recruit teachers? From where! How about science teachers who are not there? 

My dear Members of Parliament, we have a task and if we are serious and we are willing, we are going to get something. If these big people were not arrogant, teachers were also going to listen. They were going to be there in class. Right now, they are in class not to do work, but to deceive us that they are doing something. 

My feeling is that whatever little - we talked about cuts when hon. Ekanya said some 600 billion was there. Can we not think about going to make an analysis and cut something for teachers? We are also going to talk to other sectors; but let us start with teachers, because all of us went through the hands of teachers. (Applause) Who is that who is not going to claim that he or she did not go through the hands of teachers? All of us went through the hands of teachers. I know that it is important that all of us have to be healthy. All of us have to be secure. But let us start with teachers. And when we start with them, then we move to the health personnel and we move to the Police and all other sectors and cover them all -(Member timed out_) 

4.09
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When there is a crisis it is important to act in a crisis manner. At the time when war broke out in Britain during the time of Winston Churchill, Churchill said to himself, “Crisis has come; Britain must win; action must be taken.” He reduced the cabinet from 30 to nine ministers so that he could appropriately take action and win the war. (Laughter) 

The crisis of teachers has come. We are in a crisis of teachers and nobody should underrate the teachers. If they command to go on strike everyone can go on strike and Government can fall. (Laughter)

So, I urge Government to take this seriously and not to assume that we are joking. And what Churchill did was to take action by following this slogan: “You do it or you do not do.” We have stopped talking; it is not enough to talk when we are not acting. I want to quote a provision of the Constitution of Uganda, which will provide a solution and a scientific one at that. Under Article 99 of the Constitution, it is said that the executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of Uganda. In law, that statement is a guiding principle because the President is the chief executive. He can commit Uganda internationally so that we borrow the money to pay for the teachers, if there is need to do so.

Since I am now here as the acting Shadow Minister of Energy - because my colleague is not here - I think we have the security talked about in the Constitution. We have oil in western Uganda. The chief executive can commit Uganda over that oil so that we get money to pay for teachers. What are you doing, Mr Prime Minister? Why don’t you organise this? 

There is the money, which was paid to Uganda through the transfer of shares from Tullow Oil to Total amounting to over $ 400 million. What is that money doing? Why don’t we commit part of that money so that the teachers are paid once and for all? What are you doing? If you are not acting, the alternative government here can take action. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if you do not hear me calling your name, when you stand to speak, please state your name. I apologise I have not yet picked all the names.

4.12
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising to debate on 4.6. First of all, I would like to appreciate the work done by the Budget Committee. I support the idea of the committee recommendation to recruit health workers using the Shs 5.5 billion. Life is really difficult down there. Health workers are the people who do a lot of donkey work and I would really ask my colleagues to support the committee recommendation to recruit these health workers.

My second point is on the committee’s resolution of transferring the $ 8 million to UMI. Most of us here must have gone through that institution and it is already doing a lot of good work in training civil servants. By creating the Civil Service College, we will be duplicating the work of UMI. Let us not waste resources by creating another civil Service College. Transfer this money to boost the work of UMI. 

The committee recommendation of Government priority to review civil servants’ salaries in next financial year 2012/2013 is a very bright idea. If we do selective salary increase at this moment, we are arm-twisting the government. We have to be very objective. If the money is there, let us increase money across the board. If it is not there, we wait until the money is available -(Member timed out_)

4.15
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Teaching is far different from other jobs. I have been a teacher myself and it involves parental care. In fact, a school works as the home of a child where there is a lot of counselling and guidance. Teachers spend sleepless nights reading and preparing and at the same time in the morning, they move to school as caretakers.

Right now, the problem of teachers is becoming a public outcry, where there are a lot of frustrations. Teachers are going to be embarrassed among the children and I know how children love their teachers. If they are frustrated, you are going to get something different.

Secondly, my worry is that we are going to frustrate a sensitive programme of the government, which is UPE. Remember teachers are no longer teachers because they are like politicians and are caring for hundreds of children in one class.

In terms of jobs, when we taught, we used to care for only 40 pupils, but now they have a lot of marking to do. Members, teaching is not only a profession or a giveaway job, but bringing out the wholeness of the child and this is not something very easy.

You have heard parents complaining that now they have released the children, we are going to suffer with them because they are really at a tender age and are very difficult to handle. Right now they have been obedient enough and have gone back to class, waiting as we have been promising them. They are already at school. Why don’t we look around and give them any percentage while we wait for something bigger in the future? (Member timed out_)

4.18
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the time is now for us to appreciate that teachers are indispensable and we cannot do without them. The time is now to appreciate what they are doing. On the other hand, we have to note the situation in which we are in. We are in an economy, which is not only fragile, but also volatile. 

I do not want to be misled by what the Budget Committee indicated on page 8, 5.2 as was hinted on by some of my colleagues. I think what the committee was saying here is that it had noted the teachers’ salary crisis and they were worried that it would actually cut across other civil servants and, therefore, what they were talking about was the policy, but not the salary. If they were talking about the salaries for 2012/13, I am not there. It must be now.

We should appreciate the work of the Budget Committee on page 3 because we assigned the Budget Committee to look for budget savings. This is what they did and we thank them. I am of the view that we use this work as a starting point, since they managed to identify this. Whatever percentage it gives to the teachers, we appreciate it and then we can go further adding.

For example -(Member timed out_)

4.20
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am making a comment on the issue of teachers. First of all, I think all of us appreciate that teachers have a problem and their pay is not adequate.

Secondly, we must note that all the teachers we have in Government schools of Uganda today are frustrated and demoralised. Much as Government can force them to go to class, you cannot force them to teach effectively.

I appreciate the work of the Budget Committee, but I have one problem with it. When you look at the principles of budgeting, many times when someone comes up to defend his or her budget, you make sure that you do not lose a single shilling. You cannot allow any money to get out of your hands and this is why all the ministries had to justify that they needed the money they had for their sectors. 

Mr Speaker, during the budgeting process, there are areas which are underfunded or which are left as unfunded – these are things we can do without. Therefore, a sector can move on without them. As we talk now, the teachers are in class, but there is no effective teaching because teaching goes beyond physical presence in class. This is third term - I have experience because I have been managing a school; teaching is done in term three, especially in UPE schools. I want to inform you, Members, that be ready for the worst results in this country in the PLE, UCE –(Member timed out_)

4.22
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a teacher by profession and sincerely, I know what the teachers are going through. Most of them have become boda boda riders, while some of them are selling in the markets and doing all sorts of odd jobs.

I support the idea of increasing teachers’ salaries, but I am worried of one thing; we are budgeting for what we are expecting to get – expected income. I am looking at a situation where we get a shortfall in our budget and we are not able to sustain payment of teachers’ salaries. If we get such a shortfall, and we are not able to pay the teachers – because a salary is a right and the teacher must get it monthly! So, if we are not sure that we shall get enough money to pay the teachers, let us not tamper with this budget – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have a right to reject information. She has refused.

MRS MUTYABULE: Mr Speaker, I will only take information from one person.

MS NEBANDA: Thank you, hon. Mutyabule, for giving way. I want to help remove the hon. Member’s worry that we might not sustain paying teachers’ salaries. I sit on the Budget Committee and if you remove the cuts that the President directed us to remove, whereby we re-allocate wasteful resources, namely 30 percent and 50 percent, we can be able to raise at least 20 percent of the teachers’ salaries and sustain it. I am saying this because when we met as a committee, we did not take the issue of teachers seriously, rather it was taken as a by the way. Therefore, all the money we had saved from wasteful resources was re-allocated. If the committee were to be serious and ready to do what the House had instructed us to do, teachers’ money would have been found – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please wind up.

MRS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much for that information, but I still have the fear. Why? You are talking of an increment of 20 percent and yet teachers want 100 percent. For that matter, we cannot decide here as Parliament that we give them less than they want –(Interruption)

MRS JANEPHER EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a professional teacher and was once in UNATU. Let me inform the House that we should not talk about only one category; teachers are many. Right now, lecturers are not teaching and yet they are teachers at their level. Some of our children are at the university. He is called a lecturer because of the level at which he is. Even the tutors in tertiary institutions are there. What was our complaint before I joined politics? It was low pay. Secondly – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you contributing or seeking guidance?

MRS JANEPHER EGUNYU: I am guiding this House so that –(Laughter)– Yes! Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I will allow you to make your contribution in two minutes.

MRS JANEPHER EGUNYU: I would like to guide this House by saying that as much as we want the increment for teachers, we should increase salaries at all levels. And let us find out the number of teachers in the country; those in tertiary institutions, secondary and primary. If we find out the total number, we shall then look at the money in the resource envelope so that we get to know the percentage to give them sustainably for the financial year. Thank you.

4.29
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here for the primary school teachers. Sincerely speaking, anything that matters must have a root and it is the primary school teachers who are suffering. Right now, a kilogramme of sugar goes for Shs 9,000 or even Shs 10,000. How much do teachers need per month? Don’t they have children? The leaders of this country are succeeding – I think they have ticked the nine points out of the ten in their Ten Point Programme - killing Uganda; cracking it down. If education is dead, then we shall remain with nothing. 

Obote used to fight poverty, disease and ignorance while this Government is fighting for poverty, disease and ignorance. In fact, if you went to the villages, there is sheer poverty. You cannot tell 20 years ago –[Mr Omona: “Order.”]– Order for what? (Laughter) I am telling you, in 1980, we were even better off because not many people were civilized. But now the most civilized, those who call themselves “intellectuals” are the ones making Ugandans suffer. Ugandans are refugees in their own country, while the real refugees in Uganda are enjoying. Thank you.

4.31
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a background in Local Government. When I was in Local Government in 2006, my district had only nine pupils passing in division one, and it was so embarrassing. By the time I left, we had gone past 60 something passing in division one. 

When I did my analysis I found that one of the issues that are making us miss having quality education in this country is the poor remuneration of teachers. I expected that this particular year in this House, we would have something to improve on the remuneration of the teachers, such that we have one element of improving the quality of education in this country addressed. I felt like the Government should have even come up with this increment in the initial stages of making the budget. But now that it has come to this House, I strongly suggest that - my Leader of the Opposition put it very clearly - that if we only looked at an eight percent cut across the board of all the sectors, we would definitely have a 50 percent increment on the salaries of teachers. I had an opportunity to attend a Cabinet retreat and there was no –(Member timed out_)

4.33
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): I thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of raising the salary of teachers, the President and all of us are for quality service delivery to our people. The education sector is one of the areas that we target and it is the base for the provision to the rest of the sectors, of quality services. 

Mr Speaker, you affirmed to this House that we have the mandate of decision-making. Before today, this issue came on the Floor of Parliament and consensus was almost reached, and even today, we are re-echoing the same thing. Where is our power if we are not ruling on this? What are we doing? (Applause) 

The proposal made here is a long-term plan and not short-term. We are good in managing crises in our country. There is already a crisis in the education sector. Why do we say that we have to postpone the addressing of this issue until the structure is reviewed? (Applause) Where is the short-term vision for management of this? I, therefore, think that as a country, we really have the money. I did not agree that we do not have the money as a country. Let us re-prioritise and have something for the teachers. (Member timed out_)   

4.36
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable members for their vivid contributions. We have tried all means and the question is whether it is possible or not to re-allocate. I want to stand in the middle of both. 

One; I think it is possible and you could simply suspend these patriotic clubs and the teachers therein –(Applause)- and you have the money. 

Two; if that is not possible - this Parliament has a tradition of receiving ministers coming here for supplementary budgets. Let the minister concerned prepare a substantive supplementary for this particular purpose.

Three; if that is not possible, this Parliament has a tradition of borrowing and some of it is questionable. Let us borrow for the sake of bringing back the hearts of our crying teachers and other civil servants. (Applause) If that is not possible, then the Government has a problem; it has either failed or it is not aware that the successful people who can advise it are present.

Lastly, we cannot force the Government to do what is not possible. If the Government cannot re-allocate, look for a supplementary, or cannot borrow, then let us peg the teachers’ salaries to the US dollar. In January, a Ugandan teacher who gets Shs 200,000 was earning the equivalent of $ 95. In April, this same teacher was getting $ 86 and today, this same teacher is earning $ 71. It is simple logic to peg their payment to the dollar so that it remains $ 95 all the time -(Member timed out_)   

4.38
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): I thank you, Mr Speaker. What is before us right now is a constitutional mandate. Members of Parliament in this august House, which is the 9th Parliament, have a clear-cut obligation. Education in our Constitution is an inherent right as per Article 30. Article 30 of our Constitution clearly provides that education is a clear cut right, but what is or what forms education? 
There have to be benchmarks and the very first classified benchmark is to put right that one who galvanizes the process of education. 

What we have on the Floor of Parliament is to have an increment of the teachers’ salaries. We are not going to have this far-fetched because we can do it as a Parliament, which is within our mandate in Article 79, and we stop zeroing down on what individuals have got to provide. The mandate is within you, the Members of Parliament. Sit down Rt Hon. Prime Minister; what we need is that increment. Hon. Kyanjo has categorically put it that at least put it at a minimum of $95 period; he has given a clear-cut example of what you can do. You can have -(Member timed out_)  

4.40
MS HELLEN ASAMO: (PWD Representative, Eastern): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a statement about the teachers because that is where my profession is. I am 40 something years old in this country and I want to say that the doctors went on strike and money was got for them without giving us the teachers. At that time, I remember we were told that we were very many and that we would affect the budget. This is the first time in history that teachers have come en masse to say add us something little (Applause)

As a parent, our children are suffering in schools; our children are not learning; they are in classes but teachers are seated there. Today, one teacher said, “Wait for the examination time. You people will come and mark your papers.” I told the teacher that it was terrible and that we understand the pain. 

We are aware that challenges are there, but we need to do something small, Members, for these people. I am assuring this House that if doctors went on strike today and left patients in hospitals, money would be found; why not teachers? Our children are being tortured psychologically and now the children are begging for money to take to the teachers. I think we need to find something, honestly, as a government; to say, “This is something small” and we could categorise them. 

I know some people are talking of university lecturers; these people get money from private students. Where are private learners in primary schools so that they can top-up? In a primary school, which is UPE -(Member timed out_)

4.44
MRS JOY ARINAITWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the increase of teachers’ salaries. However, my issue is with the primary teachers. So many people have talked about it. There are so many reasons as to why the UPE and the USE schools are not performing yet private schools do better. How do you expect a teacher, who earns less than Shs 100,000 or less than Shs 200,000, to survive? They are parents and they have children. Where are we putting the future of our children? 

Exams are near the door; as Members of Parliament, we can decide to increase a small percentage for the teachers and we commit ourselves on increasing for other civil servants, maybe in the next budget. Let us think about the future of our children and the future of the next generation. I thank you.

4.44
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho North County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been a teacher for long; 30 years -(Laughter)- and I once taught in primary teachers’ colleges. I would like to bring to your notice that teachers have not started striking today. They started long ago, but because some of you come from these urban schools, you think they are starting today. In upcountry schools, you may go to a district where you cannot get a grade one from PLE results. When you compare children upcountry to those in urban areas, there is a difference. In Kampala, for instance, a P.3 pupil can write, read and speak English. Go to my area, Bungokho North Mbale, a P.7 candidate cannot even spell the name Oulanyah. (Laughter) 

I would like to convince you. I have been a teacher but teachers are very simple. From the word, “Teacher,” T stands for tolerant. Teachers are tolerant; they have tolerated a lot, but they need little more. Indeed, I was interacting with some of them in my constituency, and they said, “Okay, the Prime Minister has directed that we go to class. We are going, but when you get there, tell him or Government that do a little as we wait for 2012/2013.” -(Member timed out)

4.46
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am both worried and in a dilemma. I am worried because the plight of the teachers, which has been well received in this House, may not receive the due action as we want or may desire. This is because, first of all, the terms of reference were so restrictive for the committee to focus on teachers alone. Indeed, within the terms, the committee did their good work, but there is no way you can blame them for having focused only on teachers when the terms were so broad and require that they cover everything.

Secondly, alongside that, the resources that managed to be what we called “Saved” are so minimal that they are a drop in the ocean. 

Therefore, it brings me to the second part: the dilemma I am in is that, I really would like the teachers’ pay to be increased even by 100 percent, but at the same time, we need the pay for other players in the Public Service to be increased to. You can talk of teachers being the mentors and sources of wisdom, but you also need health, and they also need to be facilitated. I support the fact that we have the pay for the teachers increased, but at the same time, we should support the other sectors, particularly medical, to be considered. So, I would like to ask - because you do not have capacity to raise sufficient resources -(Member timed out_)

4.48
MR MANOAH ACHILE (Independent, Aringa County, Yumbe): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the point that teachers’ pay be increased. As a matter of fact, all of us assembled here are products of teachers. Without the teachers, we would not have been here. I see no reason why we should labour on this point. We should have simply generated a consensus and said, “Please, let us increase the pay of teachers”. 

Mr Speaker, let me take our minds back to the Biblical times. The greatest teacher was Jesus Christ. What happened? Today, we have seen the Gospel is preached all over the world. If He had not taught the 12 who multiplied to-date, I do not think the Gospel would be there. 

Socrates taught many; today we have many philosophers. My humble appeal to the government is, let us look at this issue with some empathy. The children are suffering! The teachers do not have the motivation. I thank you.

4.51
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we are agreeing that teachers’ salaries need to be increased. We are only deferring on when and how. I did Economics both at undergraduate and at post-graduate levels. But I want to use Elementary Economics here in order to arrive and allay the fears of those who are saying, “If we increased one, what will the others do?”

Those who did Economics at A’level know about disposable income. If you increase the disposable income, you are increasing expenditure and the indirect taxes as well. If we increased the PAYE threshold, take the figure of Shs 200,000, which teachers earn, how much do teachers pay in terms of disposable income. You notice that Government would only realise the Shs 34,000. But if we increase the teachers’ pay by Shs 50 percent, which is about Shs 300,000, and we raise the threshold of PAYE at 350 or even just 300, the disposable income will increase and we will realise Shs 54,000 in terms of tax revenue. Yet, if you charge it at 200, you cannot get the 34 percent.

Therefore, the best thing to do is to raise the PAYE threshold; it will cater for everyone across the board. That is simple Economics. 

4.53
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, in the education sector, there is a triangle: The parent, the child and the teacher. As we speak now, UPE capitation grant has not yet reached the schools and the people who were sent to inspect the teachers and ensure that they are working are paid Shs 12,000 per day. It you add up what the RDC or CAO earns in 30 days, it comes to Shs 360,000 - just to inspect the teachers who do not have scholastic materials to perform their duty!

Mr Speaker, in your wisdom, what is the meaning of such behaviour? Teachers said that they are going to cause industrial action and people thought that it was a matter of a common industry. It is industrial action and the action is taking place. 

I would like to inform you that educational psychology is very different from military psychology. If you apply military psychology on somebody who has educational psychology, the result will be zero. Therefore, it is my view that we ask the ministers of education to extend PLE forward; let it be done in December or later than that because of the effects of what has taken place.

Is it fair for RDCs and other people to get a daily allowance with fuel to inspect on people whom they do not know what they do? That is not fair. Let us work on this problem. This problem has been here since 1998, when UPE started. Before Government started UPE, parents used to pay PTA funds, which would cater for teachers’ allowances and housing. When they brought in UPE, this money was not included in the budget of the teachers – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should be drawing it to a close. We have a better opportunity to deal with this matter when we come to the actual figures later. So, we need to go over this stage to enable us deal with it in more detail later.

4.55
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): I do agree with the people who want to raise teachers’ salaries and that is the key reason why this matter was referred to the Budget Committee in consultation with the sectoral chairpersons. 

We are in a crisis! Teachers are not teaching; our children are suffering and within two days, the Budget Committee was paid Shs 500,000 per seating. That is Shs 1,000,000 in only two days! And we are here lamenting. We are hypocrites – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, there are rules governing the language permissible for using in the august House. Would you like to withdraw that particular one?

MR ATIKU: I withdraw and apologise but we are all aware of the facts of the matter. I am bothered by the word, “Ring-fencing.” We have been told that certain sectors have been ring-fenced. Yet, we are told that it is this Parliament which allocates resources as one of its cardinal roles stipulated in the Constitution. I am sure, if we are to check across all sectors, we would be able to realise all the money we need to raise the salaries of the teachers.

Secondly, the Leader of the Opposition presented to us detailed information, which we seem to be disregarding. He presented a proposal, where if we had some monies reallocated from the non-wage, we would realise – for instance, in this document, it is stated that the analysis of the budget considered the following: At eight percent, we would realise Shs 360.47 billion. This money would have raised the salaries of the teachers by over 50 percent –(Member timed out_)

4.58
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to refer to page 3(b) above, which says, “In cases where guidance on priority areas were not followed, reallocation of funds be made”.

On 1 September, the Committee on Social Services made their presentation and there was a response from the Minister of Education, and also a response from the Opposition. In their responses, they were all talking about the formal education system. They were talking about UPE, USE, BTVET and higher institutions of learning. 

I took a look at the ministerial statement of the Ministry of Education and Sports, and it was also talking about UPE, USE, and BTVET, without talking about non-formal education. You are aware Members that we have a non-formal system of education in the country and it includes programmes like ABEK; there are programmes like ELSE, COPE, among others. 

Mr Speaker, I seat on the Committee of Gender and the programme they handle there is FALU; there is no ABEK, no COPE. I request that non-formal education systems, particularly ABEK which is in my district, be captured under (b) where there is a provision that reallocation of funds can be made. It is a very important programme, which was designed to take education to the communities that have not yet been -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have had more than four hours on this subject. I think the debate has been exhaustive and the single issue that we have been raising is on the teachers’ salaries. I think the point is made. We need to move towards where we shall be able to take some decisions on this matter. 

Now, to begin zeroing down on that, I am going to ask the government Frontbench to make some comments on what has been raised. That will take us to the actual figures and we deal with them. We have really expressed what we wanted to express over this matter.

MS NAGGAYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need some clarification from you, Sir. The clarification I need is on the amounts that were not clear - in the Budget Committee report - that were realised, and also, how the allocations were made. I am asking this because when they read to us the report, some of us, through our committees, had made recommendations that were clearly saving money that could be used. I actually feel the Budget Committee did not do justice to most of our recommendations as committees, because money had been seen in some of our sector committees. So, if our chairperson who represented us did not do this, then that is not good. For example, that is why you saw hon. Nantaba, from the Trade and Industry Committee, raising some of these issues. Also, that is why some Members are lamenting, though others are still saying the money was not enough. 

I would like to say that there is money that is going to be missed, which has been cushioned in this report. I can give you an example of the Shs 1.7 billion; that my committee had agreed to have the project in respect of which it had been budgeted, halted. That project is about the ultra modern building for the museum. My committee was very strict on the issue of building this ultra modern facility of 60 storeys, because the project has not been harmonized, though money has been allocated to it. I don’t see that reflected in this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I get your concern, but what is happening now is this. At this level, we cannot be able to deal with figures. We can only deal with actual figures when that time comes. That is why I was asking to move very fast away from this general debate so that we can start dealing with the actual figures. Let us close this process so that we can start dealing with actual figures when we start handling supply. I had actually hoped that we deal with supply today and handle these figures, but the debate has been on for four hours, which I think is sufficient.
 
Most of the issues have been raised. Government has picked what they had to pick and responded to them. May I now ask the Frontbench on the Government side, or the chairman of the committee - though I do not see any issues that have been raised to the chairman directly – do you have something to say or we just go to the next stage straight away?

5.05 
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Tim Lwanga): Mr Speaker, I have been listening very attentively and realised that there are not many issues that have been raised that are different from what we reported to Parliament. But I would like to comment on one or two things. 

One is about the issue of the sessional committees seeing so much money, yet us as the Budget Committee, we saw little money. One of the many reasons for that is that there is what we call donor funds, which we can do nothing about. We cannot transfer such money to implement other projects. That is why you realise that whereas the sessional committees found more money, we actually found little money. Also, because we got a chance to get responses from the sector ministers and the permanent secretaries, we were able to filter out what we can get and left the chunk of the donor money that we cannot touch.

Also, we must keep in mind the fact that we had terms of reference, and the main thing we went for was the 30 percent on the seminars and other related expenditures, and the 50 percent on advertising. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to just make a little clarification from the chairperson of the committee. If we agree that you saved Shs 45 billion and we decided that this should be the money for Parliament to start with – you have identified over Shs 50 billion, but also, we never told you to go and find this money and re-allocate it to other activities in the same ministries; we told you to go and identify savings.

Now that you have identified a savings of Shs 50 billion, will that have an effect - we agree here that the starting money is already this Shs 50 billion as identified by the Budget Committee, and that we should only look out for the balance to top up.

MR TIM LWANGA: Mr Speaker, terms of reference 2(a) says, “To look at issues raised in (1) above with a view of harmonising them and allocating funds for such other activities in the budget.” That is exactly what we did. Now, the question is, Would we have any objection? The answer is that Parliament has got to decide on that one. But not only that, you have got to be aware of the fact that the law might not allow us to do that. And I think since the Attorney-General is here, he can advise on that. Otherwise, as a committee, we are smaller than Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Government Frontbench has decided that I respond to the issues, but we will again speak when we get to the stage of supply.

I would like to first of all thank the committee for the work they did in the short time they had. I can see in the report that they made extensive recommendations about reductions in almost all votes, including votes, as had been indicated earlier, where there was no interaction between that committee and the vote holders. Really, I think if there was a fault, it was ours or mine because our understanding was the question of cutting or reallocation, which would only arise in respect of those votes where the sector committees had so recommended. But as you can see, the Budget Committee looked at the entire budget before they came up with this report. So, like I said, we will have something to say about that later.

Mr Speaker, you are right that the dominant theme of the debate, which is the general debate on this report, is the question of the increment for teachers’ salaries. But let me repeat what Government has said many times before, that the government wholly and 100 percent supports the idea of increasing the pay for teachers. I thought I would – I was a expecting a standing ovation, hon. Amuriat. Maybe they did not hear me well because they expected something different. So, let me repeat what I have just said; that Government supports wholeheartedly and 100 percent, the idea of increasing teachers’ salaries even by 200 percent. As we all know, the NRM Government has been doing so regularly, year in and year out, because it fully appreciates and completely sympathises with the level of earning, the low purchasing power of teachers, and has been consistently increasing the salary of teachers, year in and year out. The last increment was 30 percent, only last year. We know, therefore, that even then this increase was not enough and they deserve more. I thought I would get applause for that. (Applause) 

Indeed, when the leaders of the teachers met with the President – hon. Epetait was right in quoting me on what I said last time. The President mandated their leaders, together with the sector ministers related to the Wage Bill, Finance, Public Service, and Education, to go and look at the entire budget; all the items except the ring-fenced ones. The ring-fenced ones are the ones which enable my brother, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, to perform his duties as Leader of the Opposition: Defence or security, education, infrastructure, the roads that we are talking about, for instance, to Bukwo or Suam, electricity, and so on.

The President must be ring-fenced. The leader is ring-fenced so that he can be effective in performing the job that people voted him to perform. This Parliament was ring-fenced because we wanted the hon. Leader of the Opposition, together with my sister, the honourable Betty “America Online” Aol and all the others, to be able to perform. 

This committee looked at the entire budget and you recollect they had weeks. And indeed as agreed, on the 28th of August, they did meet with the President and they reported to him that they had found Shs 50.7 billion, which they thought could be reallocated. 

The Social Services Committee took a hard look at the sector budget and they came up with a report that they could identify Shs 29 billion from the budget. Now the Budget Committee has taken a hard look at all the budgets and they are reporting to this august House, having looked at the entire budget, that they have identified Shs 45.4 billion. Therefore, no one can accuse this Government of not making the effort to look for the resources to meet the obvious and popular demand, which the government supports; that teachers’ salaries must be increased. That is absolutely clear.

I heard my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi Nathan, the man that escaped, read figures here. We were all hearing this for the first time. This is now a Nandala Committee; he gave it to me after he spoke. I wondered because the very purpose why we asked the Budget Committee to do this was to receive that information. So, why didn’t you take it to them so that they consider it and take it into account when they are making their report? (Applause) 

As usual, I was highly impressed by my young colleague - he is no longer young - hon. Ekanya –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business for giving way. The information I would like to give is that, as an ex-officio member of the Budget Committee, I know that those figures were proposed to the Budget Committee on the first day of their sitting, and this took place at the Conference Hall. If the Chairman, Budget Committee is honest, he will admit to this House that those figures were actually submitted before our committee. They were totally ignored –(Interruption)

MR TIM LWANGA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to insinuate that he gave me figures and that I am denying that I got them. I never got any figures from him? Is it in order, therefore? If I got them, hon. Ekanya would have seen those figures as well and we would have compared them because he was also there. To add on, the honourable member was at the meeting. We were very many people at that meeting, at least 50. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chairman, I thought you were displeased by the kind of indication that if you were honest you would admit to the figures. I thought that would have enraged you. But since you are okay with it, the other leg of the order you raised does not raise any substantial point of order. So, I ask the honourable member to wind up.
  
MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. Actually, different options were given on which areas of our budget to cut in order to get this money. And the option of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are just giving the information that was given to the committee, period. 

MR AMURIAT: The information I would like to give to the Prime Minister is that, actually, this information was given to the Budget Committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the information.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, fair enough, thank you. (Laughter) I was saying that as always, I was highly impressed by the honesty of hon. Ekanya because that is the Ekanya I know. (Applause) The point I was making about -(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: I really want to thank the Prime Minister for yielding the Floor. The Prime Minister and I interact, and we have been interacting for the last 13 years. He indeed knows that I am very honest on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you disputing it?

MR EKANYA: I am not disputing that I am honest, but the Hansard is very clear. The Prime Minister appreciates that I am honest and he is the very person who did not want me to present the alternative. I made it categorically clear that I presented the figures, but my position was not adopted by the committee and I had to sign the report as collective responsibility required.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Ekanya. I remember I am the one who asked you. I asked, did you bring this to the committee? Let us proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I would like hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the hon. Member for Terego to listen to this. I have been trying to trace the roots of the Member for Terego. This really beautifully makes my point because I was worried that hon. Nandala-Mafabi had good information, which the committee did not have the benefit of looking at and examining. Now he says it was delivered to the committee, they deliberated over it, examined it and found it wanting. They found that there was only Shs 45 billion and this makes your case collapse.

MR KYANJO: My father is 97 years old, but he continues to watch television. I fear imagining him watching me interrupt the Prime Minister. I want to realign the memory of the Prime Minister. He is thanking hon. Ekanya for submitting the information, but the Chairperson of the Committee denied knowledge of the information. Therefore, I do not know where you want to be placed in that understanding. Probably, you could consult the chairperson and he admits that he received the information. He may have used it or disregarded it.
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will tell you how I interpreted it. As usual, I believe hon. Ekanya. I used to believe the Leader of the Opposition fully, but now there is something that we need to sort out. This time, I believe him when he says he gave the information to hon. Ekanya and hon. Ekanya says he delivered the information to the committee.
 
The chairman says that this information, which is from hon. Nandala-Mafabi, was not presented to the committee. He did not know that it was from Hon. Nandala-Mafabi. When you look at it that way, then you see that both sides are right. But the simple point is that if this information was taken to the committee and the committee fully considered it, Parliament needs to come to a rational and sound decision whenever someone has information for me. 

Unless I judge that it is abuse of process, it is only fair that I give the Member the opportunity to give it to me, so that I debate with that knowledge. Therefore, I give way to hon. Kyanjo again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You took five minutes to accept the information.

MR KYANJO: Thank you Rt Hon. Prime Minister for your kind attitude. Let us sort out this matter. You know we have Parliament, but we also have the public and the press. We do not want to create a shadow which is dark in between this crucial discussion that has taken this whole day. Let us be clear on what actually happened. The chair is denying reception of the information; you are basing your presentation on the fact that this information was received. The chair is just behind you, what happened?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, hon. Kyanjo is a Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs. I was surprised to here that there is no shadow.
 
MRS OSEGGE: The Prime Minister is making a joke out of a serious matter. The language he is using is continuously unparliamentary; “this shadow”. What does it mean? May we have our leader, the Prime Minister, use appropriate language? Is it in order to demean a colleague just because you want to make a point? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we cannot use rules to constrain intellectual debate. What I followed was hon. Kyanjo saying that there was a dark shadow in the issue that is beforehand. Then I remember the Prime Minister trying to say that he is surprised that the honourable member is talking about a shadow when he is actually a shadow minister. That is how I was following the intellectual engagement. It was at that level that I was beginning to enjoy it.  Please, wind up and we make progress.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, the simple point I was making; either way, these figures that we had today in this debate, cannot stand any test because they should have been subjected to the process that we agreed upon, if they were not. The simple argument I am making is, if they were not subjected to the process, then their value is minimal. If, on the other hand, they were subjected to the process, then they were found wanting because they were not reflected in the report of the committee -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my big brother, the Prime Minister, who ran away from circumcision. The Uganda Government budget is an incremental budget; it is not zero-based. Every year, they put a particular percentage for which they increase. For example, they can say, “We have increased it by 10 percent and this is how you should spend the money.” This means that an incremental budget does not really anticipate which activities we can start with, but they say, here is the money, go and do the work. That is why this document you are talking about was given to the Budget Committee. 

A Member talked about it and there are Members across there who have it and when you read, the document says they have not touched the wage bill because it is untouchable. It says non-wage is recurrent. The item we are touching is the one which you can increase or decrease. So, if you say they have not even subjected it to the process, it is the percentage. If our budget increment is always 10 percent-plus and we are saying that instead of increasing the ministries’ budgets on non-wage, we want only 8 percent of that to go towards the teachers, what crime would that be? Even a lawyer will see it. You do not need to go and subject it to accounts. Even a psychologist, a lawyer, a chemist and a teacher himself will see it. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: And it is indeed that I saw it clearly, that I am making a very clear statement on it because I have no equivocation on that. What I am saying is that we have tried everything possible and we have come up with various figures. I am sure it is clear to all Members of this august House and to all Ugandans that the problem is not unwillingness on the part of Government to raise teachers’ salaries. It is the resource envelope that we have been debating all along. 

I have heard many colleagues here speak passionately about the plight of teachers; yes, of course. We can all repeat that and we all know it. I have teachers in my constituency, in my family and I know their purchasing power. Therefore, the question is, does this Government, does this House, does this Republic, have the money to pay teachers to a level which raises their power to purchase? That is the question and I think we will soon come to that because when we come to the Committee of Supply, then we are going to look at the details. 

The other day, when I was speaking to teachers and I convened a meeting of all the relevant people, we actually worked out the figures. We had been talking theoretically. So, we asked the Ministry of Public Service to work out how much money we would require to show you that we really cared. The Ministry of Public Service, which is in charge of the wage bill, came up with figures and the figures are that if we were to raise the teachers’ salary by 20 percent, we would require an additional Shs 172.5 billion and this is the calculation done by the Ministry of Public Service; by the section which handles the wage bill. 

I am just giving you the figures they gave us and these are primary school teachers only, by the way. If we were to raise it by 30 percent, we would require Shs 250.7 billion. A 50 percent increment would require Shs 420.2 billion and 100 percent increment would require Shs 840.4 billion. In addition to that, we had already agreed with the teachers; for instance, for the science teachers, they had already agreed that this would be done next year. We would need to raise 40 –(Interjections)– let me finish the sentence and then I will give way. We had already agreed on raising Shs 40.7 billion for the teachers of science as that other special allowance for them, and there is Shs 7.9 billion for in-class promotions, because you remember teachers had been complaining that whatever level of qualification they had, if they were employed as teachers, they would remain at the same scale. So, a teacher who has been teaching for 10 years would be earning the same as a teacher who had just been employed and was earning his or her first salary. 

When you add all that together, the requirement for increment of teachers’ salaries is about Shs 900 billion. [Mrs Bakireke: “Clarification”] Mr Speaker, I will give way for my good friend. (Laughter)

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Speaker, I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. From the presentation of the Prime Minister, it is very clear that he agrees with everybody here that teachers’ salaries need to be revised upwards and it is also clear from his presentation that Government does not have the money to perform this important duty required of them. In view of the fact that the teachers have gone either directly or indirectly into an industrial action, and in view of the fact that that will affect the education of our children, the clarification I am now seeking is; doesn’t the Prime Minister now feel that Government, having failed to sponsor to educate the children of this country as it had undertaken to do under the UPE, it is now time that parents are called upon to pay school fees so that we can top-up the teachers’ salaries, which he has ably appreciated need to be revised upwards? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I can say without fear of contradiction here that the question of doing away with UPE and USE is not on the agenda of NRM. It is not and it will not be. What we are saying is that - and I will make another point just in a moment - when you look at the requirements of the teachers now in terms of the demand, if we are to meet that demand, these are the resources we will require and we are saying we do not have these resources. That is a fact. And I really want all of us to accept this. (Mr Amuriat rose_) Let me finish. 

Therefore, the question is where is this money? We have spent the last few months trying to look for it, but we have not found it yet. When we go to the Committee of Supply, I look forward to someone standing up and saying, “This is the money.” And it is not enough to say that cut this money from here or by percentage. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If this House must believe the argument of the Prime Minister, it means even the promise to increase teachers’ salaries next financial year does not stand. It just falls through. What magic would Government have to play in order to fulfil that promise that was given to teachers of a pay rise next financial year if in the words of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business, we cannot find money now? Where are you going to find money next financial year to pay the teachers and the other cadres of Civil Service that you have promised this increment? 

You have talked about oil endlessly. Oil can only be of any revenue if it is got out of the ground and sold. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have nothing more useful to add to what hon. Amuriat has said because I was also going to go in the same direction. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the Leader of Government Business for giving way. I would like to inform the Prime Minister that in Uganda, we have this problem already. We have teachers in school who hold diplomas and are already earning Shs 360,000 per month. We have teachers in Uganda who have been teaching since 1999 and are earning Shs 360,000 while others are earning Shs 400,000 with diplomas. We also have teachers in classes who are also diploma and degree holders earning Shs 260,000, and they are all doing the same job. We also have teachers with masters. 

Mr Speaker, it was the ministries of Education and Public Service, which put a rule for primary teachers that if one wants to go to Makerere, it must be in line with their profession. Before then, teachers were going to Makerere and they were getting degrees in administration and other courses and were coming back and managing schools as headmasters. Currently, Makerere University is awarding degrees to primary school teachers, because they go there and study Social Studies, Science and Maths. That means the major reasons for people going for further education is that they look at their salary scale. Look at that particular imbalance, where we have two teachers: A grade three, a diploma, a degree and masters holder teaching during the same day, and having the same lessons, but not the same salary.

So, my idea is that even if the Prime Minister says there is no money, we must see that all teachers reach that ceiling and then maybe we remove the Pay-As-You-Earn and start with that this financial year. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: We have a commitment to raise the teachers’ salaries next year by 15 percent at least, and for the next MTEF period by up to – effectively, although we said 50 percent - actually it will be 58 percent.

Where shall we get this money from? Of course, from our usual sources. We have been raising our revenue collection every year as you know. In 1986, the total revenue collection for the whole year for this country was the equivalent of today’s Shs 5 billion. Today, we collect Shs 6,500 billion. So, we have been going up and we look forward to increasing next year. And let me tell you that if we raise more, for instance, from oil revenue, certainly that increment should be even higher. 

Now, on the question of public workers generally, I told some people that this is a Parliament for all Ugandans, including all public workers. Let me tell you that the teachers are not the lowest paid public servants. The lowest paid public servants earn Shs 224,000 per month. Or if you look at Police officers, Prison warders and Local Government workers, all these people earn much less, and at any rate, even those who earn a little more, their purchasing power -(Hon. Wadri rose_)- just a second. So, it is important that we do not forget the other public workers. One MP made the point we should all know and you are responsible; you are the Parliament of the whole of Uganda. Tell me, and this is the position that Government has come from, what would it benefit this country to have selective treatment of its own workers?

Why should we have what you call cherry picking; that today, we pay these and the others we do not consider? This is going to cause agitation in the public sector; because if you are going to pay more and stop some activities of Government in order to increase the salaries of those who are so demanding by strikes, then you are telling the others that there is a simple and straightforward way of increasing their pay, and that is go on strike.

Surely, you, in this great Parliament, the Ninth Parliament, do you want to be responsible for that? (Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. We have heard from the Prime Minister that we have been increasing the revenue base of Uganda every year from Shs 5 billion to Shs 6,500 billion. That is an increase of over – that is a very big increase. Is the Prime Minister in order to tell us that we have been increasing - and by how much has the government been increasing salaries for civil servants? Is he in order to tell us that the government is increasing in revenue whereas we are not paying our civil servants? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, please roll up.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. You clearly said it will be very bad for us to be privy to selective increment, payment or treatment of the same workers or our very own civil servants who work for our Government. But it is this very same Government that has had selective payments for people in URA. Now it is coming to KCCA and other departments. Whereas it is true that wherever we are doing these things - you are a senior counsel and you know that whenever you want equity to be done, you must come with clean hands. So, let equity be done today.

You are seeking equity when it is the very same Government you are talking about that has carried out selective treatment of its workers. Therefore, please clarify to this House whether it has ended today and you are beginning a new phase or it is not to change. If you talk of URA and KCCA then even the teachers fall in the same docket of importance as those workers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, we have a lot of pending things, we need to roll this up and move forward, please.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I will not yield ground any more. Hon. Taaka, the Speaker ruled that she was seeking clarification, you were obviously not listening. So, I am responding to the ruling of the Speaker. You must listen. You have to be careful because I listen carefully.

The clarification I will give you is this. In 1991, these teachers were earning Shs 8,070 per month. Today, you know they are earning Shs 273,000. That has been –(Interjections)- well, I could convert it to dollars at the rate of that time and still there is an increment. I do not know why you are making this point because I said, even what they are earning is not enough now. So, the -(Interruption)

MRS AOL: Mr Speaker, last week, we were here up to about 9.00 p.m. discussing teachers’ salaries. Today, we are still debating teachers. Is it really in order for the Rt honourable Prime Minister to try to justify the Shs 260,000 earned by teachers, which is not enough for his breakfast, as good enough for teachers and comparing it with salaries that teachers used to earn previously? Is it really in order? Why have we been wasting time if we know that what teachers earn right now is enough? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I heard the Rt Hon. Prime Minister saying the Shs 270,000 is not enough. That is what he said and repeated. I heard that at least. The point you were rising on was not actually a point of order, but another of those issues that you come to seek clarification hiding under order. I have got to start making strong rulings on these matters of rising on a point of order and then you end up seeking information or clarification. Hon. Prime Minister, please roll up and then we move forward.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As for my colleague, hon. Nsereko, I just want to tell him something he knows already and he will get to know more. Experience is the greatest teacher. Therefore, it is from that experience of selective salary increments by this government that we have learnt that it is not the right thing to do.

Last year, when Government awarded 30 percent salary increment to teachers, it did not award the same level of increment to other public workers; in fact, it was selective salary increment. But we have seen that the entire public is affected because the issues that cause this problem are issues that are cross-cutting and they are everywhere. It is inflation - purchasing power is inflation and things like that.

Therefore, the question of other public workers is very critical and in fact, our proposal is that next year, when we increase salary, we shall increase that of the entire public sector. (Applause)

Finally, when we come to tackle the question of supply. I want Members who are proposing cuts – because even from the committee, I will want to hear the cuts because I will restrict myself to cuts, and then I will give the reasons at that time. I would like to know which specific programmes of Government are to be reduced. 

Hon. Epetait should have quoted me even on this – I said last time, when I spoke, that we have been trying in Government – the President indeed has said and the Minister of Finance said it in her Budget Speech – Mr Speaker, you alluded to it. We must look at our budgets again and ensure that we remove those expenditures that may have been provided for areas that can wait. Thereafter, these resources will be put on priority programmes. So, it is important that when we come to supply, we look at that detail. 

I heard someone mentioning that barazas are not useful – I heard a heckler saying “useless”. But let me tell you that I will have the opportunity as Leader of Government Business, if you allow me, Mr Speaker, another time, to come here and make a presentation after we have gone through it in Cabinet on how we propose to increase the performance of the public sector. This is aimed at achieving maximum efficiency in the performance of the public sector. We shall do this by right-sizing the public sector, modernising our methods of work and strengthening supervision and evaluation of work. In all these, the people will have a central role to play. 

When we talk about the barazas, we are talking about the people because Government has been sending money out for projects, but because the people do not know about the money, they do not know what is going on and they cannot tell whether these officials are performing their jobs well. So, these barazas are meant to cure that so that the public knows how much money has been sent there and they hold the officials accountable. This is the whole idea. 

Therefore, when we come to the Committee of Supply, we will have to look at each item to see – because this is important just like somebody said earlier that the budgeting process begins in October and by April, these are submitted. Of course, this happened because this is a new Parliament and this was in the last Parliament. But actually, Parliament went through these figures item by item and it proposed where to change. Wherever change was proposed to Government, it was incorporated in the figures that we have now. As much as it is alright to examine them even now, we will have to do so in detail in terms of the proposed shut down or reduction of activities of the specific programmes that are provided and for which reduction is proposed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I ask the chairperson to wind up on this report and then we will move forward.

6.06
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Members for having debated our paper and I must say that learning does not stop. During this debate, at least for myself, I have learnt a lot and I believe all my colleagues have also learnt.

I now beg to move under Rule 177(2) that the report be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, proposals have been made by the committee chairperson and as you are aware, we have business that has been pending for a while now – that is the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill - which I had hoped we would be able to finish – at least a vote on the principles of the Bill and then we would get the opportunity to go to the committee stage to deal with its details and see where we need amendments.

From my earlier communication on the issue of the Shs 50 million, which is clearly not in this Bill, but is an administrative matter that URA was proposing, I was going to immediately after this process come down and ask the Members that we move forward and deal with this Bill, and then wait for what will happen next to the pending business.

Hon. Members, the committee chairperson has proceeded under Rule 177(2) of our Rules of Procedure to ask that their report is adopted by this House. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, as I have explained, the issue of the Shs 50 million – we had reached a stage where we were supposed to take a vote on the principles and not the details of the Bill. The second reading motion is on the principles of the Bill and we discussed the principles. Now we should be given the opportunity to get into its details and see where we need to make amendments.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before you put the motion, which we have just pronounced ourselves on, you talked about the issue of the administrative measure put in place by the URA about the figure of Shs 50 million. As an institution charged with the responsibility of appropriation, I see it a little irregular that we can allow an institution of Government that administrative power to come up with such a huge amount of money to be levied. 

The clarification and guidance that I am seeking from you is: Shall we, as Parliament, have the opportunity to consider that excessive power given to URA to single-handedly levy a tax of Shs 50 million without our input as the people’s representatives?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One of the key principles of taxation is that there is no taxation without representation. There is nobody who can levy any taxes on the citizens of Uganda without Parliament confirming that tax. That is the correct position, but that is not the matter we are discussing now. The Shs 50 million relates to the discussion under a completely different matter – the Stamps Act. 

Let me guide on this; the matter that came before the Committee on Finance, which I have seen in the report and which caused this debate, was that URA said they were going to impose some administrative measures so that when you do any transaction on land and the amount of the transaction is Shs 50 million and above, they will come and find out because that means you have been earning some income. They will come and find out if you have paid income on the money. 

However, that does not stop you from paying the stamp duty on the transaction even if the transaction was for Shs 1,000 because the tax is under the Stamps Act on the transfer of land. You have bought the land and it is going to be transferred to you and you pay Stamp Duty of one percent, if I recollect correctly. That is the one they want to see if your transaction is above Shs 50 million, meaning that you have been earning some income and the question now is; did you pay taxes on the income which you earn to facilitate you buy this item? It is not imposing a new tax in the land transaction. In the land transaction, you are still going to pay the one percent Stamp Duty on transfer of your interest or on receipt of interest transferred to you by somebody else.

So, in my understanding, it is not what we are pronouncing ourselves on the Shs 50 million. It would be proper for the committee then on this particular matter to go back and have a discussion with URA, but that should not hold the process of this Bill because this Bill has no provision on anything to do with the Shs 50 million at all. 

If they are going to do things administratively, then that should be within the prerogative of the committee to summon URA so that they can handle these matters properly. What we are now discussing is the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill and the provisions are what we have seen and what the committee has studied and made recommendations on. 

Can we then now pronounce ourselves on the principles of that Bill to give us the opportunity to move forward and examine the actual clauses of the Bill as proposed?   

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are right. Article 152 of our Constitution says, “No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.” That is number one and it is very good.

The issues that have come up are administrative, but have an implication on Income Tax. What they are saying is that you have come in and you want to transfer land which you have bought at Shs 100 million. Before you transfer that land, you must show that you paid tax on that money. The tax you are talking about, which you pay on that money, is Income Tax, and that is why the committee has raised this issue under the Income Tax. It is right what he is talking about; you earn an income for which you have not paid Income Tax, Corporation Tax or PAYE – but PAYE would have been deducted. 

What the committee did was good to raise it. Even if it is administrative, it is trying to bring an issue, that somebody got money which he never declared to URA and URA has methods of getting this money. In fact, the moment you pay stamp duty, you need to have a TIN and you would have told URA, “Here is the money, can you go and cross-check?” So, URA would go and cross-check, but it should not halt your transaction. The purpose now is that they must stop your transaction until -(Mr Ekanya rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that on the Bill?

MR EKANYA: I am on information. I thank you. I am a member of the committee and we have interacted with URA, tried on this matter –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we listen to this?

MR EKANYA: Initially, when URA started, they would stop until you have paid. They told us that they would stop and then ask you. If you cannot, then they would summarily compute 30 percent under the Income Tax Act, but lower it to 15 to allow you for your administration, because you do not know how to keep your books, and then move ahead.

I have looked at the Registration of Titles Act and you are a lawyer, who knows this thing very well just like the Prime Minister. Under the Registration of Titles Act (RTA), which gives power for transferring titles, URA has no power whatsoever, to stop any institution –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It does not.

MR EKANYA: So, what we advise URA – what the Leader of the Opposition has said, once somebody pays stamp duty - Income Tax is normally reviewed at the end of the year – once you have got a TIN through stamp duty, then URA should follow the person, but allow the transfer to go ahead because they do not have the power under RTA, but that is what they were doing. Maybe, through you – anyway, it was information. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much. The moment you try to stifle a transaction and you say URA should stop a gap there, three issues are going to happen; the first one is that URA is not going to get the full one percent because what will happen is that my brother Hon. Amama Mbabazi and I, shall say this land was at Shs 45 million, even if it was at Shs 1 billion and we agree. 

Therefore, my brother will hide the balance and I will also hide the balance and URA will be the loser. What you do is to allow for the transaction; I declare Shs 1 billion for the land I bought; you go and assess hon. Mbabazi’s Shs 1 billion and then also assess me on Shs 1 billion using back duty. We have the law that deals with back duty – if they have a problem, then I am ready to teach them. We have a back duty law to deal with that; meanwhile a 1 percent of the transaction goes further.

If you allow us to pass it like this, the implication is that we would have given URA powers to do everything.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you need to guide us here. In the Bill, is there – because if I say that we allow it to pass like that, we would have given URA powers. Are there such powers in this Bill?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What we want to say is that URA will start raising arbitrary assessments because whenever you come, they will say you have bought the land at Shs 200 million. Shs 200 million at 30 percent is Shs 60 million and before we transfer the land, here is the assessment for Shs 100 million. So, what I –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I propose is that the committee goes back to URA and these processes should be stopped. That is a different process altogether, but for purposes of the Bill - we finished with our Bill; the committee calls back URA since there is now provision in the Bill requiring URA to first consent before you transfer - there is no provision like that? It was raised because it came as an administrative matter and unless I can be educated by the chair –

MR TUMWEBAZE: I thank you. Many people will raise many views on anything to do with taxation, but I can assure you, Rt Hon. Speaker, that we had a number of interactions with URA and substantial amount of time. 

We seemed to be at par, but our concern as a committee, – if you can read our report. First of all, you rightly observed that there is no new tax being levied, but just an indirect method of taxation as hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows, which ensures tax compliance. They are simply saying that if you are buying land or a vehicle, show them proof of payment of tax on that income or show us proof that it is exempt income according to Income Tax. 

Therefore, what then was our observation? Our observation was that I come to clear my title and you demand that I show you proof of income, payment of tax; and then we start arguing and maybe I have not filed my returns because the time has not reached; maybe I have inherited property. Won’t this haggling between me and the URA officer induce some kind of negotiation and breed corruption? That was our first observation; and we called on URA to be as clear as possible and issue guidelines on the dos and the don’ts such that the tax payer knows and they reduce as much as possible, the discretional powers of the tax officer. That is perhaps what the minister should be telling us.

Then two, we wanted to know whether the measure will not in a way affect some economic activity in the land sector because of people fearing to be taxed double or maybe some want to evade because others have good, others have bad intentions. So, we asked Government to carry out a study; maybe the minister could tell us how we shall make sure - URA used to be a land of corruption, but it has now been redeemed, thanks to the management.

So, how do we ensure that the past dark history does not come back? How do we also ensure that economic activity is not hurt? These guarantees could come from the sector ministry, but it is not necessarily a new tax measure. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let the hon. Leader of the Opposition finish.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I wish hon. Kiyonga was here. When stamp duty was high, many people started saying, “I have got land as a donation” because donations were not being taxed.

I want to tell you this. The moment we start the process we are talking about, people are going to start saying, “It is a donation” which is zero value or “I have inherited from hon. Amama Mbabazi; he is my brother from Kabale” and yet you know, he is not from Kabale, he is from Bugisu. 

So, we would plead that the Minister of Finance should come up and make an explanation. Otherwise, failure to do that, we are going to make big losses. 

The law we need urgently, which was needed by the year 2001, is the Anti-Money Laundering Act. You do not want it; that is the law which will catch all this dirty money, but none of you wants it. You only want to go to a transaction point. It is dangerous; it is bad; and it is going to bring resentment, and corruption will increase.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me listen to the Shadow Attorney-General and then minister, you will make a comment on this.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we have two issues. No.1 - and I expected the Attorney-General to guide us - the legality of the action of URA. I think that is very crucial. Does URA have authority under any law to stop a transaction based on non-proof of payment of Income Tax? Do they have those powers to stop a transaction, especially, if we now have to relate to this, a land transaction? 

What does the law require? The law requires you to pay stamp duty and registration fees. There is no law that requires you to prove that actually, that income you are using to pay this land tax was paid; it is not there. So, really, URA should be advised that that is an irregularity. 

In any case, Income Tax is assessed at the end of the year. If you are going to transact at the beginning of the year, how does somebody ask you to prove that you have actually paid Income Tax? It does not make any economic, legal and common sense. 

Government should take it up and say, “Look here, find a way of collecting the tax” because what URA should be doing is to use this information, put it in their data bank and when the honourable Omach is filing his returns, they will say, “Excuse me, there is this other information we have about your transactions”.
 
That is what they should do and then they can be able to trace and they have all the remedies under the law to enforce that tax collection. But this sort of thing going on is so clumsy; it is illegal and really, it is bound in my view, to cause litigation against URA and –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my honourable friend with whom I always agree with, although he says the opposite. I rose to give him information that this matter has been brought to my attention and those arguments that I have heard have been presented even within Government.

I have asked the Minister of Finance to get in touch with URA, get a full explanation so that the matter is settled with involvement of the Attorney-General and all the people concerned so that if URA is to act, it acts within the law, exercising the powers that URA has; and if there are policy issues, they are duly cleared by those whose duty it is to clear those policies. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, this is again one of those rare moments, and that being the case, I have nothing useful to add. (Laughter)

MR Fred Omach: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and Colleagues -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the matter is only one issue, this URA thing because debate was already finished.

MR OMACH: First, on the issue that we should bring the Anti-Money Laundering Bill here; this is already with Parliament. So, we only have to ensure that we pass it into law.

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has already directed my ministry to interface with URA to ensure that we handle this issue. The purpose of these laws is to ensure that we increase our revenue to GDP, which is currentlyvery low. Right now, the Commissioner General of URA is using sections 92 and 96 of the Income Tax Act, 1997 to implement this. 

So, the law allows them to assess any taxpayer who, one, has not submitted returns; and two, has submitted returns which are not accurate. But having said this, we have taken seriously the directive of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and we are going to ensure that we bring this issue to its logical conclusion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think the section of the law he has quoted just confirms what you have been saying that, there is no authority, even under this law, that he has cited that imposes a pre-transaction assessment responsibility on the URA. Can we close this?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable Minister of Finance raises an issue which I think we need guidance on from the Chair, because it is not about that particular Bill only - the Anti-Money Laundering Bill - but many other Bills were presented to this House for the first reading in the previous Parliament. 

The guidance I am seeking from the Chair is; what is their fate? Have we inherited all those Bills or are we going to have them re-tabled for the first reading and have them committed to the respective committees – actually, the committees to which these Bills were committed to are no longer in place. We have new committees and new members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have had discussions on this matter. Actually, to give you some detailed information, the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Ninth Parliament had put me in charge of Bill-tracking. And there are two Bills I have already made correspondences on and there are lots of other Bills. The initial position was that a formal motion should be moved when Parliament reconvenes, to see how we treat those Bills that remained from the previous Parliament. Some of them may need re-printing; some of them might need to be presented the way they are. But that is to say that all those things are under discussion and when Parliament resumes after this recess, those are the matters we are going to be dealing with; there is a lot of pending business that is blocking the functioning of Government and we need to be working on them very quickly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister is right. Section 92 talks about furnishing of return of income. When somebody furnishes return – where a commission is not satisfied with the return of income under sub-clause 10, the commissioner by notice in writing, requires that person who has furnished the return to provide full further return on income. 

Before you go to the tribunal, you must pay 30 percent of the tax first, and that is what they are aiming at. There is assessment, where everybody is supposed to furnish a return. But when you furnish a return in a way that does not satisfy the commissioner, he or she can raise an assessment to the best of his judgment. 

Under Section 96, there is self-assessment. A taxpayer is free to assess oneself and file a return. But you are aware of our loss; people save money in the banks – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I need us to get relevant on this subject. The provision of the law you have just referred to has confirmed what the Shadow Attorney-General said; that URA does not have any powers under the law to stop transactions. That is what he has said and it is what you are confirming. So, is it still necessary for us to belabour this point? It is not. We have agreed that URA should be guided on this matter and they should stop because they have no legal basis in pursuing this matter. 

Therefore, I put the question to the motion that the Income Tax Amendment Bill, 2011 be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX AMENDMENT BILL, 2011

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. Why are you inserting the word “Internet” after the word “television”? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: If my conceptualisation is not proper, then they will help me. I think for purposes of e-taxation and e-business; businesses are transacted electronically. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, you are now trying to bring the Internet in the tax bracket –(Interjections)– two is for interpretation. The argument I am putting across is that there is no need to put “Internet” under that clause. In the parent law, section (nn) talks about loyalty; they define loyalty and at the end they say, “After television, insert “Internet”. What loyalties exist on the Internet? Mr Chairman, I want you to tell me how the Internet is a loyalty. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, you have made it easier now. It is not the Internet per se; it is the services and businesses transacted via the Internet. Hon. Nandala, you are an auditor; people do account auditing and send it via the Internet. For instance, DStv – Multichoice is not in Kampala, but its services are consumed via the Internet. So, why shouldn’t Internet be well-defined for purposes of royalty determination?

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, in Uganda at the moment, we have artists who put their music on the Internet and you can download that music and pay for that music using your credit card. So, those people are basically earning through the Internet as a medium. Therefore, those earnings should be taxable like all other earnings.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me read it so that you understand what it says: “Royalties means: 1) any payments including a premium or a like amount made as consideration for…”  And (1)(c)says: “The use of or the right to use or the receipt or right to receive any video or audio material transmitted by satellite, cable, optical fibre or similar technology for using in connection with television or broadcasting.”

What I want to ask is, How does the Internet get into this?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Okay, but you are really answering that question. Haven’t you done a search by visiting a certain site and you were asked for a password to access the material there? And before you put in that password, you must have a credit card against which you are charged? So, precisely, there are transmissions on the Internet that are commercial –(Interjections)– yes!

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if we want to tax the Internet services, we cannot put it under royalties –(Interjections)– it cannot be under royalties. Do you know the definition of royalty?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could you please guide us and why the television has been included.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, televisions like those on Multichoice are here, because they have rights from somewhere. They have a right treated as a royalty to use their services. But for the Internet, where do we get the royalty? If we have to tax services on the Internet, we need to define it by including a clause to the effect that all services on the Internet are liable to taxes; we should put that definition on its own.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, like the Leader of the Opposition has said, since Multichoice is giving us services, they should also tax the person who connects us to the Internet from the US. Once somebody here is using the Internet to earn, he should pay a tax. I think that is the argument.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if there is no way we can make it stand on its own, we let it fall – the Internet cannot fall under royalties. Somebody will ask how we treated Internet as a royalty.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we are talking of the Internet as a source of transaction that has royalty-based services, not like television; but I am also trying to understand it. There are transactions on television. For example, if you broadcast somebody’s music, you have to pay for it and there are royalties that are earned. The same transactions can go on the Internet, for example, if you visit the YouTube and download somebody’s music and you pay for it, then you must pay for the royalty. So, you can see that royalty-based transactions are being conducted via the Internet just like they are being done on television.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why I would like to agree with my brother, hon. Kasule Sebunya, who is saying that the one who provides the Internet services should be subjected to taxes for that income earned. That is why we are saying that it ceases to fall under royalty. If the Ministry of Finance wants to tax Internet services, they should put it out on its own because Internet cannot fall under royalty. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: But you actually defined it. I respect you, Leader of Opposition, via tax issues. But remember, here we are involving non-resident companies. For example, Multichoice is not resident here. They won’t pay your VAT of whatever incomes they make? They will not pay your Income Tax, but they are selling to your market. So, what is wrong with charging those royalties on the services they are transmitting when even the televisions you are talking about could be using Internet to receive some of that material? If we are receiving information on television via the Internet, what is wrong with charging a tax on that; you already said royalties are premiums. I mean Hima Cement in Tororo, is charged royalties on what they do. So, what is wrong with charging royalties on profits of businesses done via the Internet? We are not going to charge the Internet as a service. You need to distinguish the two.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I think the contention is not whether to pay or not pay that tax; the issue is where do we put it? Under what tax code should it be? Should it be under royalties or not?

I propose that we stand over it and proceed so that we can consult the lawyers.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Okay, whether we stay over it or not, we must clarify two things, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi must understand. You pay for Internet in your offices, for example, the services via the modem from MTN, that is not the Internet services we are talking about. The royalty is your right to access certain programmes on the Internet with inscriptions, if I may use that word. So, differentiate between buying Internet and buying the right to access certain material.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I am an IT expert and that is why I am rising to give information. On the Internet today, you can listen to radio just like you can listen to a normal radio set. You can also watch television. You can watch CNN, UBC, WBS and any other television stations. If in the schedule you already have television stations listed, it means even the Internet qualifies. I am saying this because if you are talking about royalties received from airing your music on television or radio and it applies to television, it should also apply to the Internet. That is why we are now talking about a migration from analogue to digital. 

The broadcasting sectors and IT are now merging like IT has already merged with the telecommunication industry. You can see that your telephone set can also be used for Internet services; you can also use it to listen to radio and watch television. So, there is no need to separate the two because that clear demarcation is no longer there. Television is now almost the same as Internet. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I just want to give the definition of royalty and it means any payment, including a premium or like amount made as consideration for the use of or the right to use or the receipt of or the right to receive, any video or audio material transmitted by satellite, cable, optic fibre or similar technology for use in connection with television or radio broadcasting.

Mr Chairman, if you take the issue of DStv, you realise that we have agents in Uganda who just get little money with the bulk of the money collected being sent to South Africa. So, we should be able to tax that money. That is why we are proposing that the Internet be included in this amendment. (Applause)

MR OBOTH: Whereas I may not be an IT expert, I find the use of word “Internet” in our legislation quite narrow in a way. What do you mean by “Internet”? Internet working? Interconnection? My proposal, Mr Chairman, if it would be pleasant to the committee and the whole House, is that the word “Internet” be substituted with the word “Cyberspace”. 

We are using the Internet now, but the actual word is “Cyberspace”. Internet is quite limiting. If I had a whole one hour to give the differences, I would do that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: “Cyberspace” in place of “Internet”?

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Chair. My insistence is based on the obvious and the obvious is that I just want to follow what is going on. These are technical matters for me. I learnt recently after following the events in the Middle East, the UN adopted a resolution declaring Internet access as a human right. I do not know whether I am right, but that is the information I got. 

So, I am trying to understand these matters of Internet and royalties. Firstly, if I am going to download music, how are you going to collect the tax? I just need to be helped so that I follow. I am going to pay and then I will be allowed to download the music and that is it. So, how is URA going to follow up the collection of that tax, because really, tax must be collected? So, like I told you, I need your help. 

Secondly, I am not a draftsperson, but wouldn’t it help if hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal does not take away the principle, but adds clarity on the drafting in this Bill. Wouldn’t it benefit us to have something clearer if we drafted the way he proposed? Because we will not lose the principle but we will add clarity to it. I just wanted you to help me so I can move with you. Thank you. 

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, although many people use “Cyberspace” and “Internet” interchangeably, I find “Cyberspace” to be less precise. The use of the word, “Internet” would be more precise in this particular case than “Cyberspace”.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I agree with the expert. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I will put the question. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are proposing an amendment that “Internet” be deleted. In other words, the provision remains as it is without the word “Internet”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to go to property income, which is under Section 20. You are talking about property, but there are those who own Internet, and I want to agree with hon. Sebunya, where he says if you have where you generate income, like through the Internet, you should be subjected to taxation. If the minister is interested in the Internet, he should define property income as meaning any dividend, resource payment, rent, royalties and here you could also bring in Internet if you want. Because you are interested in taxing Internet services; but if you put it under here, I can tell you that as a royalty, I will come and say I have paid royalties for this so I am not subject to tax. 

We are trying to help you and that is why we are saying that if you want, let us put it under – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can I stand over this clause and we go to other clauses and we come back to it later?

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, we had an amendment on Clause 5: Exempt Income. We are proposing to insert another amendment to Section 21 as follows: Section 21 of the Act is amended in sub-section (1) by inserting immediately under paragraph (ab) the following: “(ac) Income of a person for a year of income derived from farming.” The justification is in line with Government commitment to promote the agricultural sector and motivate more farmers to produce on a large scale. I beg to move. 

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and Colleagues. While I agree with the principle that the Chairman of the finance committee is trying to bring here, and which is in line with Government’s priorities, I would urge that we examine it a little more and try to calibrate it so that we would put it in such a way that the people who are big farmers are given a certain calibration. I think this will need time, but if you gave us about four months, we would be in a position to come out with the calibration so that the tax moves according to the income that each particular area –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words you do not accept this amendment. 

MR OMACH: I do not accept this amendment. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the purpose of this amendment is very good; to promote farming so that our farmers can produce and reinvest. But it would be very dangerous to leave it open because people who grow sugarcane, like Mehta, will not pay taxes. We know on average what our farmers get. My colleagues know that there were farmers who were saying they get Shs 8 million, Shs 10 million per month. To be fair, we need to put a threshold on this. 

My proposal to the amendment of the committee, which I know the minister is going to buy, is that a farmer who is engaged in agriculture, who has income derived at a gross not exceeding Shs 100 million, should be allowed, but it is only those who are above that who should be brought in the tax bracket. Purposely, to promote our farmers. I want to ask the minister to agree with at least Shs 100 million so that your man in your constituency will go tax free and maybe buy himself a motorcycle. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, as I said earlier, I do not disagree with what the Leader of the Opposition is presenting, but this needs a bit of time for us to study, to see how to calibrate it. Otherwise, we could end up in a situation which is not palatable. We are praying for four months within which to come back to this House, but we agree in principle. However, this is not the time for us to accept this amendment. Once we are ready we will bring it back to the House. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, two points are emerging; that there needs to be a threshold so as not to lose tax from large commercial farmers. Our principle was that let us have a blanket exemption because we feel whether you are big or medium, the sector needs time to grow. 

There seems to be debate on those positions. First of all, the minister is in agreement and he is committing himself to four months. I believe in four months, our committee will still be there. I would rather concede to him and we wait for the four months and we all debate on the threshold. The committee was never addressed on the threshold.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, those who are doing agro-processing are not paying. The farmer comes and pays, but the one who is going to make more money does not pay as they are exempted. I think that is being unfair; let us have some small threshold so that the small farmer from Kazo can be happy to sell his milk and not be taxed if it is below Shs 100 million. Then the agro-processing person can continue with paying tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On Clause 5, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are very intelligent and can say yes every now and then. I am proposing that we do not need a new Chamber. We have only two days when the Chamber is full; that is on the Budget Day and the State of Nation Address. We can hire for 10 times instead of wasting money to build a Chamber.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 11 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (The House resumed, the deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011 and passed it without amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I put the question.

(Question and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLs 
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2011.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations hon. Minister and Chairman.

It is 7.00 p.m. now. The next business of the House was supposed to be moving to Committee of Supply. The processes that are remaining are, we need to supply; on that basis the Appropriation Bill for this financial year will be met.

Right now, we have that pending business of the Committee of Supply. We also have the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which is already with the House. The other matter that we have is Schedule 3, which is supposed to finalise the content of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill.

I had earlier directed that the Budget Committee should be able to finalise this on Monday so that we move forward with all the other Bills. The House stands adjourned to Monday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.09 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 12 September 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

