
Friday, 4 September 2009

Parliament met at 11.03 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting, but I will start with some bad news: our colleague, Maj. Sarah Mpabwa, lost her husband at about 6 O’clock yesterday evening. Today there is a service at All Saints Cathedral starting now, but burial will be on Sunday in Kebisoni, Rukungiri District. However, after the service today, there will be a vigil at their home in Ntinda, off Kisaasi Road. For Members who have not been able to go and who will not go to bury in Rukungiri – she was here by the way, even though she did not contribute. Let Members rise for a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

11.06
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Madam Speaker, I am standing on a matter of national importance, in relation to the British High Commission, particularly to do with visas. Previously, they had a visa section here and Ugandans who wished to go to the UK were getting their visas from Kampala. Recently they moved it to Nairobi and so, for Ugandans to get a visa, your passport should go to Nairobi and spend there some 15 days.

The most recent position is that for a Ugandan to get a visa, the passport has to go to Ethiopia in Addis Ababa, and that you can be denied your passport for up to two months. That means even if you are to fall sick, you have to plan for your sickness before hand because you cannot access your passport. Even when you want to travel somewhere else, you cannot go because it takes two months. Some other people have even sent emissaries to pick their visas from Addis Ababa.

In international relations, when a country begins to scale down its presence in a host nation, that means that the host nation in one way or another is becoming irrelevant. I am wondering; in a situation where Uganda is the Chair of the Commonwealth how can we get relegated to this level! Some students have abandoned their studies because they cannot access their passports. And after going through such a humiliating situation, the money is not refunded.

There is a case of a student who wanted a visa and when he went to the embassy, he was made to fill the wrong forms and to pay Shs 500,000 and his passport spent there three weeks. When it came back, they told him, “You paid for the wrong forms”. He paid another Shs 250,000 and then got a visa after two months. 

Therefore, I want to find out from government: are they aware of this situation? And what prompted the change of operations to the extent of taking our passports to Ethiopia? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.08
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, the matter that the honourable member is raising is actually very serious. Ugandans are being mistreated in terms of the amount of money they pay. If you want a visa, you must pay the money first. If we are to calculate how many people have been denied visas vis-à-vis those who have received them, the proportion is big by far. 

The trouble started when they were still here. People would sleep at the British High Commission; you would find 200 people sleeping because they needed to queue. To make matters worse, when the visa section was transferred to Nairobi, you had to, not only pay for a visa, but you also had to pay money for the courier services to make sure that your documents go and come back. And after all that trouble, there was no guarantee that your visa would be given; even when the case was so clear.

I have an example of somebody who was scheduled to attend the smart-partnership meeting in London. Everything was there, even the London office tried everything; and just because some courier service mishandled the documents, that visa was denied. In diplomatic service, there is what is called complementary. Why are we giving to the British so much if they cannot give back to us?

As the Member has said, Uganda is now chairing the Commonwealth; how can members of the Commonwealth be treated as if they are just another African country, and have their visas administered in Addis Ababa? How much is Uganda losing through this process?

I support what hon. Namayanja is saying: let us have this matter explained openly. Why are Ugandans not defended in this matter? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.10
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a matter that concerns two countries and normally an issue like this should first be quietly handled as diplomacy demands. 

The British Government is not represented in this House and I think it is not fair if we discuss them here and yet we have a Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

The first thing that should have been done was to refer this matter to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for a solution, after which, it could be right for us to discuss it if they failed.

MR EKANYA: I want clarification from hon. Okello whether the British Parliament first consulted the government when they discussed the arrest of Dr Kizza Besigye and the storming of the High Court. By doing so, did they violate our rights? I also want him to clarify whether this matter has not been handled in Parliament before, because to the best of my knowledge, we have. We even had a meeting with the Minister of Foreign Affairs about the same. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: If the British discuss Uganda in their Parliament without first handling it quietly, it does not mean we should do the same. 

If the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has handled this matter, what was the outcome? I am uncomfortable discussing a foreign country in our Parliament without the other government being involved.

11.16 
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): I have a strong feeling that we are so friendly as a country and yet the people we are friendly to are not friendly to us. It is not only the British Government. 

With me, I have visas that I was supposed to have used to enter the DRC. I did lose a relative, and crossing over for the burial was a problem, as I had to wait for more than five hours, and in the end, missed the burial.  

I beg to lay on Table the visas we needed to cross to the DRC. 

When we were about 40 kilometres into the DRC, myself and three others were delayed and my car had to remain overnight at the border, leaving me no option but to find a boda boda to bring me back home. 

We also go through the same experience when travelling to Sudan, and yet we have these bilateral agreements. This is a very serious matter we are discussing, and I wonder what diplomacy we need, to deal with our neighbours, because our friendship goes generations back. Unless the Minister of Foreign Affairs comes to explain to us as a nation, as to why we are being coerced by people who are supposed to be our own friends, then we shall just be seen to be too soft. 

I can assure you that tourists find it very easy to come here and yet for us to travel to the UK for example, is made difficult. Who would wish to be in their cold country permanently? We have all the beauty we need here. 

Now the office has moved from Uganda to Ethiopia; the last time I heard, it was supposed to be in Nairobi. If they can have their foreign missions here, why does it have to become exceedingly special to travel to their countries?

Besides that, I wish to lay on Table these visas that give us trouble to even cross into the DRC. I do not read French that much, but here they are. I lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What bothers me is that Ethiopia is not even a member of the Commonwealth. Can you imagine us from the Commonwealth countries being taken there? Anyway, can the Office of the Prime Minister tell us what they are going to do because by the time Ugandans cry out, then it is really a problem?

11.18 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I am holding the portfolio for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs –(Applause)– and it is true this matter has come up in Parliament before, and has also been brought to the attention of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It, however, appears that the situation has not improved and if anything, it appears to have worsened. 

The approach that the government has been pursuing in such matters that could affect the relations between two countries is to handle them diplomatically. I am going to prepare a note for the Minister of Foreign Affairs so that when he returns on Monday, he can be in position to take up this matter. 

I want to assure the honourable members that we shall use our position in the Commonwealth to ensure that we find an acceptable solution to this problem. 

As I indicated, I will hand over the portfolio to the substantive minister on Monday, with a note indicating the views of this House. I believe that within a week, we should be in position to get a response from the minister. 

Regarding the DRC, I will also indicate in my notes that there is actually a much bigger problem with –(Interruption) 

MS BAKO: Hon. Minister, thank you for giving way and receiving this information from me. 

In 2007, I was with the President in Ngorodoto for the signing of a bilateral agreement between the DRC and Uganda that contained issues to do with our border lines and relations. 

There were other meetings that followed, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs informed me in person that he was going to register the agreement with the United Nations. 

It is unfortunate that we still have these unfortunate relationships with our neighbours. The eastern part of the DRC and your government have exceedingly failed us, particularly, we the people who are living along the border lines. Until now, there has been no information relating to what transpired in that agreement. Possibly, you need to take it seriously and follow it up. And as you write, could you please ask him what happened after the special summit in Arusha? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, maybe you could also inform the Minister that the Swiss have also moved their consular services to Nairobi. They have the Mission here, but you must take the passport to Nairobi.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, maybe we will be interested as Parliament in getting a formal ministerial statement from the Minister when he comes back, concerning how this situation will be handled.
	
MR MIGEREKO: I have taken note of all the issues that have been raised. But regarding DRC, I would like to say that it is true hon. Bako, was in Ngorodoto with the Attorney-General and several other ministers including myself. It is also true that an agreement was signed between the two Heads of State witnessed by the President of Tanzania. 

I also recall, we came and reported to Parliament, the progress we had made. That was important because at that time, we were having problems on Lake Albert and the border line between Uganda and Congo. I thought we had made substantial progress ever since; the incursions on Lake Albert had stopped; and the border surveys had started. 

I think these are implementation issues. I will bring this to the attention of the Minister of Foreign Affairs so that when he comes here to make a statement, he will be in position to capture the situation regarding DRC and other embassies.

However, I would like to make one simple observation to the effect that the NRM Government is our government, including you, hon. Christine Bako. 

Madam Speaker, you had given us a directive yesterday to make a statement on the issue of salaries. I would like to report that the Minister of State for Finance, hon. Omach, has got a ready statement for this House. I request that you allow him make that statement because when we promise to do something, as government, we always live by it. I thank you.

11.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I thank you. Madam Speaker, you did direct that the minister responsible for public service makes a statement on the delayed payments for the August salaries of civil servants and members of the Teaching Service.

You will recall that the Second Deputy Premier and Minister of Public Service pronounced himself on the matter of delayed payment of salaries for August this year. As you maybe aware, government runs one payroll for the teachers and traditional civil servants. The salaries are released on the basis of payrolls as advised by the Ministry of Public Service.

You may also be aware that before the introduction of the Straight-Through Payment (STP) System in July 2008, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would release funds to ministries, agencies and local governments directly. These institutions would in turn make payment schedules and print cheques in favour of the banks involved. This system caused delays to the extent that some civil servants, especially those in local government, would take up to 30 days after the end of the month before they could actually receive their salaries.

The Straight-Through Payment (STP) System was introduced to minimise these anomalies. And the system has been extended to all government institutions including the Judiciary, Parliamentary Commission and recently, public universities.

This necessitated the updating of the PAYE bank information in accordance with the Electronic Fund Transfer Rules, extending the STP System to all aforementioned institutions, which caused these delays in processing salaries for August this year, and as mentioned earlier, in particular, the inclusion of the public universities in this system.

In regard to the salaries of the UPDF, we initially released one twelfth of their provision on 24 August 2009. I can report that the UPDF are now also getting their salaries direct through this EFT System.

And as promised by the Second Deputy Prime Minister, within 48 hours, these salaries will be paid. As I speak, this matter has been resolved, with officers accessing their salaries on personal accounts since late yesterday. We regret the delay, but we would like to assure you that we shall endeavour to ensure that henceforth, all salaries continue to be paid by the 28 of every month. I thank you.

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As far as we know, the transition from the old system to the new one started sometime back. We can take an example of the Parliamentary Commission. My understanding is that when the transition has been done with the data already in the system, even if you upgrade the system, it should not affect that data. As a case study, what happened with the Parliamentary Commission having been hooked on in the first place some time back? What happened at the end of July? 

I am trying to ask these questions because that could lead us to something. Once a system is set and the data put there, how does it disappear? We could understand if there are some new sectors that have been brought on board that involve data collection. But using this as a case study, what could have gone wrong?

Yesterday, an issue was raised about the SPCs and our Shadow Minister for Defence passed on to you a piece of paper from a certain police station upcountry, and that is just a sample. All over the country, SPCs have not been paid their salaries over the last two years. (Interjections) Yes, I can bring you evidence from my constituency as well. The one we brought on board yesterday is just one case. These SPCs are dangerous because they have guns; they move in communities, and there are instances where they have caused havoc in the communities. Now, what is the status? And we had hoped -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, respond and we move on to our business.

MR FRED OMACH: Madam Speaker, I did mention that we captured new institutions, and these are the public universities; and the delay was caused by bringing them on board. We hope that this will not be repeated.
 
In the case of the SPCs not being paid salaries for some time, the information we have is that all salaries have been released to various paying institutions, and we can only follow up with the respective ministry to see whether they were paid, and if not, this can be resolved. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

11.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The report is quite long, but we shall try as much as possible to point out the highlights. 

In accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution and rule 161(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is mandated to:

    • Discuss and review the estimates of revenue and expenditure;
    • Examine and comment on policy matters and;
    • Evaluate the previous financial performance of the institutions listed in the scope below, and make recommendations to this Parliament.

Scope

This report covers policy statements and budgetary proposals for the following institutions:
    1. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
    2. Electoral Commission
    3. Uganda Law Reform Commission
    4. Judicial Service Commission
    5. Law Development Centre
    6. Uganda Human Rights Commission
    7. Judiciary
    8. Directorate of Public Prosecutions
    9. Parliamentary Commission
    10. Inspectorate of Government

Methodology

In fulfilment of its mandate, the committee:
a) Held meetings with representatives of the above institutions.
b) Studied previous policy statements and parliamentary reports on the institutions.
C) Considered the current policy statements.

General Observations and Recommendations
Land management has become a problem in the country. Ugandans do not know the authority which is managing land, with court orders being subjected to review by Police and Resident District Commissioners. Court bailiffs demolish structures and crops, and yet the orders are for eviction.

There is failure by government to undertake sufficient construction of both residential and government offices, which would minimize the escalating colossal costs in rent.

All government commissions in the JLOS sector in Uganda have different salary scales, which affects the morale of the staff.

The Judiciary has opened magistrate courts in every district. More districts continue to be created without providing funds to enable the Judiciary plan for the establishment of these courts.

The committee recommends that the Constitution should be followed and decisions of courts respected. The committee further recommends that court bailiffs should implement orders of eviction and not demolition.

A salary structure should be streamlined across all government commissions in the JLOS sector.

The government should consider an option of Build, Own, Operate and Transfer (BOOT) for office accommodation, so that money paid in rent is used as part payment for purchase. The Uganda Land Commission should as a matter of urgency provide to government, land on which to construct government offices.

Funds should be provided to enable the Judiciary open new courts in the newly established districts. The Ministry of Local Government should in future ensure that funds are provided in the MTEF before a Motion for creation of new districts is moved.

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

Under 2.1, there are planned activities and programmes for 2008/2009.

On the achievements of the Ministry during the year, let me only highlight the first one; that the Attorney-General’s Chambers won 31 cases out of 104. These cases were worth Shs 4,520,356,518,639 and $1,900,000 compared to the figure indicated for those lost, which by all standards is a good performance.

That brings me to page four; the budget performance of the Financial Year 2008/2009. Total performance stood at 79 percent and 2.4 is about the key planned activities and programmes for the Ministry of Justice for the Financial Year 2009/2010, which Members can read through when they have time.

On page 5, we have unfunded priorities and programmes for the sector for the financial year 2009/2010:
    a) Hosting the International Criminal Court Review Conference in April 2010. 
    b) Operationalisation of Uganda Registration Services Bureau as pointed out in our report of last year, and
    c) The Funding of the Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution (CADER)

Observations and Recommendations 

The Committee observed that:
The ministry’s recurrent non-wage budget provision has remained static; it is the same as the one of financial year 2008/2009. This is notwithstanding the inflation factor which is around 14 per cent, and the devaluation of the Uganda shilling against the major foreign currencies. Related to this is the increase of staff allowances for travel inland and abroad.

Effective from 2004, the ministry has been decentralising its service by way of opening regional offices. By financial year 2009/2010, four regional offices, that is, Mbale, Mbarara, Gulu and Arua will be in place. There is need for operational funds to ensure effective and efficient service delivery to the general public and most especially the local government authorities.

The committee recommends that the non-wage ceiling be raised by about 50 percent, that is, to about Shs 23.5 billion, so as to offset the outstanding commitments and meet the operational needs of financial year 2009/2010.

The ministry has no capital development budget and yet money to buy office tools, furniture, motorcycles and vehicles, falls under this particular budget. All the assets which the ministry has have been acquired either through donor support to projects, or through the JLOS/SWAP development funds. Most of the vehicles obtained through this method have become too old and unserviceable, and hence need replacement.

The committee recommends that government provides Shs 700,000,000 to enable the ministry buy a vehicle for the Attorney-General, and to replace the obsolete ones; buy office furniture, office tools as well as partitioning of existing office space for more offices. 

The Government of Uganda undertook to host the International Criminal Court Review Conference of the Assembly of States parties in May 2010. The conference will last for five days. A budget of Shs 13 billion for hosting the conference has been prepared in consultation with the ICC Secretariat, and submitted to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. No funds have been earmarked for this very important activity.

The committee recommends that government provides the required Shs 13 billion to enable the ministry prepare for the conference. Otherwise, the country stands to be shamed if this matter is not resolved. 

The restructuring of the departments of the Administrator-General and the Law Council has been ongoing for five years now. The Administrator-General’s department needs to be restructured in accordance with Article 247 of the Constitution, and to do so, requires additional resources as follows: Employee costs, service costs and capital development, and equally so, the Law Council lacks a substantive secretary. In place is only an office typist and office attendant. The rest of the staff including the Acting Secretary to the Law Council, are borrowed staff from other directorates in the ministry. The cost implications for restructuring the Law Council are indicated in the report. 

The committee recommends that government provides the required funds to enable the departments carry out their functions.

Cabinet directed that the Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) be fully operationalised effective financial year 2007/2008. Due to inadequate financial and human capital resources, the board cannot drive the bureau to the expected performance standards vis-à-vis reduction of costs of doing business in Uganda. The cost implications of operationalising the bureau are indicated in the report. 

The URSB generates a lot of non-tax revenue from business registration, intellectual property rights, trademarks, copyright and neighbouring rights, civil births, deaths and marriage registrations. During the Financial Year 2007/2008, the bureau generated Shs 2.12 billion. The Financial Year 2008/2009 is projected to generate Shs 2.6 billion.

The committee strongly recommends that government allows the Uganda Registration Services Bureau to spend the money at source to enable it meet its important mandate. 

The Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution (CADRE) was created under Section 68 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, Chapter 4, Laws of Uganda. CADRE as a statutory centre is tasked with steering and guiding the growth of the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) sector in Uganda. The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment), Bill 2007 provides for direct financial support from the Treasury to CADRE.

CADRE required a financial provision of Shs 1, 244,581,941 for employee costs and services, to partly offset the earlier outstanding commitments, and to also meet the financial requirements for this financial year. A budget was made and submitted to the Ministry of Finance. No provision for this request has been made. Only Shs 120 million in the form of subvention has been earmarked for CADRE. Once CADRE is fully operationalised, it has the potential of generating non-tax revenue from activities which include:

    i. Arbitration and mediation of cases.
    ii. Training services in Alternative Dispute Resolution.
    iii. Publication of basic reference materials.

The committee recommends that government funds activities of CADRE within this Financial Year 2009/2010.

There is no budget line to facilitate government witnesses to attend court sessions. This is due to lack of a budget line for this activity. Non-court attendance by witnesses frequently leads to loss of cases by government, and this demoralises state attorneys who seek for constant adjournments over which other parties rebuke them. Provision of a mere Shs 75,000,000 as start-up funds towards this activity would reverse this trend. The committee recommends that government should provide a modest Shs 75 million to facilitate state witnesses and reduce on the loss of cases.

The ministry operates in rented premises. It registered a shortfall of Shs 550 million due to rent quotations, which are made in dollars. When the Uganda shilling depreciates against the dollar, a shortfall is registered. Inadequate rent provisions meant that VAT could not be fully paid as expected.

The committee recommends that government provides Shs 550 million to enable the ministry to meet its rent obligations. Since the details of the figures will come at the stage of Committee of Supply, it will suffice if I read the totals. The committee recommends that the budget of Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be approved as a total of Shs 66,768,000,000.

The Electoral Commission

The Electoral Commission was established by Article 60 of the Constitution. The key planned programmes and activities are indicated under 3.1. The ongoing programmes are provided under 3.2 and the achievements of the Electoral Commission are under 3.3. The total budget performance was 97 percent. The planned activities for FY 2008/09 are under 3.5. I will go to under funded priorities, which are under 3.6: 

1. The general elections, which require Shs 57,644,907,279.
2. Capital development, which requires Shs 55,302,000. 
3. Domestic arrears, which require Shs 996,033,885.

Observations and Recommendations 

a) The MTEF ceiling for the Financial Year 2009/10 was revised from Shs 12 billion to Shs 31 billion for elections. The commission requires Shs 644,907,279 in order to organise polling stations, recruit, train, and deploy election officers and vote educators; update the national voters’ register using the biometric method; and procure equipment, vehicles, furniture, and election materials. If this ceiling is not raised upwards, it poses a big challenge to the commission. There cannot be free and fair elections unless there is preparation and adequate funding for this process.

The committee recommends that government provides Shs 644,907,279 to enable the commission do its work. The release of funds in time will enable the commission to follow the procurement laws and educate the voters.

b) The commission requires Shs 103,674,999,536 during the FY 2010/2011 for general elections. However, the MTEF ceilings have pushed this provision to 2011/2012 when the elections will be over. These funds are required for the display of the national voters’ register, nomination of both national and local leaders, campaigns, voter education, printing of ballot papers, and polling day’s activities. 

The committee recommends that the said MTEF ceilings be raised to reflect Shs 103,674,999,536 for FY 2010/2011. This is necessary to facilitate elections in the country. 

c) The inflation, which is currently being experienced in the country, has rendered staff remuneration inadequate. This has in effect eroded staff morale and increased staff turnover. This problem is compounded by the medium term ceilings which do not provide for a pay rise to staff. The five percent which was announced in the national budget does not apply to the commission.

The committee recommends that government provides funds for government employees who are in statutory institutions that are not directly under public service, to enable the institutions to provide competitive wages and reduce staff turnover.

d) One of the objectives of the EC’s Strategic Plan 2007-2011 was to treat the 2010/11 general elections as a project. This would imply that funds for the project would be released over a period of three financial years beginning FY 2008/09. This was intended to ease pressure on the government and also to enable the Electoral Commission to plan and execute its activities with ease. 

It was planned that Shs 43.3 billion would be released in FY 2008/09 and Shs 53.5 billion in FY 2009/10. However, this has not been done. Government approved a supplementary release of only Shs 8.91 billion during FY 2008/09. The commission has started the procurement process for a few of the items required for the 2010/11 general elections. 

The committee recommends that government should provide the required funds to enable the Electoral Commission prepare properly for elections before the end of FY 2009/10. The committee also advises the Electoral Commission to utilise some of the fixed assets used in the previous elections in order to save funds.

e) The Electoral Commission continues to be housed in unplanned structures, which are the former stores of the Ministry of Works. Although the commission was allocated land, no funds have been allocated for the construction of the building.

The committee recommends that government provides funds to enable the commission start the construction of offices and stores.

f) The land which was allocated to the Electoral Commission is on leasehold terms. This, coupled with delayed release of funds, may make the commission lose the lease before it is developed. 

The committee recommends that the Electoral Commission apply to the Uganda Land Commission to convert the leasehold into freehold to protect the commission from losing the land.

g) The committee recommends that the budget for Vote 102 - the Electoral Commission, be approved in total; that is, Shs 47,498,733,000. 

Uganda Law Reform Commission

Uganda Law Reform Commission was established under Article 248 in the Constitution. At 4.1, we have the planned activities. Under 4.2 are the achievements for the year 2008/2009. The ongoing activities are under 4.3. The budget performance, on page 16, is recorded at 84 percent. Under 4.5 we have the planned and proposed activities for 2009/2010.

The under funded priorities include: allowances, advertising, commissioners’ allowances, inland travel, staff training, furniture and fixtures.

Under 4.7, the committee observes and recommends as follows:

a) The commission consults the public through workshops and seminars, media and field research. These are costly in terms of fuel, vehicle maintenance and costs of workshops. Consultations enable the public to participate in the law making process. A gap of Shs 265 million exists on this item. 

The committee recommends that government should provide Shs 267 million to enable the commission consult people before Bills are formulated.

b) Delay in the legislative process and passing of Bills into law greatly hampers the attainment of outcomes for the commission’s work. Bills are delayed both in Cabinet and in Parliament. 

The committee recommends that government develops a legislative tracking system to enhance monitoring of the legislative process. Cabinet should establish a sub-committee to handle and track the Bills, and Parliament should follow the period stipulated in the Rules of Procedure, that is, rule 113(2).

c) Staff appointed by the Attorney-General were formerly not covered under the mainstream government pension scheme. To provide for such staff, the commission has since been declared “other service”. There is need to provide for contributions of the previous years. 

The committee recommends that government provides Shs 106 million to enable the commission clear the pension arrears. 

d) The committee recommends that government enhances the training budget of the commission by providing Shs 146,760,000 for staff training.

e) The commission faces challenges in the process of law reform due to an increasingly affluent population and divergent interests reflecting culture, religion, gender and economics. These interests need to be resolved and reconciled in the law making process so as to create and sustain a legal regime capable of supporting the national development goals. 

The committee recommends that government supports the commission’s proposed community law reform programme with the necessary resources for implementation.

f) Over 23 percent of the commission’s budget goes to rent for offices and storage of printed materials which affects attainment of goals. These funds can be put to other use if the commission had its own premises. 

The committee recommends that government provides Shs 3.6 billion in a phased manner, starting with this financial year, to enable the commission to construct its own premises.

g) The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service studies the restructuring proposals and advises the commission on the way forward.

h) The commission has continued to operate without a fully constituted commission for the last three and a half years. The tenure of the commissioners is three years. There are no commission meetings at the commission since there have not been commissioners.

The committee recommends that government appoints the commissioners to enable the commission to conduct its activities effectively. 

i) The committee also recommends that the budget for Vote 105, Law Reform Commission, be approved in total as Shs 2,968,690,000.

Judicial Service Commission 

The key planned activities are under 5.1. The major achievements are under 5.2, and this goes up to page 20. The pending and ongoing activities are under 5.3 on page 21. The budget performance was at 93 percent during 2008/2009 Financial Year. The major planned activities are under 5.5. This brings us to 5.6, the under-funded priorities, which are: transport facilities for the chairperson and the secretary; board expenses to enable the commission to meet; staff training; computer supplies and ground rent. 

Under 5.7 we have the observations and recommendations as follows:

a) Various Acts of Parliament require that persons to be appointed to serve on commissions and tribunals should be fit and qualified to serve as judges of the High Court. This has made it difficult to utilise the experience of retired judges from the High Court to occupy such offices. 

The committee recommends that the Constitution be amended to increase the retirement age of High Court judges from 65 to 70 years so that persons above 65 years who are still able to serve in the Judiciary and in tribunals can be appointed.

b) The commission has recommended to the appointing authority persons for appointment as judges, that is, 10 for the High Court and two for the Supreme Court. Only appointments for the Supreme Court have been effected. 

The committee recommends that the appointing authority expedites the process of appointment of judges for the High Court in order to clear the case backlog and ensure efficient delivery of justice. 

c) We recommend that the commission be provided with Shs 210 million to purchase vehicles for the chairperson and the secretary of the commission.

d) The appointment of sitting judges to public offices exposes them to conflict with the members of the public and this in turn erodes the image of the Judiciary. 

The committee recommends that government should reconsider its position on the appointment of judges who are still on the bench and only consider their appointment to judicial offices like commissions of inquiry and other tribunals. 

e) The committee recommends that government provides Shs 35,413,000 to enable the commission carry out disciplinary hearings. 

f) The committee recommends that government avails Shs 40,897,497 to the commission for ground rent and property rates since these are payments required by law. 

g) The committee recommends that the budget for vote 148, Judicial Service Commission, be approved in total as Shs 1,617,000,000.

Law Development Centre

Key planned activities are under 6.1. Major achievements are under 6.2. Pending and ongoing activities are under 6.3 and planned activities under 6.5. 

Observations and recommendations are under 6.6 on page 26:

a) The Law Development Centre has not been receiving development funds from government for the past 12 years –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, who is finding it necessary to receive messages continuously? 

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

a) The Law Development Centre has not been receiving development funds from government for the past 12 years. This is in spite of the fact that LDC currently hosts more than 800 students instead of its original capacity of 100 students. This has led to inadequate accommodation, inadequate computers, inadequate library stock and failure to computerise the Law Development Centre.

The committee recommends that government provides funds for actual development to enable LDC build lecture rooms, staff houses and acquire furniture to meet the increase in the number of students. 

b) The MTEF ceiling for LDC has remained at Shs 1.179 billion for the last 10 years despite the expansion of its activities. 

The committee recommends that government increases the MTEF ceiling to enable the centre match the expansion of its activities.

c) Strangely, Madam Speaker, unlike other government institutions, LDC has no budgetary provision for wages. Salaries and allowances are mainly paid from internally generated funds such as school fees.

The committee recommends that government starts paying staff salaries and allowances for LDC as it is doing with all other government institutions.

d) The committee recommends that government provides Shs 0.719 billion this financial year to enable the centre meet operating expenses.

f) We are recommending that government provides Shs 130 million to enable the centre purchase at least two vehicles.

g) The committee recommends that government provides Shs 250 million to enable the centre acquire a colour separator in order to have its printery fully serviceable. 

h) The committee recommends that the budget for Vote 109 - the Law Development Centre, be approved in total as Shs 1,179,000,000. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission

Under 7.1 we have the planned activities. Major achievements are under 7.2. Budget performance, on page 30, was 96 percent. The major planned activities are under 7.5. Under funded priorities include: rent, inspections, complaints handling, research and civic education. 

Under 7.7 the committee observed and recommended the following:

a) The anti-torture law is yet to be enacted into law in Uganda. The Human Rights Commission has a draft Bill which will enable the State to handle perpetrators of violence and abusers of human rights. 

The committee recommends that the Attorney-General takes up the enactment of the law on torture to enable the commission easily punish the violators of human rights.

b) Government has not speeded up the compensation to victims of human rights abuses. This money is needed to enable the victims to access treatment and help those who are no longer able to work. 

The committee recommends that government should separate the funds for compensation of human rights abuse victims from the general compensation fund provided to the Attorney-General in order to speed up the compensation for human rights violations.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that government pays all compensation arrears during this financial year.

c) The core activities of Uganda Human Rights Commission like investigations, inspections of alleged human rights violations, tribunals, sensitisation programmes, publications, office accommodation for regional offices and outreach programmes continue to be funded by donors under the basket fund. However, donor support is reducing. 

In view of the importance of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and its constitutional mandate, the committee recommends that government should increase its funding to the commission to match the decrease in the donor funding.

d) The committee recommends that government avails Shs 190,400,000 to enable the commission carry out its mandate and bring services closer to the people. Otherwise, there is a risk that the commission will be evicted and close its regional offices.

e) The committee recommends that government provides Shs 145 million to the commission to enable it carry out its monitoring function.

f) The committee recommends that government provides Shs 107 million to enable the commission carry out civic education. 

g) The committee also recommends that government provides Shs 82 million to enable the commission undertake research.

h) The committee recommends that Parliament approves the budget for vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission, in total as Shs 7,450,365,000.

The Judiciary

Planned activities are under 8.1, and there are development capital activities also. Achievements for the sector are listed under 8.2. Pending activities and programmes are under 8.3 and budget performance, which was 92 percent, is under 8.4. Planned activities are listed under 8.5. This takes us to page 39 where the under funded priorities for the Financial Year 2009/2010 are listed as follows:
    • Construction of the building to accommodate the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the Judiciary headquarters. 
    • Construction of court buildings. 
    • Reinstatement and proper facilitation of land tribunals. 
    • Enhancement of salaries for Magistrates Grade II and Senior Principal Magistrates, Grade II.

Observations and Recommendations

a) The number of judges at various levels remains low compared to the increasing population of Uganda. There is an increased level of crime among the population and an increase in awareness of people’s rights. These have increased the number of cases being reported to the courts of law. 

The committee adopts the recommendation of the Judiciary that the Supreme Court Judges should be increased from seven to 11, the Court of Appeal from eight to 15, and High Court from 50 to 82.

b) With the creation of new districts, a number of Magistrate Grade I Courts are still not staffed. This has been aggravated by trading off of three Grade II magistrates for one Grade I magistrate, a policy that has been taken up to professionalise the lower bench.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service approves a new structure to increase Grade I Magistrates to man the courts that are now vacant.

c) The Judiciary has no suitable headquarters for its operations. It rents nearly half of the court premises countrywide including the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and other magistrates’ courts. Some of the courts such as the Court of Appeal and the Constitutional Court are often threatened with eviction due to failure to meet rent obligations. 

The total expenditure on rentals amounts to approximately Shs 1.2 billion annually. Reliance on the private sector for renting to such an extent does not augur well with the principles of the Judicial Code of Conduct, particularly the integrity and independence as expected of the Judiciary.

The committee recommends that the government should provide Shs 14.5 billion to construct an appellate court building to house the courts and headquarters of the Judiciary. 

d) Judges are entitled officers who should fully be provided for by the government. Chauffeured vehicles are some of those entitlements. Currently, over 15 judges have very old vehicles which need urgent replacement. These entitlements traditionally come from the Ministry of Public Service but unfortunately, this responsibility was transferred to the Judiciary without a corresponding resource transfer. 

The committee recommends that funds are provided for the Judiciary to procure vehicles for judges and other administrative staff to conduct their functions properly before the end of 2009/2010 Financial Year.

e) The contract for most of the chairpersons and members of the land tribunals expired in 2006. Following that development, the Hon. Chief Justice issued an administrative circular, directing specific magistrates to handle land matters countywide pending a resolution by the government on the future of the land tribunals. 

The committee recommends that the government provides urgent policy guidance required on this matter before the end of 2009/2010.

f) Judicial officers are not paid terminal benefits despite the nature of their work which does not allow them to hold any other office and takes much of their time. The risks involved in the work are also very high. The government did not include them in the Bill for the benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister. 

The committee recommends that either the judges’ terminal benefits be included in the proposed Administration of Justice Bill or the government introduces a new Bill in Parliament catering for the welfare of judges who are retiring. We recommend that this be done during FY 2009/2010.

g) There has been continued appointment of judges to other public offices. This reduces the number of judges in the course of judicature and increases the workload on the few judges remaining. 

The committee recommends that the appointing authority should always consult with the Chief Justice before appointments are made. The Judicial Service Commission should be given authority to appoint judges on a contract basis for the period equal to the time the judges will be out of office. The Appointments Committee of Parliament should also ensure that there will be a replacement of the judges before approving those ones that have been nominated.

h) The Judiciary, which is an arm of government, has a shortfall of Shs 18,182,318,087 on the recurrent budget, Shs 19,769,320,000 on development expenditure and Shs 6.2 billion on other projects. 

The committee recommends that the government provides Shs 44,219,832,087 in a phased manner to enable the Judiciary expend justice to all Ugandans starting FY 2009/2010. 

The committee recommends that the budget for Vote 101 be approved as follows: the total is Shs 50,813,727,000. 

The Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP)

The planned activities for the DPP are under 9.1. Major achievements are under 9.2. The budget performance is under 9.3, which was very good at 99.8 percent. Unfunded priorities included: the opening up of 11 stations and upgrading 19 resident state prosecutor stations; procurement of transport; construction of non-residential buildings; and facilitating of witnesses. 

The committee observed the following: 

a) The increasing crime rate in the country will affect the performance of the directorate. This is due to the high population growth rate, improvements in technology, unemployment and land disputes among others. With the rise in crime levels and shortage of staff in JLOS institutions, case backlog reduction will remain a big challenge. 

The committee recommends that government provides funds to recruit the necessary personnel in the JLOS institutions to enable the institutions expend justice in a reasonable time. 

b) The committee recommends that Shs 1.08 billion be provided by government to enable the Directorate of Public Prosecutions pay for transport and lunch allowance for state witnesses to save the government from losing cases. 

c) The committee also recommends that government provides Shs 600 million to fully computerise the directorate. 

d) The committee recommends that government provides Shs 250 million to enable the directorate construct upcountry offices, save money paid for rent and bring services closer to the people. 

e) The committee recommends that government provides Shs 800 million to enable the directorate open 11 new field offices and bring services closer to the people during the financial year.

f) The committee recommends that the budget for vote 133, Directorate of Public Prosecutions, be approved in total as Shs 9,471,000,000. 

Parliamentary Commission

We come to the Parliamentary Commission, where all of us belong. Under 10.1 we have the planned activities for the last year. The achievements are under 10.2. The budget performance was at 95 percent. The planned activities for the year 2009/10 are on page 49.

The committee observed the following: 

a) Some of the donors of Parliament continue to manage the resources from outside Parliament. This has made it difficult for the committees which they fund to oversee the activities. A case in point is the FINMAP programme, which funds accountability committees. 

The committee recommends that the funds be transferred to Parliament to ensure the independence of Parliament in execution of its duties. 

b) Bills are taking too long to be considered by Parliament and to pass them into law. 

The committee recommends that the Business Committee addresses the problem of Bills taking too long when being considered by the committees in accordance with rule 113(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

c) The commission is not well informed about the funds available from some of the donors. 

The committee recommends that the commission should get details of funds to be provided by the donor groups, in particular USAID/linkages programme, the Westminster Foundation for Democracy and Uganda Country Capacity Building Programme. This will enable the commission monitor and evaluate outputs of the support extended to Parliament. 

d) The commission did not include the budget for death gratuity of Shs 275,376,000 for deceased Members of Parliament. 

The committee recommends that that sum be included in the current budget since a supplementary is provided at the end of the financial year. 

e) The constituency development facility has a shortfall of Shs 540,468,146. All Members of Parliament are entitled to this facility. 

The committee recommends that government provides that sum to enable the commission pay the constituency development facility. 

f) The attendance of Members of Parliament for plenary and committees has continued to go down. This is affecting the performance of Parliament in their ability to complete their work on time. 

The committee recommends that the Rules of Procedure be amended to provide for sanctions against members who do not attend committee and plenary meetings. 

g) The construction of the new parliamentary chamber has been stalled due to lack of the land title for Parliament. Kampala City Council cannot approve the plan without the land title. 

The committee recommends that the Uganda Land Commission issues the land title to enable the construction of the chamber and reduce on the current sitting problem in the House.

h) The committee recommends that the budget for vote 104, Parliamentary Commission, be approved in total as Shs 124,516,695,418. 

The Inspectorate of Government 

The planned activities of the Inspectorate are under 11.2. The achievements are 11.3. Pending and ongoing activities are under 11.4. The budget performance was 80 percent. 

Observations and Recommendations: 

a) The committee observed that over the years, the inspectorate has been losing staff especially professionals and technical staff to other organisations due to poor remuneration. In order for the inspectorate to attract, recruit and retain well qualified staff, it needs a good salary structure as part of a staff recruitment and retention policy. The inspectorate requires an additional Shs 9.43 billion in order to implement a new structure, which will raise the wage bill. 

The committee recommends that government should provide the required funds to enable the Inspectorate of Government recruit and retain professional staff. This will also improve morale, performance and efficiency. The committee considers this an urgent matter considering the sensitivity of the work of the Inspectorate of Government. 

b) In accordance with Article 228 of the Constitution, the Inspectorate of Government may establish branches at districts and other administrative levels as it considers fit for the performance of its function. The IG has so far established 13 regional offices. Ideally, each region should serve two to three districts instead of the current four to seven for effective coordination.

The committee recommends that government provides funds this financial year to enable the IG establish an office in Moyo to cater for the districts of Moyo, Adjumani and Yumbe. 

Government should also consider the budget of the IG whenever there is creation of new districts to enable the IG also provide services closer to the people.

The budget of the IG has been reducing since 2007/2008 from Shs 32 billion to Shs 17 billion. It has been reduced further to about Shs 13 billion, less than a half of its budget two years ago. This is in spite of the increase in population and the work load for the IG due to the increased awareness.

The committee strongly recommends that the MTEF ceiling for the IG be increased to cover the overall deficit of Shs 18 billion.

Government should also provide the required funds this financial year to enable the IG carry out its mandate.

Urgently, government should provide Shs 17.4 billion to cover the shortfall created by the reduced donor support in 2009/2010.

Gratuity for staff has been partly funded with need for additional funding to the tune of Shs 439.6 million. This is similar to the last financial year when gratuity was partly funded. Staff who serve on contract are paid gratuity every year.

The committee recommends that government provides Shs 439.6 million to enable the IG pay gratuity to its staff.

Vote 103 - Inspectorate of Government

The committee recommends that it be approved in total as Shs 13,837,280,000. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair. Despite the size of the report, you have been able to cover it in less than one hour. Thank you very much.

I do not see the shadow Attorney-General. (Mr Ekanya rose_) Please, only five minutes. I do not see your text.

12.23
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): As the Leader of the Opposition, five minutes, Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have a letter telling me who the Leader is in the absence of hon. Latigo. Everyday, I see a new leader but anyway, five minutes.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am representing the Leader of the Opposition. Our minister and Attorney-General is with the Committee on Local Government and they are all in Jinja. That is why he is not here. As the Opposition, we have a few concerns. The Opposition will come up with a motion on this sector that will be debated entirely to create reform but today, we just want to raise some key issues.

The key issues are one, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and the Constitution. Article 94 of the Constitution states that, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure including the procedure of its committees”.

What is our concern as the Opposition? That if you look at the Rules of Procedure, other committees are super and that makes the Rules of Procedure inconsistent with the Constitution. The committee, which we are basically very concerned about, is the Committee on Appointments. This committee’s decision meetings are held in camera. The report of the Committee on Appointments, as per the Rules of Procedure, is not supposed to be debated by the House. That means that that committee is super and superior and according to our interpretation, that contradicts the Constitution and that is null and void. 

We want to urge Parliament that this provision be amended very urgently. Our major concerns stem from the decision of Parliament and the Committee on Appointments in considering the appointment of members of Electoral Commission. The manner in which the Committee on Appointments handled the reappointment of members of Electoral Commission, to us, was unconstitutional. This is based on the fact that the Rules of Procedure and the manner in which it was handled violated the best principle of multi-party democracy. 

Therefore, we want to urge government to reconsider this matter and consider a dialogue with the Opposition with a view to having new members of Electoral Commission appointed based on the new form of democracy we have, where the Opposition’s interests are represented.

The second concern is that for us to have mature politics and to enjoy democracy, Electoral Commission’s budget should not be restricted by MTEF. The Electoral Commission is self accounting just like Parliament. We have seen in the report where the chairperson has stated that the MTEF ceiling has caused the Electoral Commission not to get all the funds as required. For us, we look at that as unconstitutional because the procedure for self accounting is very clear. The Minister of Finance is only supposed to comment and state. So, to apply different rules to Parliament and different ones to other self accounting institutions is unacceptable and this House should reject it in totality.

Another key concern, which you need to take up is that the Rules of Procedure allow you - I have been looking at the rules. Our Hansard does not capture material that is not read. The rule says only what is stated and spoken is what the Hansard is supposed to capture. Now you find that the chairman sometimes tries to summarise some key issues. If you try to track down such information from the Hansard, you will not be able to get it. That is a major problem. 

I want to urge you, Madam Speaker, that you use your prerogative as provided for in the rules that the Hansard should capture the entire report as presented by the chairperson.

If you look at the parliamentary sector, you find that in terms of output, Parliament achieved a lot but little is reported. That means that if we are being assessed by other organisations, it seems we have received a lot of money and yet our output is very minimal. When I was the Chairperson of Local Government Accounts Committee, my committee alone produced over 200 reports and we have 150 reports lying in the Office of the Clerk because we produced reports for Local Government Accounts from 2001 to 2005; that is for each of the 80 districts of Uganda. So consider, each financial year you have 80 districts times 300 reports; that is more than 2,000. And all these chairpersons have been conducting field work – international travels and making reports in the House. Therefore, I am dismayed that the activities in terms of output of Members of Parliament – (Member timed out_)

MRS KASULE: Madam Speaker, THE Parliamentary Commission facilitates the Opposition. I want to know why they have not produced the report because I do not have a copy of the report.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we had a meeting with Rt. hon. Ssekandi and we said that in order to enhance completion of the budget within a given time frame, we had to choose key sectors where we had to produce written reports. Those were just six; others were just supposed to comment and that is on record. Thank you.

12.40
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Aruu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee reported vividly that they secured Shs 4.5 trillion in cases won. But I want to reiterate that the image of the government is totally stained because out of 104 cases, they actually lost 73. This makes this government a partner in crime. If you have 104 and you won only 31, and you lose 73; that makes you a criminal. By ordinary standards you are just a criminal and therefore you invest in crime. 

We cannot trust a government that continues to lose cases; the financial implication is just minimal. The fact of the matter is if out of the 104, you just win these very few, that –(Hon. Members rose_)- no, I do not need your information because this is your report.

The Uganda Law Commission, page 16, under funded priorities: the Shs 166.3 billion is for allowances. And again allowances for commissioners are Shs 146.8 million – and when you look at what they call the other priorities, these allowances are excessive. I worked as a member of the National Governing Council of the APRA and our allowances were not up to this tune. What is very special about these commissioners? And the progress that they are reporting is that commission meetings are going on. I sit on the National Governing Council; do I get such unrealistic allowances? I do not. 

The Electoral Commission; we in the Opposition strongly believe that we should not even pass the budget for the Electoral Commission. The reappointment of the electoral commissioners is in total disregard of our proposals as the inter-party corporation. That means there is no commitment to oversee free and fair elections. The last commission mismanaged the previous electoral processes and this is on record. If nothing is done about this, how can we, the Opposition recommend financing of this commission when we know that last time they did us a disservice?

Even the country review report - the Peer Review of this country stated clearly that there needs to be structural changes in the Electoral Commission and nothing has been done about it. Therefore, it is no wonder that the head of state refused to go to Libya for his own peer review. These are the problems that Africans are suffering from. There is a governance problem in Uganda and we are not taking it seriously, beginning with the person holding the Executive powers. How can we prepare the next generation for a better future if this is how we are going to work?

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Human Rights Commission is the body charged with civic education; today there is nothing like civic education in this country. How can we then believe their commitment to civic education? Since 1986, civic education has turned out to be sensitisation workshops. No wonder the youth of this country are now beggars; they do not know their civic rights and responsibilities. What is the Uganda Human Rights Commission doing about it? And there is no voter education by the Electoral Commission; it is done belatedly by organisations managed by NRM cadres. How can there be transparency in this country if these are the things going on?

Lastly, access to justice; we have already been told that government is a partner in crime. In fact, it is an investor in crime. The poor people of this nation have to walk long distances to courts –(Member timed out_)

12.46
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County Kitgum): Madam Speaker, I will start with the Law Reform Commission. Last year there was a conflict that there was only one commissioner appointed. The same situation still prevails today. I would like to know from the Attorney-General or the chairperson of the committee; what is the problem? Is it lack of qualified people to be appointed?

We have a commission and a lot of unemployment in the country and so many vacancies waiting to be filled. I do not understand this.

Secondly, we have so many commissions in this country, but all of them have various terms of service. Some serve for seven years, some three years, and some for four years. Why don’t we have a uniform term of service for all these commissions? Is some commissions are less important, why don’t we get rid of them?

Three is the congestion in courts, normally called backlogs. It is very serious in this country that after sometime, after final submissions, the parties have to wait for as along as six years to get the ruling. Madam Speaker, Uganda is one of the few countries in the world, if not the only one, where there are more ministers than judges. What this means is that we put a lot of resources into politics; we prefer to pay more heavily to politics than to rendering justice to our population. I think this situation should change. We should have more judges than ministers.

Fourth, let me talk about mob justice. I would like to inform this House that there is a lot of lynching in the country. People do not want to wait - you make a mistake, you are lynched. What that means is that our people have lost confidence in the law and order system. It is a vote of no confidence in the Judiciary. So, something must be done for us behave like civilised people.

Lastly, in my opinion, we should review the proposal to construct a bigger Chamber. Look at Parliament now – supposing we were in a much bigger Chamber, what would the situation look like? We cannot spend a lot of money to construct a big Chamber just to wait for either the Queen or the President coming occasionally to address Parliament. I am saying this because this Chamber is always empty. Why should we really spend money to construct a bigger one when there are so many other demands on the same money? This is my opinion. I think we do not need it. I thank you.

12.50
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for that good report.

Let me concentrate on the aspect of the Judiciary. I am happy to hear that the Judiciary plans to increase the number of judges in the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal and High Court. However, in increasing these numbers, I pray that the Judicial Service Commission does a thorough evaluation of the people to be appointed to those posts. I am basing my argument on a case in which judgment was passed by the High Court in Jinja. I do not want to give the facts relating to the names of the people. Anyway, it began with two brothers being sentenced to death by a High Court sitting in Jinja. And when they reached Luzira, one of those people starved himself to death. However, after a year, it was realised that the person allegedly killed was by the two was alive; he was in Jinja. 

I think you can now see the irreparable damage that was done to that family. My prayer is that evaluation of those to be appointed judges should be carried out thoroughly by the Judicial Service Commission.

I am happy to see the Attorney-General, but yesterday as we debated the other report, there was something related to today’s report. The Attorney-General has pending obligations with some 13 inmates in Luzira. I am going to avail the names at an appropriate time. But these are inmates who are in prison on the Minister’s Order. Some of them have stayed there for over 18 years without their matters being heard. This has been on because it needs only the Attorney-General to revise the cases and determine whether they should be released or continue to serve their sentences. 

We talked about the issue of delayed justice under the aspect of backlog of cases. I would like to inform you that in those prisons especially Luzira, there are inmates who were committed in 2000. However, to date their matters have not been heard. And when such a person is brought to court, either the witnesses to the case disappeared or are dead, which requires the Office of the DPP to sort out. In that respect you find that both the government and the person in jail do not receive the justice they require.

The other issue is about government sponsorship at LDC. I was admitted to LDC on government sponsorship but what I know is that you are told to pay the tuition and your money is refunded after the completion of the course. I would like to inquire whether there can be a measure where students admitted on government sponsorship can have their money paid by government as they study and not them paying for the course before a refund is done.

Madam Speaker, finally let me say something about the Electoral Commission. Many alarms have been raised with the international community being concerned about electoral reforms in this country. And we as Opposition do not have any faith, at the moment, in the current Electoral Commission. Everybody knows the clear judgments from the Supreme Court as far as matters regarding presidential elections are concerned. So, to have the same faces at the Electoral Commission erodes the confidence of Ugandans. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Godi was there a petition against your election?

MR GODI: I meant presidential elections.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I mean you.

MR GODI: No, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see when you say they have done a bad job, then how many petitions of the Members of this House were brought up?

12.54
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start with what hon. Godi has been talking about. I find the argument of targeting individuals at the Electoral Commission very wanting. What is important is for Parliament to strengthen this Commission by building structures and funding it in time. That will help us more than discussing individuals, which to me does not make any sense. Even if you put a Bishop there to head that Commission or whoever person you put – for as long as the funding – because, I have seen from the report the ceiling for only the 2011/2012 Financial Year instead of 2010/2011. That is the argument we should be having instead of quarreling over who should be in the Electoral Commission.

My observation is that funding is key such that the Electoral Commission can carry out its work in time so that we can all proceed – we are all going to be handled by this Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, the next issue I want to talk about is the Administration of Justice Act. We all know well that with the principle of separation of powers, we have the Executive with all the laws that are required, we have the Administration of Parliament Act and I think it is necessary that we expedite it. Government should bring it forth and then as Parliament, we expedite the enactment of the Administration of Justice Act. Otherwise, I was concerned when the chairman made recommendations on which car to buy for the Administrator-General, how much it will cost for the Judicial Service Commission and I think this shouldn’t actually have come here if they had such a law that would allow them to stop being dependent on the Ministry of Finance. 

Hon. Godi talked about the issue of case backlog. In Uganda, 57 percent of the 34,000 inmates are on remand and have been there for three, five to seven years. This is unconstitutional because our Constitution is very clear. Article 23(c) talks about mandatory bail and speedy trial; what happens in such situations? Article 26(b) prohibits delaying justice. So, if we render those articles redundant or delete them, then Ugandans will think that there is no justice at that level. It is even against the judicial code of conduct which prohibits protracted trials and when I read the report and they said there was some level of improvement, I wondered how they could even talk of improvement if out of 15,000 civil suits in the High Court only 3,000 were disposed of and only 21,000 of 100,000 criminal suits in the magistrates courts were disposed of. What kind of improvement is that? I believe the remedy is to support the position of the committee to increase the number of judges and to fund the Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution, which can help us to really do away with some of these minor cases. 

When I saw that Shs 6 billion for the backlog reduction strategy was not included in the ceiling, I realised that government is failing to walk the talk. You cannot talk about reducing backlog if you do not provide money for the reduction of backlog. So, I believe the issue of case backlog is actually a denial of the fundamental human rights of Ugandans who keep rotting in jail and yet we keep spending a lot of money to feed those people for all those years instead of increasing the number of judges and funding alternative dispute resolution. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

12.59 
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the committee for the good report. I just have a few concerns to raise. I want to thank the committee for the observations they made on page 48 that the structural drawings for the new Chamber of Parliament were prepared and already submitted to Kampala City Council for approval but it becomes a matter of concern when the committee observes on page 50 that the construction of the new parliamentary Chamber has stalled due to absence of the land title for Parliament. If Parliament, which is the legislative arm of government can take this long to get a land title, then what about other ordinary Ugandans? I think something has to be done so that a land title is got for these premises so that we are able to get a chamber that can accommodate the number of Members of Parliament. 

The committee observed that plenary and committee meeting attendance has continued to go down and this has affected the work of Parliament. The committee recommends that the Rules of Procedure be amended but before we think about amending them, let us ask ourselves why Members do not attend committee meetings and plenary. We all know that there is a problem but we are shying away from talking about it. There is a lot of pressure on the ground and I think something has got to be done to restrain people, who are running up and down in the constituencies. That is why Members are not here. People are campaigning openly like it has already been declared. People have got to be restrained otherwise by next year, there will be nobody and Madam Speaker, one day you will be surprised to find yourself alone in this House -(Laughter)- I think the office concerned should try and restrain people because if there is only one member in a constituency, why do other people also address meetings like they are Members of Parliament? Things should be done at the right time –(Interruption)

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also think that the recommendation given by the committee is a little bit unfair to the Members. For instance, many of our colleagues are in Jinja and I do not know whether somebody has accounted for their absence vis-à-vis that activity. So, a lot of things should be taken into consideration to explain why they are not in the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But there are members who I have not seen since the beginning of their tenure here. There are names on the register. How do you account for those? Were they campaigning in 2006/2007?

MS OKORI-MOE: Yes, Madam Speaker, that is the reason you have never seen some Members in this House. Something has got to be done and this has not spared anybody; even the ministers. Things are not good. 

I do not know whether it is not wise enough for the Parliamentary Commission to explore the possibility of saving us, especially those Members that have offices in Bauman House. I have heard several Members complain about the difficulty to cross to that side. I do not know whether it is not possible for them to consult with KCC so that we either have a zebra crossing somewhere there or a flyover. Otherwise, we will be finished. 

Madam Speaker, those are the concerns that I wanted to raise. Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I do not know who can help me because I wrote to the Mayor of Kampala City requesting for that zebra crossing. I wrote to him about three months ago, following your complaint [HON. MEMBER: “In English?”] Yes, in English. (Laughter) 

1.05 
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank the committee for the good report and allow me make two observations concerning the demarcation and the mapping of electoral areas. This is a very serious problem. Almost at every election, we see illegal voting areas coming up and these tend to confuse the voters as they move from one place to another. If it means giving the Electoral Commission the required money to sort this out, government should do it because this is quite a big problem. 

Secondly, although my colleague mentioned it, it is about civic education. I think it is the mandate of government to ensure that citizens’ rights are respected but if the government continues not to give the commission the money that is necessary to educate our citizens about their rights, then it is a disservice. I am saying this in regard to what I read in the newspapers yesterday about a group of workers who petitioned the President. What happened was that some workers were forced to use their tongues to clean the floor -(Interjections)– yes, this is actually happening with the new companies of foreign investors. This is just one of a thousand cases but quite a number of those cases have been reported. Some girls are actually raped but they cannot seek the help of the courts because they do not know their rights. I therefore want to request the government to give the commission the necessary money so that the commission continues to carry out civic education. I thank you very much. 

1.07 
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank the chairman for a well done report and the cool and articulate way in which he has presented it. But what I have observed is that almost for every government institution, the premises are hired and the chairman has told us that money for rent is not budgeted for. That causes a problem to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs because even the premises where he sits are rented. The premises for the Uganda Human Rights Commission are rented and he tells us that that money is not even in the budget. Is that a matter of budgeting? Was this not included in the budget proposals of the ministry or were they thrown out by the Ministry of Finance? That bothers me. 

Secondly, there are 110,466 pending cases; 61 cases in the Supreme Court, 1,624 cases in the Court of Appeal, 27,614 cases in the High Court, and 80,967 cases in the magistrates’ courts. To the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice I ask: how can Parliament help you in this situation? How can Parliament assist you in managing to handle and dispose of these cases? Won’t there be people fighting in the streets because their cases are not handled? Shall we not have a problem on our hands? I would like the minister to respond to this. 

Lastly, I am glad there is a Commissioner behind me - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, they are two.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: There are two Commissioners behind me: has there ever been a land title for this Parliament? Did it get lost? Have you bothered to go to the Land Registry to find out where this title is? Do you know the steps to be taken in order to get a new title? If the title was not issued, you should go to the Ministry of Lands, to the Uganda Land Commission, fill the forms and get a title. If the title is lost, establish and prove it and go to the lawyers and get a document saying that the title was lost and then go to the ministry and get a special title, bring that title here and take it to Kampala City Council so that they can assist Parliament to look at the drawings and then allow the construction to start. But for commissioners who are distinguished people and who know things to come here and tell us that Kampala City Council cannot approve the drawings simply because the title is not around, is really not serous enough. I do not take it seriously and I advise that if the title exists, bring it. If it is lost, print a special title. If it has never existed, apply and get a new one - and I think that will be very simple - so that the expansion and construction of the Chamber is completed and I hope that in the next budget, this matter should -(Member timed out­_)

1.12
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Pallisa): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me another chance to contribute in this august House during this session. I would also like to add my voice to my colleagues’ who have thanked the chairperson and the committee for a good report and a good presentation.

I want to comment on the comments of my colleagues, especially those from the Opposition, about the Electoral Commission. I am sure that all of us came here because of the good work that the Electoral Commission did. If anybody says no, why did you come to swear and why haven’t you resigned, because you are condemning those elections which were carried out by those very people? I think let us be fair to the people. Call a spade a spade -(Interjections)– yes! These are the people who did that good work which brought us here -(Interruption)

MR KABUUSU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is aware that before we came here to Parliament, during the campaigns, many of our supporters were flogged, beaten and killed when the Electoral Commission that was given the duty to manage, monitor and supervise elections was helpless and did not help them. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to just celebrate this suffering because she won the election and was sworn in as a Member of Parliament? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, if you felt so badly about the conduct of the Electoral Commission, you should have rejected their outcome, including taking an oath. You should have said, “I do not want to touch you; you are dirty.” (Applause) Proceed.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Madam Speaker, thank you for that wise ruling. The Electoral Commission came up with a plan for a project to enable them to prepare for the coming elections, and they asked for funds, which funds have, up to today, not been availed. 

Also, when Parliament passes laws to assist the Electoral Commission to carry out or to prepare for elections, and we pass those laws very late, then we are partly to blame. We should take it that we have also contributed to the poor performance of the Electoral Commission. So, it is not the Electoral Commission that should be solely condemned.

Now we are talking about the location of the Electoral Commission. It is housed in those dilapidated buildings; and yet I know that the Electoral Commission of South Korea came in to assist in building headquarters for the Electoral Commission. I hope the minister will inform us how far they have gone with that assistance from South Korea. 

I also want to comment on the Human Rights Commission. I think civic education goes together with voter education. So I would like the Human Rights Commission to carry out massive civic education so that people know what they want when they go to vote. 

They should also know that when they vote for a Member of Parliament or any other person, the Member of Parliament or that other person is not Government to build roads, schools and hospitals. They should also not vote because they have been given, perhaps, a kilo of sugar, a bar of soap or a piece of soap. We need civic education to be carried out massively. 

Yesterday we were at a workshop where they were suggesting that it should be mainstreamed. Maybe if it is mainstreamed, it will help our people to know what they want when they are going to vote. It will also help them to know whom to vote for, and what their representative does and what government does. 

I also want to make a comment on the Law Development Centre. Every institution here is being under funded and we have heard that the results from the Law Development Centre are very poor; most of the people failed. And now we are hearing that the development fund is not there. I am sure some of these issues are the ones which cause bad results. I am sure that if these institutions are properly funded, then they will be able to carry out those activities perfectly, and we shall get good results. Madam Speaker, those are the few comments I wanted to make.

1.19
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start by commenting on the committee’s report which highlights the planned activities for the financial year that has just ended. 

I particularly refer to the Parliamentary Commission. One of the things that have been highlighted here is the output of the Parliamentary Commission. On page 48, they mention the handling of the 20 questions for oral answer. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that I am a member of the CPA Executive here, and because of that, I have had the opportunity to interface with quite a number of parliaments. This level of performance of our Parliament in terms of the number of questions that we ever handle is terribly worrying.

In many of the parliaments, you will find that in a year of Parliament, up to thousands of questions are handled. I had wanted us to handle this together with what the report observes. It made a recommendation on how this Parliament should review our Rules of Procedure with a view of enhancing Members’ attendance of committees and plenary. But if we looked at those Rules, there is also a serious matter -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take information?

MR OLENY: Well, I can allow information.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the honourable member that much as he is worried that a few questions are raised, they are even rarely answered.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much for that information. That only serves to worry us more. (Laughter) 

MR MIGEREKO: I would like to thank the Member for giving way. I thought we could put the record straight, particularly in regard to the issue of oral questions and oral answers. It was agreed that questions for oral answer come up on Thursdays and this takes precedence.

On our side as government, we have tried as much as possible to make sure that whatever oral questions there are, we provide responses. It is, therefore, not true and it can be misleading, for one to assert that even the few questions that Members come up with are rarely responded to. Madam Speaker, you have been following this matter fairly closely, and I am sure you will agree with me on this. Thank you.

MR OLENY: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I hope you will be able to compensate my time, because there was no way I could refuse information from the Government Chief Whip. 

Having said that, I would like to point out that we are seriously concerned and we should do all that it takes to review our Rules of Procedure, to provide for even structuring the manner in which oral questions are answered, because many times the simple questions - if I may call them - that are asked, attract a detailed explanation of a policy statement by a minister. I think this is not fair to Parliament. 

We waste a lot of time when the answer is solicited for a specific matter. On many occasions ministers have come here and spoken for 15-20 minutes, and in most cases, they would even need more time. So, this is also going to affect our Rules of Procedure. 

I want to emphasise that the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee should liaise with this very committee so that we enhance the performance of Parliament by reviewing our Rules of Procedure.

The other matter that goes with the Rules of Procedure is the recommendations of this very House. Many times we deliberate on issues here and as we leave – it is as if that is all left here; even though we have them in black and white there is no follow-up.

Madam Speaker, as you may be aware, it is common practice in the Commonwealth parliamentary establishments, for example in the UK, that whatever recommendations committees come up with, the Executive is under obligation to respond to each and every recommendation within a period of 90 days. This does not happen here. Recommendations are made; we go to the next budget considerations; scrutinise and make the same recommendations. So, I am seriously concerned, and I hope that the Rules, Privileges and Discipline Committee liaises on this, and we as Members of Parliament should improve on how it works.

1.25
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Chairman for the good report. My concern is on page 11, under the Electoral Commission where they say, “Procurement of specialised equipment for 2010-2011 elections.” 

But my major concern is voters’ registration equipment. We are aware that these equipments were purchased in 2006; cameras were purchased, but hardly a year later, one could not get a voter’s card because most of these cameras and equipment had broken down. I, therefore, want to know from the people concerned, whether these were fake cameras or they were just toys. 

MR GODI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and the honourable colleague for giving way. In as much as some of the cameras have disappeared or have been mismanaged, I would like to inform him that it has been reported and captured in newspapers that in some police stations, the plastic ballot boxes are used as utensils for serving food to suspects. Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, this is my concern because I lost my voter’s card in 2007, but when I went to get a new voter’s card, I was told that the equipment had broken down, and up to now I have not got a new voter’s card. I really need an explanation on this. We have offices of the Electoral Commission at every district, but I always wonder what these offices do. During elections, they are very active, but during the course of those five years after the elections, I do not know what they do. What I would have expected them to do is to keep on updating the voter register and register those who come of age. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, hon. Mutuluuza for giving way. Ordinarily, they are supposed to do continuous civic and voter education, and registration, but the reason is that they do not have the funds. Even in the last elections, they got money just before campaigns. So, I think the problem is with Finance appropriating resources, but not them. 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Member for that information. Therefore, we should request government to make sure that these offices are put to use.

My other concern is on the Judiciary. I have had a lot of complaints from my voters that the money they pay for Bail is always not recovered by the people who pay it; even after the disposing of their cases. I want an explanation from the people concerned, because people are being cheated.

On page 20 of this report, they say that one of the achievements was that anti-corruption strategy posters were produced and circulated. I don’t know who this anti- corruption strategy was targeting, because I think it should start with the magistrates’ courts –(Member timed out_)

1.31
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this chance to thank my colleague, the chairman, for the report well presented. 

My first point is on discipline. In any institution where there is no discipline, you cannot have good results, whether it is in the church or schools or wherever.

I am disappointed because on page 24, the Judicial Service Commission, which is responsible for disciplining judicial officers, says they cannot do disciplinary work because they lack Shs 35 million. This should have been a priority for this institution. Nothing can go on well if there is no discipline. So I appeal to the Judicial Service Commission to reallocate funds within, to see that we handle discipline. People are complaining about judicial officers and if nothing is done, we are going to face a situation like that of Police, where mob justice will come in. I appeal to the Judicial Service Commission to ensure that money for discipline is found.

My second point is on page 26; about the Law Development Centre. I am surprised that there is no budget provision for them for wages, allowances and salaries, and that they get these wages from the internally generated funds. In most institutions where government stops giving money for wages and salaries, standards go down because they want to generate as much funds as possible. They try to get as many students as possible in order to get money, but surprisingly, for the Law Development Centre, they have kept their standards. People are still failing because they are not competent enough, and I commend the Law Development Centre for this. I appeal to government to consider them for development funds. I really commend LDC, please keep up the standards.

My third point is on the Parliamentary Commission. They have told us on page 49 that they intend to install CCTVs in this place. We want to know where, because we don’t want these people to encroach on our human rights. They must tell us exactly where so that – no! There is a programme coming if you look at page 49.

When you go through this report, everybody is talking of office accommodation, but we have said several times that government should utilise the limited land we have, as well as the vertical space. If you look at the Ministry of Finance and Statistics buildings, as well as that of Foreign Affairs, those spaces were spoilt. We could have accommodated many ministries there. 

I appeal to government to, please, construct structures, which can accommodate several institutions and ministries rather than spreading thinly on the ground when we have very little land.

Construction of office accommodation is one of the areas where we can easily use PPP. The others are more complicated and maybe we don’t have people who can really go deeply into it.

Lastly, on page 3 we were told that the Attorney-General won 31 out of 104 cases. What I didn’t get is, did we lose the 73 cases or we lost part of the 73? This is because the information is very misleading. It is the figure that is highlighted. Can we get clarification on this so that we get the right picture? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

1.35
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start on page 25 and 26 with LDC. The LDC was established under an Act of Parliament under Cap. 132, yet on page 26, the committee points out that it has not been receiving development funds for the last 12 years. Similarly, it has no budget provisions for its Wage Bill. I compare this to a parent who has a child and starves the child intentionally, and to me this is very criminal.

I strongly recommend that government provides funds for capital development for LDC as recommended by the committee, to the tune of Shs 3.7 billion. It is high time government honoured its responsibilities and starts paying LDC staff salaries and allowances.

Thirdly, I wish to submit that Parliament revisits the law to open up this training to other qualified institutions. The issue of LDC having a monopoly should cease. 

My other submission is on the creation of alternative dispute resolution centres. To me this is a move in the right direction. Hopefully, if we lessen on the backlogs, which has already been pointed out - and I suppose it will come in handy for those who cannot afford exorbitant lawyers fees in their struggle to seek justice. 

But I am very disappointed that despite the fact that a budget was made and submitted to the Ministry of Finance, no provision has been made. I urge the government to avail the Shs 1.244 billion, as requested for by CADRE, to enable it carry out its activities. 

My last submission is on the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission is the only legal body mandated with carrying out national elections. Its vision is to monitor and ensure free and fair elections. There is no way it can fulfil its mandate unless it is adequately empowered and provided with funding to achieve its planned objective. 

The report brings out a funding gap of Shs 103 billion and the committee points out that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will provide this money in 2011/12 after the elections have been carried out. We need this money before 2010 and 2011 to enable the Electoral Commission to plan. I keep wondering why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give the money after elections; what kind of planning is this that government is doing? It is like a post mortem; it seems to be intentional that a lot of unscrupulous activities should be done. 

So, I support the committee recommendation that the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development provides this money well in advance - the Shs 103 billion, to enable the Electoral Commission to plan properly for the coming elections. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.40
MS REBECCA LUKWAGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those who have thanked this committee for this voluminous report that is well detailed. 

On page 3, the committee notes that the number of children registered at birth was a great achievement on the part of the ministry, and it is highlighted. But I wonder, is it realistic? The growth of our population in Uganda is now at 3.5 percent; how can this committee call this a great achievement for which the Members of Parliament should thank them? 

Here they say that approximately 33,000 births were registered; but when it comes to planning, can we use these figures to plan for our country and to fight vices like defilement? This committee should have looked at this seriously, because there are a lot of vices that are perpetuated by lack of registration at birth. 

I did not go into the details of the other registration, but when you look at the number of registered children in Uganda, it is quite appalling; they are very few. So, can this committee consider family planning in our country so that we plan appropriately for our nation? Have you forgotten the importance of birth registration in terms of protecting our children? Lack of registration has caused routine abuse of our children. I would really support this budget if this sector is funded to strengthen the registration department, especially at birth, so that we can curb vices like defilement, child labour, human trafficking and early marriages. 

You can imagine a child can be given away for marriage and she tells you that, “My mother does not know my age”. So, did the committee consider the child abuse in this country before highlighting birth and death registration as an achievement? Madam Speaker, I want the funding of the department of registration to be increased so that we can curb child abuse in the country. Thank you.

1.44
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. I want to make a few observations to do with the Parliamentary Commission. 

For us who sit in Bauman House - all chairmen of committees, most shadow ministers and commissioners sit in this main building but down there, there is a lot of insecurity. Over ten computers have been stolen during my stay there. There is free entry and exist of outsiders. Yesterday I was crossing the road and a boda boda knocked me, but I was lucky it was not fatal; I have a bruise; something should be done about it.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you advised that the Rules and Disciplinary Committee should come out with a position on the shadow ministers.  But it would also be good that chairmen and vice chairmen should not belong to other committees. There are times you find that the chairman or vice chairman of one committee belongs to another committee and are able to do the work there. 

The shadow ministers should also be treated like the government ministers, because they withhold information during the debates and then they come up like angels to express their views on the Floor of the House. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Electoral Commission, I want to commend the work the Electoral Commission has been doing in spite of the meager funds it gets.

During the 2006 Elections, I met the Chairman of the Electoral Commission, Dr Kiggundu, in my constituency on a rainy day, trying to supervise elections. Anyway, what needs to be addressed is what happens at the polling stations. 

You will recall that most of the employees - the presiding officers and polling assistants of the Electoral Commission - during elections are casual workers. They are also paid after elections. How do you expect them to conduct and supervise elections during that time on hungry stomachs? 

Many of them come from the local communities and are posted to work near their homes because they are paid later. So, you do not expect them to behave like the outsiders. They tend to go with the political situation at hand, because they are ever broke and hungry, yet the results of the elections are decided at the polling station.

Madam Speaker, let me say something about the issue of office accommodation. I do not want to go into details about it, but I think government needs to conduct a policy review. Crested Towers, for example, was a government building under National Insurance Corporation. Most of our offices were in that building. What I am trying to say is that after us selling and privatising most of these buildings, we are now renting. Why don’t we review this policy so that – we are supporting districts to build office accommodation yet we, ourselves, do not have such accommodation? 

I and hon. Oleny had the opportunity to travel to Zambia but if you looked at their office accommodation, you would wonder; everything looks official. But here, I do not even know where some of my ministers sit -(Interjections)- I am just concluding, hon. Ekanya.

On the issue of the Judiciary, I do not know whether the Attorney-General knows that the highest level of corruption in that institution is at the lowest levels, among the Grade I and II magistrates. They collude with policemen. I know a case where police officers arrested a debtor for a civil matter at midnight; took him to the police station and negotiated with the Grade II Magistrate so that immediately he appeared in court, he would be charged with obtaining money by false pretence, yet he had borrowed that money on a written agreement. Surprisingly, this man was released on cash bail, but asked to continue paying the debt. This type of intimidation by Grade I and II magistrates, and the policemen at the lower levels is too much; our people are suffering.

Lastly, let me say something about the LC courts. I notice that the Judiciary has not come out to supervise the LC courts. The chairpersons are sacked anyhow. What is the procedure? If this is done, it will help us to put our position clear. Once again, I would like to thank the committee. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute, Madam Speaker.

1.49
MR GORDON SEMATIKO (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the detailed report. I have got a few things to comment about. 

On page 3, under what has been achieved by the ministry, where it says the ministry registered 33,515 births. This is actually one of the activities carried out at sub-county levels. However, when you look at this figure, and you compare it with the 3.5 percent population growth of Uganda, it means there is quite a big fraction of citizens who are not registered. 

And with our porous borders - no wonder the honourable member yesterday stated that many people from Southern Sudan have bought land in Arua and other parts of Uganda. So, if we do not register our citizens, it will be very difficult to determine who is a citizen and who is not. When people go to apply for passports that is when they talk about citizenship. The ministry must take interest in registering births and deaths for proper planning.

As far as registration of patents is concerned, I have seen 234, but still it is not clear. For example, of these, how many are domestic? If we are saying Uganda is to develop, we need researchers to have their work patented. Unfortunately, the report talks about only industrial designs. If that is the case, what are our universities doing? Are our universities like secondary schools where students just go for tutorials with no research? How can we develop a nation at that rate?

On the issue letters of administration, I would like to say that if you visited the Office of the Administrator-General, it is chaotic. There are usually so many families packed, complaining and crying. So, when the report says only 185 letters of administration were processed, it means this is most likely to be intentionally done to maybe make people give in some money before their papers are processed. We really need to look into how this office handles our citizens.

On the disciplinary committee of the Law Council, which is on page 4, it is indicated that 404 cases and 239 new cases against Advocates were handled. But my question is: who disciplines the court bailiffs? I am asking this because we have had so many people being mishandled by court bailiffs; it seems there is nobody to regulate their performance. They overcharge and manhandle people – the committee should have looked into these people’s activities. No wonder the Judicial Service Commission is also talking about under funding for the disciplinary sector; we should give it a priority. Otherwise, there is a lot of injustice being meted onto our people.

On page 32, there is something on civic education. Madam Speaker, the Uganda Human Rights Commission is supposed to sensitise people on their rights. That helps us as people’s representatives, because if they know their rights – they over demand from the Members of Parliament because they do not know to what extent the Members are supposed to serve them and what part they should play themselves. So, it is not only for the people to know their rights but it is also insurance for the Members of Parliament. 

On page 39, among the under funded priorities of the Financial Year 2009/10 -(Member timed out_)

1.55
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to commend the committee for the work done and the chairperson for the nice presentation –(Interruption) 

HON. MEMBERS: But he is a member of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh please, no. If you are member of the committee, let us have hon. Sauda Mugerwa.

1.55
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the ministry for the good work done. 

I would like to comment about the Parliamentary Commission. I have observed that since I came to Parliament, very little effort has been made by the commission to improve our welfare. I am saying this in regard to the computer library. The computer library opened with one printer regardless of the number of computers that existed and we still have only one printer. If it is faulty, you can spend a whole week without having your work printed. I appreciate the fact that commissioners have got facilitated offices but I am appealing to the commission to ensure that they get a typing pool for Members who do not have special facilities in their offices. They should give us a printer and a photocopier. 

Secondly, this concerns the Speakers, especially you and my distinguished hon. Speaker. When we came here we were promised a canopy to shelter people who use the bridge between this building and where you sit. We are threatened by heavy rains in the coming season and I want to find out whether this can be effected as soon as possible because I consulted with one of the commissioners and she told me that this request has been tendered. How long will it take to get this canopy in place so that we are protected from the heavy rains that are expected? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.59
MR JOWALI KYEYAGO (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for coming up with this report. My concern is about land management. I read page 2 where the committee said that land management has become a problem in this country whereby Ugandans do not know the authority that directs events. It is alleged that court orders are being submitted for review by RDCs and Police. Court bailiffs demolish structures and crops yet the order was for eviction. It is high time we stopped lamenting and took action because if a constitutional provision is being abused and then we come here and lament, I think we are wasting time. If there were no provisions anywhere, we would come here and lament but if somebody goes and abuses the Constitution, and instead of arresting or taking action on them we come here and lament, then it is very unfair!

My other concern was about the streamlining of the salary structure. It is true that there is need to address this discrepancy but my concern is that it should go across the board for all civil servants. Let us have a structure that is very clear to reflect the cost of living. We all go to the same markets and we all go to the same service providers for facilities. But, for example, if you compare how much a driver earns with what a commissioner earns yet they are all supposed to take their children to school, the difference just defeats my understanding. I do not believe that a country that is committed to fighting corruption can allow such a discrepancy because you cannot expect somebody to be comfortable in office when he is aware that he is not assured of his lunch at home, school fees and other extras. 

The other concern is on page 7 where the committee recommended that since the Uganda registration Services Bureau (URBS) collects non-tax revenue from source, government should allow it to spend money at the source. Spending money at source has got its own risks. I would rather that the committee recommends that we increase the funding for the sector than allowing it to spend money as it collects because who will control what? How will you avoid conflict of interest? 

Lastly, I want to talk about the LDC. I have been reading the report and it is perturbing to note that LDC does not get money for capital development and wage. They said that for the last 12 years or so, LDC has been getting non-wage and their figure for non-wage is Shs 1,197,000,000 and they said that salaries and allowances are paid from the money that they collect locally. 

According to the report, LDC is supposed to accommodate 100 students but it takes in over 800 students, hence making accommodation, library services and everything else are insufficient. That one alone makes me believe that there is lack of proper planning at LDC. Because if you are aware that you are supposed to accommodate only 100 students, why do you take in 800 and bring a crisis?

I have a brother who is studying a course - is it the administrative certificate? The course runs for one month and they pay Shs 885,000. They are over 400 and the intakes are in April and September. That course alone raises over Shs 780 million. So, if you amalgamate all the courses that are taken and you are saying that all that is for non-current expenditure, then we need to know what is involved in non-recurrent expenditure. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.05
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank colleagues for debating this particular report. I am going straight to page 10 of this report, about the Electoral Commission. 

In 2006, we as a country adopted the multi-party political dispensation as a way of mainstreaming political democracy in this country. What we have achieved so far is quite a lot but what is important and what is remaining is the consolidation of this achievement. The only way that this Parliament can consolidate democracy in this country is by having an impartial Electoral Commission with full confidence of the citizens of this country. Indeed, without the political, ideological belief and understanding, I think as a country we should urgently yearn for electoral reforms. This is the only way that we are going to surpass and overcome the errors that we have had in this country for the last so many years since we got independence.

I have been having a number of interactions with members and staff of the Electoral Commission who have been complaining about this Parliament and government as a whole for deliberate suffocation by failing to give them money on time for whatever they need to carry out elections in this country. Indeed those who work at the Electoral Commission are very frustrated with Parliament. When you speak to them one by one, you will discover that they are working because they have to survive in this country. But they are not able to perform their duties as required by our Constitution because this Parliament, because the Minister of Finance and because the current government is not willing to provide the necessary remuneration and facilitation that they deserve. 

I would like us, as Parliament, to become assertive on some of these fundamental issues. We cannot sing of democracy and restoring the past glory to this country when we cannot have a functional Electoral Commission. Equipment is needed now. The Electoral Commission has no cameras. Over 69 percent of youth in this country are not registered because the Electoral Commission is not facilitated to carry out some of these functions and this is a reality.

I went to my village called Kulubuge. In that village out of 100 youth that I mobilised in order to meet them concerning electoral laws and to sensitise them on elections in the country, 80 of them were not registered. They asked me to try to help them so that they can be registered and since then I have been trying but the frustration -(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: I would like to thank you very much honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to inform you that the Electoral Commission has district registrars stationed in districts all the time. They can be called upon to undertake this exercise by even Members of Parliament. I am putting it to the member that he did not go to the right place for the adequate service. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I would have thought that the chairperson of the committee would have been more serious on what I am trying to advance. If he was being assertive, as a chairperson of a committee of Parliament that is concerned about the improvement of what is within his constitutional framework - I for one know that in many districts -(Member timed out_)

2.10
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I think that this is one of the very important committees and sectors in this country. 

I want to start by saying to the chairperson that we enacted the Political Parties and Organisations Act and in it we created a framework which should have been operationalised immediately we came to this Parliament. This is the Political Parties Forum and this is one of the most important fora that should deal with the question of multi-party in this country because it is meant to bring all political parties to discuss the way forward, whatever reforms and the issues therein. 

I have stood on the Floor of this Parliament, talked about this, the Attorney-General has given answers but I have not seen results. I want to ask the chairman, could it be a deliberate effort to frustrate the multi-party dispensation? Is it about money? As the committee, what exactly is the problem or you have never tried to investigate or even attempted to raise the issue with the minister? And if you have tried, what is the way forward on this? Because, Madam Speaker, it does not help this country for us to sort our political problems on the street through tear gas! And that is why we decided that we need this forum so that we do not have to go to the streets to sort out issues of political parties. 

I am now questioning whether there is a will to nurture multi-party democracy in this country -(Interruption)
 
DR KATENDE SERUNJOGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member does not belong to any political party. Is she in order to castigate political parties when she does not belong or is not affiliated to any? Is she in order when those in political parties are comfortable with the status quo?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe she intends to join a political party. (Laughter) 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I am very shocked that a national leader who should deal with national issues can rise on such order. I am shocked and I want to cry for this country. 

I will go to the second issue. In 2006, a petition was lodged by Dr Kizza Besigye contesting the elections. Out of nine judges, all of them without exception agreed that the 2006 presidential elections did not meet the benchmarks of a free and fair election. The only matter they differed on was whether or not it could substantially affect the overall result; the vote was four to five. 

Therefore, when those judges appointed by the President could say that the Electoral Commission failed to conduct free and fair elections; that polling officials were compromised; that there was ballot stuffing; a lot of harassment and intimidation, multiple voting, double voting, and we come to this House and I hear colleagues say that the issue is not the Electoral Commission, I wonder whether we read and follow political and other events in this country! 

We need to take issues about this country seriously. We need electoral reform. I want to ask the chairman that recently the Opposition political parties handed to the Speaker of this Parliament the reforms that the Opposition political party feels are fundamental if we want multi-party political democracy to be perfect. (Member timed out_) 

2.16
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My sister, I will pick on from where you stopped. You are lucky that I am the one following you; I will develop your point to the end. 

The electoral reforms she was talking about as presented by the inter-party co-operation are here. I lay them on the Table: “The inter-party co-operation of Uganda: proposed electoral reforms May 2009; signed by the leaders of the parties as follows: His Excellency John Ken Lukyamuzi, the man, the President of CP; His Excellency Dr Kizza Besigye, the FDC President; His Excellency Mohammed Kibirige of JEEMA; and Her Excellency Mama Miria Kalule Obote of the UPC. 

You have done your part; I will lay it on the Table. So, whether Parliament takes action or not, history will redeem you. But hon. Members, it is a terrible mistake for anybody here to deny the obvious; that there were weaknesses in the electoral process; that there were weaknesses in the Electoral Commission that need to be reformed.

In science, for example, at a weather station people can predict that there will be rain but when rain comes, do not praise the weather station people. Do not even blame them when they tell you that there is going to be a storm. In The Daily Monitor, on its first page, a senior leader who was with you in the NRM but who moved out is quoted: “Bidandi hits back at Museveni”, he warned of post electoral violence. We saw the case of Kenya, why don’t we learn from these examples? Do you want people to trust Parliament to bring their complaints here when they see that nothing is being done? Where will they go? Will they go to court after having seen the example when Dr Kizza Besigye went to court and court said that surely there was something wrong? We should save this country. The ball is in our court. 

I now come to the Parliamentary Commission - this one is on a lighter note. Madam Speaker, I was very happy when I accompanied you and the Rt Hon. Speaker, Edward Ssekandi, to Northern Uganda in the programme of taking Parliament to the people. I would like to urge this House to support the Parliamentary Commission and the Parliamentary Commission should intensify taking Parliament to the people, to the councillors of the districts and the sub-counties, so that they understand the role of Parliament and the role of Members of Parliament in the development of this country. 

Members of Parliament have a lot of problems, which they cannot even take to a police station to seek for redemption. People give them burdens that are not theirs and when they try to do something good for the people, they are sabotaged. Just like in my case in Obongi in Moyo District, where we came up with a project to help a marginalised constituency that is on the periphery of this country to build a resource centre, but it was shot down. The Shs 200 million which was meant to complete the resource centre was shot down by councillors on account that the person who was championing it is not a member of the National Resistance Movement. So, who does what? Councillors need to be educated on this.

There are young Members of Parliament here who need to have their capacity built. There is a problem, and I have heard of cries in the corridors of Parliament about training and travel abroad. The criteria of selection of people to go for courses or travel – the Chinese say that the knowledge you get by travelling a thousand miles is much bigger than the one you get in reading a thousand books. (Member timed out_)

2.21
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I only want to mention, very briefly, an issue which bothers my conscience. This has been a vice practiced by subsequent governments of this country albeit in varying magnitudes.

This is the vice of government preying on its people; picking people and locking them up incommunicado in non gazetted areas for unknown reasons for periods which will be adjudicated by those who lock them up. Not long ago we made amendments to the Magistrates Courts Act, to allow magistrates courts to consider cases hitherto reserved for the High Court. This was to allow for citizens who may have offended the law to face the law but why do those people think they derive power from the Almighty - pouncing on fellow citizens and taking them to unknown areas? I want to ask the learned Attorney-General what his advice to government about a situation like this one has been all this time. 

When citizens feel oppressed by agents of government, it may be unofficial, but this is the start of derailing peaceful co-existence and democracy. Because the wrong that you do to a person today, tomorrow he will want to pay back, and this is as sure as the rising of the sun. If you pull my ear today without me having wronged you, I can assure you that tomorrow, you will have to answer. And this is how revolutions start. People feel bad; people are oppressed for doing nothing bad; and they will say, “Okay, this is not the end of the world, tomorrow will come”. That is why we are having a vicious cycle of violence. 

Learned Attorney-General, please advise that injustice should be minimised. We must nurture democracy. The courts must be open to everybody to go and face the law. Where the courts have adjudicated that you have done wrong, you go and serve your term and you come out a good citizen but not to bundle someone up. A military regime would be absolved because they are not schooled in this kind of thing but an enlightened government like ours should really have eliminated these things over this period but I regret to report that they still persists. 

2.27
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that this report is an output of members of the committee that looked at all these problems but each of us here is lamenting but we hardly see any solutions available. We must warn that on issues to do with the Electoral Commission - the ruling government is not funding the Electoral Commission even on obvious things that we subscribe to. Elections are organised - like one of the honourable members said, he would not have sworn in if he did not believe that the results were true. 

We are sowing seeds of violence. Young men are warming up in your constituencies, hon. Members, and I do not want to predict what will come out but if the Electoral Commission organises elections when under funded, young men will react violently. We had better get money and have some of these obvious issues with the Electoral Commission addressed so that they organise free and fair elections.

The second issue is on the LDC. A statement has been read. Should we just commit our students, our young brothers and sons to LDC, which is meant for only 100 people but is plotting to admit 600, 400, or 800 to use facilities of 100 people and then expect them to represent our people in courts of law? LDC and parties should be investigated and a report should be brought here to Parliament on why the standards of LDC are lowering, why there are no improvements despite the admissions and the costs charged on admissions at the LDC. Why don’t we open this field up to private-public partnerships that are ready to equip their schools with resources rather than commit our students to LDC that has no resources to train lawyers? It is a pity!

I have to ask the learned Attorney-General: you passed through the same school. You can’t just sit here and say, “Of course for 12 years” - and this is the 13th and 14th year with no funding and we hope to get lawyers to represent clients. It is a problem and we should identify priorities. It is not good to identify many things to partially fund and not do anything at the end. We are wasting public funds. At least let us say we cannot do this and leave it instead of funding it half way.

Finally, about the judicial officers in the Ministry of Justice, you know some of us hail from rural areas that are hard to reach and some ministers will leave Cabinet without reaching some of these areas and appreciating the problems that our people suffer from. The judiciary is a wanting arm of government and government must look for money to employ and increase its staff. When you go to rural magistrates courts, there are officers paraded there to solicit for bribes in order to access justice from a grade two magistrate. You don’t have money; you will not see the magistrate. You will not force your way through to her chambers to report your matter. It is the same story at the Police and the Judiciary –(Member timed out_)

2.32
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to congratulate members of the committee for the elaborate report they have made. They have given us a lot of information.

I want to comment on two areas only; the first is on the Judicial Service Commission. I would like to agree with the recommendation of the committee that the Constitution should be amended to increase the retirement age of the High Court judges. Why do I say this? Uganda may be one of those countries, which is very extravagant regarding its human resource. I know there are quite a number of highly qualified people in Uganda who have reached the age of 65 years and they are forced to retire and their service is lost. I think it is very unfair to the country to do this because in other countries, people like judges and professors are allowed to serve as long as they are fit to do so.

I would like some clarification from the chairman of the committee when they say on page 23 that various Acts of Parliament require that for persons to be appointed to serve on commissions and tribunals, they should be fit and qualified to serve as judges of the High Court. This has made it difficult to utilise the experiences of retired judges from the High Court to occupy such offices. Is the committee saying that when you retire, you are unfit? Somebody has retired, he is fit and he or she is not tired.

The other area I would like to comment on is the Human Rights Commission. Most problems in this country rise from ignorance of our rights. It is unfortunate that the elements of human rights have not been put in our development plans and as a result, these human rights are ignored. I think it would be fair to Ugandans if the Human Rights Commission is facilitated to reach people at the sub-county level. At the moment they are at regional level but that is not enough. I urge this Parliament to consider facilitating the Human Rights Commission with funds and with human resource to be able to reach the lowest levels of our society so that they can sensitise the people on their human rights.

The PIP programme failed because elements of human rights were not included in that programme and in future I think those who are planning for this country should recognise the importance of observation of human rights because without observing human rights in a country, there is no way development can be effected properly.

My last comment is on the Electoral Commission. People have talked about it –(Member timed out_)

2.36
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have about three points to put forward. The first is about the backlog that has been talked about here by a number of my colleagues. Going by statistics, you can see that under the Magistrate’s Court, they still have a backlog of 80,957 cases and this year they are planning to complete 47 per cent. This is just half way. So, when are we expecting to complete the other half of about 40,000? And this year, others will continue coming on board.

At least the expectation of the High Court is a bit okay; they have 27,000 cases and they are expecting to complete about 24,000. But when it comes to the Court of Appeal, which has 1,600 cases, they are planning to complete only 500. It is not even one third of the backlog. 

The biggest cause is the absence of land tribunals. Most of these cases, especially in the Magistrate’s Court, are because of land wrangles. Therefore, the earlier we operationalise the land tribunals and fully fund them, the better.

When it comes to the Law Development Centre, we are told that it is not funded by government as far as wages are concerned. But we can see that it accommodates about 800 students, and the fees are too high. An administrative course costs about Shs 880,000 for just one month. So, where is this money going; does it only pay the wages? We need to find out. 

There are too many failures at Law Development Centre; what is the cause of this? We need an explanation. 

About the Electoral Commission – under funding of the EC will cause a big problem for this country, and sensitising the voters and even their polling agents is very important. Let me give a simple example; a polling official may not know whether a tick that is in the box or in the photograph counts as valid. And many votes get spoilt because of that. 

Their ceiling was increased from Shs 12 to Shs 31 billion. But they still have a funding gap of Shs 57 billion as far as general elections are concerned. Surely, do you think that they can do a better job with such under funding? We should think twice before saying that EC does not do its work effectively. Thank you.

2.41
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Members who persevered yesterday and we left at 15 minutes to 11.00 p.m. I was surprised to reach home and everyone was sleeping. I wondered why Ugandans have this habit of sleeping at 8.00 p.m. and waking up at 8.00 a.m. If we are sleeping ten hours a day, I do not think this country will develop.

Delayed justice is denied justice. There is under funding at the Human Rights Commission; for people who have won cases, I think it is denied justice. 

Those departments we have under funded this financial year should be ring-fenced so that next financial year, they are made priorities. Otherwise, complaining about under funding year in, year out - we should do better as parliamentarians. The committee chairman should recommend that we make them the priority for the following year, and that is how it should be.

I would like to echo the message given by hon. Wopuwa; those who have offices in Bauman House have died several times. As we cross, the boda bodas are not sparing us. At one time I told a Member of Parliament that maybe they should give us flags to raise when crossing, to show them that they are about to kill a Member of Parliament before we bring you here the following day for mourning. So we task the Parliamentary Commission to take this case seriously.

Lastly, on the Electoral Commission, I think Members are failing to state what exactly happens in campaigns. Most of the problems we face in elections are local problems; they are not caused by the commissioners at the top. The way Members of Parliament predict doom here on the Floor of Parliament is what incites the youth. Whether they win or lose, they are prepared to go out and fight. 

During the election which I won, FDC members were fighting DP members, and Besigye could not cross to Kawanda not because of my supporters but because of the supporters of DP - they threw stones at him. It has to do with the players - you incite the youth so much that they think that they must win at every cost not knowing that their victory lies in casting the votes. Hon. Otto said that 60 percent of the youth are not registered, but the role they play in the campaigns - they threaten everybody; they stone people; yet they do not vote. And when they do not win, they complain that they have stolen their votes, yet they have not voted. So, I think we are avoiding the real issues. 

When it comes to the presiding officers, these are our relatives and uncles, who are appointed as presiding officers; and what do they do - ballot stuffing? That has nothing to do with the Electoral Commission Chairman. These are the same people we shall use; whether we bring in a UPC chairman for the commission or not. The thing is that the chairman has nothing to do with the presiding officers. The process of recruiting the presiding officers and those big people whom we worship when it comes to elections, is what has problems. So the threats of, “We shall do something when the Electoral Commission is not transparent –(Member timed out_)  

2.47
MR SILVER BAHANE (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have about three comments to make. One is about the discipline of the judicial officers. It is absurd that the Judicial Service Commission cannot have money to discipline members of staff who flout the Judicial Code of Conduct. If someone misbehaves and is not disciplined, especially instantly, the rest of the members in that institution will feel it is open season to misbehave. The learned Attorney-General should find money for the Judicial Service Commission for that purpose.

Uganda is set to host the ICC Review Conference come April 2010, and about Shs 13 billion has been earmarked for that business but it is not reflected anywhere in the budget. I wonder how this big conference is going to be hosted when we do not have money for it. Can the learned Attorney-General find this money? It is an important event and we do not want to be disturbed like what happened for CHOGM because we have a stake, especially with this pending Kony case -(Interruption)
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. I just want to seek clarification. Most of us always travel outside to attend international conferences but we carry our money to pay for our charges. However, there seems to be a norm here where we organise conferences and pay charges for all the delegates. I am wondering whether all the Shs 13 billion will be necessary if the delegates are to pay for themselves! Why should we spend Shs 13 billion on a conference where delegates will be paid for by their member countries? 

MR BAHANE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Lastly, let me talk about facilitation for state witnesses. We cry hoarse that the government is losing a lot of money, but it would appear that we are not investing in facilitating our witnesses to attend court sessions. At times we have very good cases but when we fail to facilitate the witnesses they do not show up. 

I do not want to comment on this recent case of the former DPC of Mukono who was accused of having killed his wife but was released by court for lack of evidence. Because we could not get the key witness, the DPP was forced to withdraw the case until people went up in arms. That is why I am saying that we should have money to facilitate our witnesses to guard against losing cases and protecting those who have might have been in the coolers for so long. They usually turn round and sue the state for malicious prosecution. Thank you. 

2.15
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for this fat paper. I want to talk about the Electoral Commission by first of all thanking them for a job well done. Of course many things might have gone wrong as we have complained here and there, but I think they are doing a good job in spite of being under funded. 

I want to talk about their key planned activities for the past year. I am looking at paragraphs four and seven which talk about re-organisation of polling stations and registers. In the last general elections, I was one of those victims, moving from one polling station to another - about 10 kilometres within my sub-county - trying to go and cast my vote at a polling station whose register had my name. This seemed strange to me because I knew my usual polling station. You can imagine what happened to those people who did not have transport? What happened to those people who did not have the time to move from one place to another? From that, I can tell that many people did not vote because they could not find their names. I would like to request that the Electoral Commission does the update of the registers in time to avoid making people walk the way I did. There are people who moved for almost 5 kilometres. 

My other point is on the Judicial Service Commission. The report somewhere says they are planning to conduct public awareness concerning administration of justice through radio talk shows, newspaper supplements and others. I think this is going to be a wonderful thing because many of those who commit crimes do not know the law. Many of us who sit to listen do not know the law and therefore whether educated or not, we find ourselves involved in mob justice. This is not because we want to do that and not that we want to be beaten up, but even when both the knowledgeable and the non knowledgeable are caught up in mob justice, they will suffer the same fate. I think the Judicial Service Commission is doing a good job in taking everything to the people. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Twenty eight members have contributed and I think we have done very well. Let me now invite Commissioner Lumumba to respond and then the Minister of Finance. 

2.55 
MRS JUSTINE KASULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you. I would like to thank the members for the comments raised about the Parliamentary Commission. 

The first issue was to do with the attendance of meetings and the plenary. Hon. Members, I want us to agree that this is the full responsibility of the member who asked the people of Uganda in his or her constituency to be given that responsibility. It is therefore up to us, Members of Parliament, to go and do our work which we requested the Ugandans to give us. 

I would just like to inform the members that there is an ongoing process to review the Rules of Procedure in consultation with all the party whips. We want to see that there is some revision, with the intention of bringing in punitive measures for non-attendance both in committee meetings and the plenary. This is because we have abused it and we should be responsible.

There was also the issue of crossing the road to go to offices at Bauman House. The Parliamentary Commission, as you had already informed them, took it up and wrote to Kampala City Council for a zebra crossing. We have not yet received a response. However, I promise that we are going to follow it up, and I want to apologise to the members who have had problems. Hon. Wopuwa has told us what happened to him in the morning and as a Commission, we are very sorry. 

There is also the issue of thefts in Bauman House. The commission and the Sergeant-at–Arms are investigating the theft of the computers. I want to inform you that the commission has not kept quiet about these issues. For those who sit at Bauman House, you will recall that there were fire extinguishers that were stolen and the commission took action. The Police officers who were on duty and neglected their work were made to pay for the replacement of these fire extinguishers. This is to show you that we are also serious with our work. 

On the issue of offices at Bauman House, we are going to improve the security since members have complained. However, members also complained about allowing people in and out. Hon. Members, the Police are also faced with a problem because you find that it is us who bring in people; some of us want to hold rallies in our offices and corridors. So, we are also to blame as Members of Parliament. What we should do is to all act responsibly. Some of you give your office keys to people who are not staff of Parliament or colleagues to come and use your offices, and sometimes at night. We should also be responsible as users in those offices –(Interjection)- it happens but I cannot give examples because it is not good to mention people’s names in such instances. 

An issue was raised about having one printer in the library. This printer is meant for simple printing work. As we speak, every Member of Parliament is supposed to have a computer and a printer. You are supposed to use what Parliament provides for you and in case yours is down, that is when you can move to the library to use the printer there. This was raised by hon. Sauda Mugerwa. I want to say that the commission will not buy any more printers for the library because it is useless since every Member of Parliament has one. 

At the same time, the commission gives stationery to all Members of Parliament. Those of you who have not been picking your stationery from the clerks attached to your committees, please go and get your stationery.

Lastly, there is the issue of the land title. The land title where Parliament is was the same title for Radio Uganda and the National Theatre. You know what happened to Radio Uganda when it was privatised - they had to get their own land title. So, we have been sharing the same land title with the National Theatre. Since we appeared before the committee – it is an issue that has been going on for a full year - we have achieved something and now we have our land title as Parliament. It was picked yesterday. 

On the issue of having the Chamber, if you listened carefully you heard that we are also supposed to encroach on the CHOGM Park if we are to have enough space for the Chamber and 500 offices to accommodate all Members of Parliament within the premises of Parliament so that we stop having the problems of crossing over to Bauman House. However, as the commission, we still have to pursue the allocation of the CHOGM Park which shares a land title with the Ministry of Finance. So, we have to pursue that and we ask for your prayers. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MRS KASULE: Madam Speaker, I have been reminded that I did not talk about the bridge and the canopy. I want to report that work on the canopy started yesterday. If you have been observant, you may have seen some men dressed in overalls working on the canopy on the other side. Work is going on and we are going to talk to the people doing the work to do it fast so that by the time we get heavy rains, we are already covered. Thank you.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I would like to start by thanking the committee for a very good report and also colleagues for joining the rest of Ugandans in celebrating Ramadhan.

The second thing that I want to talk about is a statement that was made by hon. Christine Bako in regard to the President not going to attend a meeting in Libya when there was a review of Uganda’s position on the African Peer Review Mechanism. The President did not go because there were other pressing state duties in Uganda. I also want to make it clear and on record that Uganda was among the first ten African countries that acceded to the Peer Review Mechanism and was the 7th to be peer reviewed and this was done on 29 June 2007. Uganda’s case is being used as a best practice. We were given nine areas of commendation I think it is one of the very few peer review reports that were not doctored by anybody and that is why it is being used as an example in Africa. So the President did not fear to go. Every year there is a review of the report and this report was submitted to the peer review meeting in Libya and the President was represented by an eminent person. 

The last thing that I want to talk about is on the funding of the Electoral Commission. There will be free and fair elections and a credible election in 2011. We have taken the observation by the committee, on page 12, that we adjust the MTEF to accommodate these elections in 2011. My Ministry will take this seriously and ensure that the ceiling is adjusted appropriately. (Applause)

Finally, for the LDC vote, we have allowed them to use Shs 3.9 billion from the non-tax revenue to handle the issues of the budget including the salaries of the staff of the area. On issues of development expenditure we have asked them to submit a detailed programme so that this can be looked into and to fulfil what has been observed by the committee. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: I want to thank hon. Omach for his good intentions for the Electoral Commission. Instead of giving the Electoral Commission until next year, why don’t you get money from some of these funds like the Road Fund and give it to the Electoral Commission now so that they can do proper preparation? This is really a request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was saying that the future is not good enough and that you should do the needful now.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we have provided what we think is realistic for this financial year and going forward we will note what hon. Ekanya has said.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I must begin by thanking the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for the interest it has taken in my ministry’s policy statement. There is evidence of serious study, analysis and understanding of the operations of the ministry and I am grateful for this.

I would like to thank the chairman for this well done and well presented report. I would like to thank the 28 honourable colleagues who have managed to catch the Speaker’s eye and contribute to this debate. Except in one or two cases I sincerely take the views of my colleagues as recommendations which the ministry will definitely study. Otherwise, I will just appreciate and stop there. However, I have learnt from practice that Parliament needs some views on record and I will put them there.

I would like to just remind honourable colleagues that this report is an evaluation of the policy statement and they have given a lot of information in the policy statement. I would, therefore, urge the honourable members to read the report in the context of the policy statement because some of the things being raised have virtually been covered in the policy statement.

I appreciate what honourable members have been saying about the Electoral Commission. The unfortunate bit is that we are mixing up the structure of the Electoral Commission with the issue of electoral reforms. Yes, they are interlinked but for purposes of analysis and understanding, you are better off if you separate them.

With your permission, Madam Speaker, there is Article 60 of the Constitution; It is basic to a matter of the Electoral Commission. I would like to read it out. I notice that many of my honourable colleagues did not carry their copies of the Constitution today. Article 60 says; “Electoral Commission –
(1) 	There shall be an Electoral Commission which shall consist of a chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and five other members appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. 
(2) 	Members of the Commission shall be persons of high moral character, proven integrity and who possess considerable experience and demonstrated competence in the conduct of public affairs. 
(3) 	The members of the Commission shall hold office for seven years and their appointment may be renewed for one more term only. 
(4) 	If the appointment of a member of the Commission is being renewed, the renewal shall be done at least three months before the expiry of the first term.”

You know I am going by the law and this time frame is fixed by the Constitution and it was coming to the time limit before you could renew. I received no other ideas from anywhere; if the 18th of August passed without the renewal of the commission, there would have been a vacuum. The law has not been adjusted to accommodate a new time frame; the constitutional time frame says, do it before -(Interjection)- Oh, yes, once you are in two or three months, you are stuck and as a responsible law officer of the republic. I had to advise the government that, “You are going to cause a constitutional crisis if you do not take immediate action”, and they took immediate action. (Applause)

You know there is a commission to speak about now; there is a commission to task; there is a commission to ask to manage the political space of Uganda. If the 18th of August had passed silently, hon. Members, there would have been a constitutional crisis. 

And at least for me, I will retire honourably. How? By saying that, “During my tenure, I did not cause a Constitutional crisis about elections” - I have not caused it and I thank God for it. Now -(Interjections)- please, I agreed with the management that I would be very brief and I agreed with the hon. Deputy Speaker. I am available for clarification permanently. Okay, I will allow it.

MR SEKIKUUBO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I was a bit perturbed in the sense that the Electoral Commission is supposed to be the umpire; you know someone who sees to it that parties stick by the rules. The dilemma we have here is that the renewal notwithstanding, there is a growing feeling that probably the current holders are not leaving up to the expectations of Ugandans. And it is from that background that there is a notion that we needed these reforms.

Bearing that in mind, whether you helped to offset a deadlock, which I do not believe in because I think this must be the third Electoral Commission since NRM took power and certainly this cannot be the last one. I also know well that when we go into the constitutional review, we can still review the tenure and the composition. My question is: what is the government position on the calls to have reforms in the Electoral Commission? Are you giving confidence to Ugandans that despite this you are still considering those proposals and you will get there? Are you putting it that this is to cast one stone and that there are no proposals or avenues to put all Ugandans on board? That is the concern, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what is the clarification?

PROF. MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Sekikuubo for his intervention but the cameras will show that he was absent from Parliament for most of the discussion, and I am sure he has missed a good deal of the contributions which were quite positive. When I began this statement, I said it is better to distinguish between two issues: the Electoral Commission and the question of electoral reforms. I said that you are better off - but if you were not here when these statements were being made, you are likely to have misunderstood what I was saying. It is still true that we can now talk about improving the performance of the Electoral Commission when there is no constitutional vacuum or constitutional crisis. 

This government, through the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister made a commitment that it is going to undertake electoral law reforms; these reforms will be in place before the end of February next year. This is a commitment of government communicated by the Prime Minister and we still stand by it.

There are proposals especially arising from submissions by hon. Okello-Okello on standardising the length of terms of constitutional commissions. There are also proposals for having the same terms and conditions of service especially arising from the submission of hon. Christine Bako Abia. I have no problem with these proposals; we will study them as government, look into their implications and see if it is feasible to implement them and the consequences.

On this Floor of the august House, I would strongly recommend that we avoid making statements, which would give the impression that we support the practice of mob justice. Yes, there are some areas in the justice system, which are subject to improvement and we are studying them. Improving the delivery of justice is a continuous process. Nobody has said we have a perfect system. On the other hand, what are we to do with the constitutional provisions of presumption of innocence, that when a person is suspected to have committed an offence, he is presumed to be innocent until the contrary is proved by the state to a standard beyond reasonable doubt. 

So it is not a matter of us saying, “When people say, ‘thief, thief’, they begin to beat and kill and then they ask, ‘what did he steal’? It is not clear what he stole but the fellow is dead.” We all agree with the rule of law and therefore we should discourage mob justice but struggle to improve the existing system so that we generate confidence in the Judiciary.

I think one of the institutions that has been debated for all these hours on the Floor is the LDC. I would be the first to admit that the LDC needs special focus for the future. I am glad that the finances will be taken care of by Ministry of Finance, as hon. Omach has just said. But there are other things, which have been said like the structure. I agree that it is time to examine the structure of postgraduate legal education and practical, and post LLB legal education. Yes, this is a matter on which you cannot answer instantly. But I think it is a matter that we should study as a ministry and be able to report progress to this Parliament as we go along.

There are recommendations to expedite the Administration of Justice Act. I agree with this recommendation.

Again one of the issues, which have been debated at length, is the meaning of cases won, those lost and the characterisation that we are now a criminal state because we have lost some of these cases and so forth. Madam Speaker, winning or losing a case is not a matter of tossing a coin. It is a matter, which needs more complex analysis than we have been able to give it. First, is the law, because government operates under the law; there is the cardinal principle of the rule of law, which is enshrined in the Constitution and there is nothing you can do about it. Then you have the facts and the facts are what a witness saw, heard, felt when he touched and so forth.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: I thought this winning and losing cases was raised by hon. Abia and I am trying to explain it. I can pass over it, but I take what my colleagues say on this Floor very seriously. That is why I am addressing this matter.

The matter of facts, the burden of proof, the standard of proof, all these issues go into whether you will win or lose a case. Of course, there is a good case and a bad case. Are you saying these cases were not won or lost on merit? Because if you have a bad case from the word go, there is no legal wizardry, which is going to turn it into a good case. So I think we need to do more complex analysis of the winning and losing rather than to just say, “Because you have lost a case you are now a criminal state”. Well, if the purpose is to make a political statement then you have made it, and we will take it in that context. But I thought we were trying to understand ourselves and guide ourselves.

I agree that we need to give the necessary facilities to the Electoral Commission in order for it to be able to do its best in these circumstances.

Hon. Tom Butime, it is not true that there is no rent provided for in the budget. There is rent provided for in the budget for these premises. The difficulty is that the landlords want to be paid in dollars and when the value of the shilling goes down vis-à-vis the dollar, the amount of shillings you need to pay the rent increases. This is where we find ourselves in a problem. It is not that it wasn’t budgeted for but the dollar appreciated and the shilling went down.

Yes, I have dealt with the LDC. We shall focus more concretely on dealing with issues of corruption wherever they may exist. We will investigate the question of disposal or recovery of bail money and we will put sufficient focus on the question of the centre for alternative dispute resolution in order to reduce the work load of the courts. 

There is the question of registering births and whether we should celebrate the registration of 30,000 or so births. The registration of births is very important and all of us need to commit ourselves to mobilise our constituents to ensure that they register births of children. 

Regarding the question of disciplining court bailiffs, yes, this will definitely be taken up I can assure you. 

I must repeat that many of the things that have been said are covered in the policy statement itself but I must assure colleagues that the Electoral Commission and its membership, as of now, is clearly distinguishable from electoral law reforms, the process of which we are committed to complete by the end of February next year.

I urge Parliament to support the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on our policy statement. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Attorney-General. Hon. Members, I put the question that this House adopt the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you so much for the work we have done since Monday. I will not keep you beyond the next two minutes. We shall resume on Monday afternoon to deal with the Committee on Natural Resources. I also wanted to announce in the meantime that there is some sporadic rainfall in the weather stations so you could check there before you go home.

The House is adjourned to Monday at 2.30 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 3.33 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 07 September 2009 at 2.30 p.m.)

