
Tuesday, 8 September 2009 
Parliament met at 10.36 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting but I am also happy to welcome the Member for Busiro County North, who is the Vice-President. Thank you for coming to join us today. (Applause)

10.38 
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance but let me also use this opportunity to welcome the Vice-President and Member of Parliament for Busiro County North. The matter concerns all of us. In one of the sub-counties: Kingo, where His Majesty the Kabaka of Buganda, Ronald Muwenda Mutebi II, has his palace - he is one of the residents in my constituency, what is happening in Kayunga District is a matter of national importance. As his representative, I am concerned that His Majesty the Kabaka of Buganda has been denied entry into Kayunga District, which is part of Buganda. 

Some of you were here and made this Constitution of 1995 and in Schedule No. 1 Kayunga District is given as part of Buganda. I, therefore, urge the government to tell us and to give reasons as to why there is this high tension because the Kabaka is going to visit one of his counties. If you have today’s newspapers, all of them have captured it. “Tear gas as tension builds in Kayunga”, is the headline for the Daily Monitor while The New Vision has “Police tear gas Mengo officials.” 

Not only am I a Member of Parliament but I am one of those people who liberated this country from the bad regimes and I know very well the role that was played by the Kabaka of Buganda. In 1985 - some of you could have been in school then, but those who were old enough can tell - the external mission of the NRM political wing asked the Kabaka to visit the war zones and indeed we chose the former Vice-President, the late Samson Kisekka and Presidential Advisor John Nagenda to accompany the Kabaka to visit the war zones when the war had stagnated in Masaka and Singo. If the Kabaka could visit the war zones at that time, yet when the NRA/NRM is in power they cannot allow him to visit one of his counties, then government should explain that - (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Even the tension that is being purported to be there between the Banyala and the Baganda is not there. It is the politically bankrupt self seekers that are doing this to create a situation which may culminate into genocide in this country. The   further information I want to give to hon. Nsubuga is that even in Busoga from where you hail, Madam Speaker, it is happening. 

I saw teargas canisters flying when they were dispersing people. It seems it is the Police that is acting without the law. It is the Police that is breaking the law and we have heard that they are saying that it is an order from above. I think the House should be told which order from above it is that is trying to disrupt the peace of this country. 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for the information. Madam Speaker, it is imperative that government explains the circumstances. After the establishment of kingdoms in Uganda in 1993, we knew that the Kabaka had been installed as the Kabaka of Buganda and the 1995 Constitution gives the boundaries of Buganda. We want the government to explain. 

As my colleague said, even in Busoga where you come from, people who were going to their headquarters in Bugembe were hit with tear gas. Is this a civilian government or is it a military government? As I said, I am one of those people who fought for the freedom of this country. We would not like to go back to the old days that brought the 1966 crisis; circumstances that brought the 1971 coup; and circumstances that brought the 1985 coup. We have all been living together. 

Where I come from in Masaka, we have Buddu County which has many people of different ethnicities. We have the Banyankole, the Banyarwanda, the Bakooki, the Banabuddu but we all live harmoniously. So we would like to know whether when the Kabaka visits one of his counties the Banyala are forced or coerced into being there. Madam Speaker, people were building stalls for the exhibition yesterday and when you look at the reasons as to why the Kabaka is going there, these are the very reasons you give in Parliament: immunization, development.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: To be precise, the stalls were destroyed by the police, the Banyala are not mentioned anywhere as interfering with the Kabaka’s visit. So I just want to inform my colleague that even though the Banyala are behind shadows, the disruption is done by the police and that is government. The Banyala issue is just behind the shadows according to all the press reports.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: I put this same information to the House that some time back the Opposition parties held rallies and the Police use it as a pretext to disband these rallies and beat our people. Today they are beating Buganda officials, people who have done nothing other than fostering development. I would like government to give us reasons why Police is acting above the law, because when you ask them, they say they have orders from above. It is good the Vice-President is here and he is a Muganda and he is No. 2 in this country. Can he tell us whether Police is above the law, because they do not act within the law?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of Government business, can you tell us what is happening in Buganda and also in Busoga?

10.47
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Hon. Mathias Nsubuga has raised an important matter and I am aware that the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Internal Affairs who also happens to be the Chairperson of the Security Council in the country has been in constant contact with the Katikkiro of Buganda together with the Inspector-General of Police right from yesterday. I want to propose that I get in touch with the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs and he will be in a position to inform the House on what is exactly happening on the ground. However, I want to assure everybody that in government we are interested in the peace and tranquillity of everybody in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I will contact hon. Kivejinja and I am sure a statement will be provided on whatever is happening in any part of the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not interested in any part of the country. We are interested in issues of Kayunga and the Kabaka and the issues of Jinja yesterday.

MR MIGEREKO: The critical issues right now are to do with what happened in Kayunga and Jinja and I will follow your instructions to the letter.

MR ERIAS LUKWAGO: Preparation for the visit of the Kabaka in Bugerere County had commenced and the information we have is that they have been halted by government. The clarification I would like to seek, Madam Speaker is: as the Leader of Government Business is consulting the Prime Minister, may we know whether government, which has said is interested in peace and tranquillity, is allowing the organisers to go ahead with the preparation for the visit of the Kabaka or not? 

Secondly, are they are considering the legal implications here, because the institution of the Kabaka, the institution of the Kyabazinga and all these other cultural institutions are well provided for in the Constitution? Is government mindful of the Constitution? We cannot have this situation where the Leader of Government Business is consulting when the Constitution is being violated. There is no room for one to consult whether they should continue with the violation of the Constitution or not. Could the Leader of Government Business at least assure us that they are protecting the Constitution jealously in as far as observing the rights of the cultural institutions and their leaders to enjoy the freedom they are supposed to enjoy with in the parameters of the Constitution is concerned?

Can we get the assurance that the Kabaka will visit his county on Saturday and when is that statement going to be made? When is the statement that the minister is assuring us that he is working out modalities to consult the Prime Minister and the rest of the people in government, when are we getting that statement? Is it this afternoon, is it now? Can we get the assurance that the Kabaka will be permitted to go to his county?

10.52   
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): The Government Chief Whip has referred to hon. Kivejinja the Minister of Internal Affairs but the minister has already made his stand on this and it has been circulated in the papers and everywhere, that in the meantime the Kabaka is advised not to go to Kayunga and that is what we want to know. Why is the Kabaka being refused to go to Kayunga and he has said that the Kabaka should sit with these other groups so that they can see what to do. 

I do not think that a statement from hon. Kivejinja is going to solve the matter. We need real assurance because as far as the Minister of Internal Affairs is concerned, that is where it stops. We do not know whether he has instructions from elsewhere, we do not know. Whether he is in charge of that Ministry, we should be told. Otherwise, the Kabaka cannot be denied to visit parts of Buganda, why should it be so?

10.53
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): I am a bit dismayed to be standing here to ask for an explanation about the developments in the country. We may be sowing seeds of hatred if we stand by and just watch things get out of hand. We had an episode in Nakasongola and another one is developing in Kayunga. We may have another one developing in Kampala where we have the Kifumbira, Gomba, Kooki, Busugga. Where shall we end?   

When somebody says that he is consulting and action has been taken, I can assure you that even I, do not feel safe, to be honest, in Buganda. I believe in the institution. It is very possible to love the Kabaka and to love the Government of Uganda and to work for harmony. (Applause) But here we are; everybody is getting scared. Should I stop talking about the Kabaka? If there is a mistake somewhere, let us all know. You are disbanding those youth who are also here in Kampala - do not do this! This is just a cultural institution; they are not armed and they are not going to overthrow the government. If there is a reason, let us know. 

Somebody suggested that Mengo should establish relations with the Banyala, but if the Kabaka is going to do that - that is why he is going there - then why should he be stopped? That is what he is going to do. If there is any problem, why should he be stopped and yet you are setting a condition that he should settle that one first? Hon. Members, I request that we reconcile now because Saturday is very near. Once we stop the Kabaka from going to Kayunga we shall be setting a very bad precedent and the repercussions may not be very good. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is not a debate. Let us hear from Dr Epetait and then the government will answer. After that we shall proceed to our other business. 

10.56 
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard the Government Chief Whip refer the matter to the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, but we are glad that inside the House we have the second in command, His Excellency, the Vice-President. I thought it would be prudent for the Vice-President to make a statement here. This is a very urgent matter and we really need to get reassurance rather than wait for consultations with the Minister of Internal Affairs. We would be happy to get the real issues from the Vice-President of the country.

10.57
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, as I indicated earlier, discussions have been going on between the Third Deputy Prime Minister, the Inspector-General of Police, the central government officials, and Mengo. It is true it is highly imperative that this Parliament gets a statement. I have conferred briefly with His Excellency, the Vice-President -(Interruption)

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, AT one time you were presiding over this House and I stood up here and asked Government to explain what the official uniform of the Uganda Police was. Hon. Migereko stood up and said he would avail a statement in the House. He even went to the extent of writing to me a letter saying Government would come here to give an explanation on what the official uniform of the Uganda Police was. I had asked what the official uniform of the Uganda Police was vis-à-vis the security agencies we have because today you see Uganda Police has black, blue, khaki, white and -(Interjections)- is hon. Migereko in order, after lying to this House, to lie to the House again that he is coming with an official statement this time and I am expected to believe it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not work in the Prime Minister’s Office. Let him explain how they work and how their statements come.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for that guidance. As I was saying, I have conferred with His Excellency, the Vice-President, and he has directed that I immediately get in touch with hon. Kivenjinja so that an appropriate statement is presented to this House. He has directed me to immediately go and get in touch with hon. Kivenjinja so that he can be in position to come. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, if you do not want his information, let us proceed to the Order Paper.

MR MIGEREKO: As I sum up, I want to assure hon. Lukwago that the NRM Government is in the vanguard of protecting the Constitution of this country. I thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
PRIVATE SECTOR PLATFORM FOR ACTION
  
11.00
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gaudioso Tindamanyire): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I lay on the Table the Private Sector Platform for Action. This is a synopsis of private sector policy concerns and suggestions for policy reforms in Uganda. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is committed to the Committee on Finance for perusal and advice and for them to report back to this House. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

11.01
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Lule Mawiya): Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I understand your report is not here. Let us go to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

11.02
CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Tindamanyire Kabondo): Madam Speaker and Hon. Members, rule 133 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandates sessional committees to critically examine the government’s recurrent and capital budget estimates and to make recommendations for the general debate in the House. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development is specifically mandated to cover the policy proposals and budget estimates for the following votes. 

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Vote 108 - National Planning Authority; Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General; Vote 134 - Uganda Revenue Authority; Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics; and Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority.

Methodology 
The committee went through the following process in handling its work: 
    i) Read the policy statements together with relevant material regarding the sectors; that is the policies, the laws, regulations and write-ups.
    ii) Raised questions about the policy statements for clarification by the relevant ministers.
    iii) Held meetings with the Minister of Finance and his technical team.
    iv) Met with the board and management of NPA, Office of the Auditor-General, PPDA, UBOS and URA.
    v)  Reviewed the report of the Budget Committee on the indicative allocations of the ministry and the Medium Term Expenditure Framework.
    vi) Reviewed the extent to which the recommendations made last financial year were implemented, analysed the background to the budget, the President’s State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech.  

Madam Speaker and Hon. Members, I now have the privilege of presenting to this House the committee’s report.

Vote 008 - the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

The mission of the ministry is to formulate sound economic policies, maximise revenue mobilisation; ensure efficient allocation and accountability for public resources so as to achieve the most rapid, sustainable economic growth and development. 

Funds that were appropriated in the Financial Year 2008/2009: the recurrent expenditure was Shs 58,772,727,000 whereas the development expenditure was Shs 266,960,000,000. 

Achievements for the Financial Year 2008/2009
The Public Investment Plan (PIP) was implemented with linkages to effectively track project performance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can skip those. Members can read them, the achievements they can read for themselves. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: I now go to the key outputs for the Financial Year 2008/2009.
 
    1. The National Budget is to be formulated and implemented. 
    2. Macro-economic variables to be set, monitored and reported upon. 
    3. Domestic and external resources to be mobilised to finance the national budget.
    4. Public resources to be effectively managed to obtain value for money.
    5. Integrated Management System (IFMIS) to be rolled out to 28 additional sites.
    6. Public/private partnership framework to be finalised and a unit set up.
    7. Communities to be availed with affordable finances to implement economic activities.
    8. A tractor hire scheme to be put in place to increase agricultural productivity.
    9. Uganda Investment Authority to continue to acquire land and provide infrastructure for industrial parks. 
    10. The Uganda Development Corporation will be revitalised.

Observations

Capitalisation of the financial institutions has increased from the Shs 10 billion to Shs 37 billion in 2009/2010. Seven billion will be utilised by Uganda Development Bank and EADB, while Shs 30 billion is for the Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme.

The stock of pension arrears is still colossal despite assurances by the government to clear them. The arrears now stand at Shs 130,542,099,950. 

The total loan portfolio to be recovered under NPART stands at Shs 152 billion.

The residual properties under NPART include 133 properties that cannot be disposed of since NPART’s lifetime expired on 9 October 2007, but the Bill to wind it up is still with Cabinet. That is what the committee was told. Also, ten NPART debtors with debts worth Shs 10 billion encountered interventions from State House, the Vice-President’s Office and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Terminal benefits of some former employees of Uganda Railways Corporation and UEB have not been paid. Former Railways staff have petitioned Parliament and we have their petition.

Although a lot of industrial parks are being established, progress is slow.

The committee further notes that government land being leased to investors is prone to being mortgaged by investors. The Executive is working on a Contingency Fund Bill. Section 10 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act was found inadequate of fulfilling Article 157 of the Constitution.
 
You remember last year when we brought the Shs 2 billion, we found out that Article 157 of the Constitution had not been operationalised so there were no regulations and there was no way we could appropriate the Shs 2 billion.

An extra Shs 6.129 billion is being provided for investment and private sector development. Members are, however, dissatisfied with the impact of activities in this sector. Embassies abroad have not facilitated or exposed the country to the market yet a lot is spent on consultancies. 

Issues raised in the ministerial policy statement for example by the Ministry of Finance regarding the investment authority were found to be scanty and yet a lot of funds are remitted. For example, in the policy statement of this financial year Shs 55.24 billion is earmarked for investment.

The Presidential Initiative for Banana Development Project (PBDP) is to receive an additional Shs 5 billion to construct a factory to facilitate value-addition to matooke products. The framework under which this is being done is not clear. That is: is it a public/private partnership, contribution to industrial research or a government project, and who are the shareholders?

There is no significant change in the land registry despite the ongoing second Private Sector Competitiveness project.

Despite re-capitalising Civil Aviation Authority, government is considering engaging DORSAL Infrastructure Developments Ltd in the business of expanding Entebbe Airport to international standards.

The Ministry is in the process of putting in place a tier 4 regulatory Bill that would address the regulatory concerns of all institutions in the tier 4 category including SACCOs.

The current outstanding domestic arrears stand at Shs 30.277 billion. The ministry attributes this to limited MTEF.

The custodian board was noted to legally exist in accordance with the Assets of Departed Asians Act as a body corporate. The Custodian Board has requested for Shs 5 billion to handle compensation claims. It was noted that there was a legal board and a legal executive secretary but no clear list of properties, their value and location including sales and all related documents and board meetings had lapsed from 1997 to date.

It was noted that the day to day management of the affairs of the Custodian Board and control of financial records are not in conformity with Section 7 of the Assets of the Departed Asians Act, CAP 83, which led to the disappearance of several files on properties, and Shs 1.9 billion, as noted by the Auditor-General.

There is Shs 3.424 billion under the Ministry of Finance for salaries of agricultural extension workers. 

Recommendations
    1. Clear regulations and modalities should be put in place to guide the agriculture credit guarantee scheme. Wide consultations with the agricultural sector should be carried out.
    2. Government should endeavour to clear pension arrears as this has been a longstanding commitment.
    3. Government should seek ways of recovering the remaining loan portfolio under NPART.
    4. Residual properties under NPART should be evaluated and disposed where necessary.
    5. The Bill to wind up NPART that has been before cabinet since 2007 should be expedited. This also applies to the Contingency Fund Bill and Tier 4 regulatory Bill.
    6. Terminal benefits for former UEB and Uganda Railways staff should be cleared as a matter of urgency.
    7. The process of establishing industrial parks should be hastened to promote economic development. 
    8. Conditions of lease of land should be well thought out and stated to cater for government interests.
    9. The Uganda Investment Authority should be provided with a Vote to enable Parliament scrutinise its activities adequately. The Ministry has no objection to this.
    10. Consultancies regarding investment and private sector development should be reduced and funds invested in actual development projects.
    11. The Presidential Initiative for Banana Development should be turned into a public-private partnership with local banana growers as shareholders. 
    12. No decision should be taken on Entebbe Airport without Parliament being consulted to safeguard the interest of Ugandans.
    13. The performance of the second private sector competitiveness project should be evaluated as its impact on the land registry seems minimal. 
    14. The commitment control system should be adhered to in light of the economic crisis. Utilities should be treated as a protected purse to reduce domestic arrears. 
    15. Records and properties of the Custodian Board should with immediate effect be managed in conformity with the Act. 
    16. The Ministry should hand over custodian board reports of January 2005 and 2008 including the takeover reports of the Executive Secretary to the Committee. 
    17. The Committee has rejected the request to allocate Shs 5 billion to the custodian board. The Committee recommends that only Shs 2 billion be provided for compensation and other recurrent activities. 
    18. The Minister should furnish Parliament with total proceeds, total compensation and total expenditure since 2004. This should be accompanied by audited books of accounts. 
    19. The Shs 3.424 billion under the Ministry of Finance for salaries of agricultural extension workers should be transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture, especially NAADS. 

Conclusion 

The committee recommends the following resources for Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the Financial Year 2009/10 in order to enable it carry out above outlined programmes and activities.

Recurrent expenditure: Shs 49,209,373,577; and development expenditure Shs 242,094,308,000. 

Vote 108 - National Planning Authority

The mandate is as stated in the report. In the Financial Year 2008/09 the NPA got a recurrent expenditure of Shs 5,999,996,000 billion and the development expenditure of Shs 4,105,186,400 billion. 

The achievements during the Financial Year 2008/09 are stated and you can read for yourselves. 

Activities for Financial Year 2009/2010

1.	 Harmonisation of planning frameworks and systems.
2.	 Operationalisation of the five-year national development plan.
3.	 Finalisation, dissemination and popularisation of a 30-year shared national vision.
4. 	Development of the 10-year outline perspective plan.
5.	 Monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the national development plan.
6.	 Assessment of the performance of the national economy and production of the annual report.
7.	 Review of sectoral and Local Government policies and strategies to ensure that they are responsive to the national development plan.
8.	 Building plans and policy making capacities at national and Local Government levels.
9. 	Coordination of Uganda Country Capacity Building programme.
10.	Coordination of NEPAD initiatives such as African Peer Review Mechanism, APRM, CAADP and e-schools project.
11.	NPA institutional strengthening and development.
12.	Conducting studies on strategic development priorities.
13.	Coordinating the national human resource survey under the EAC framework.
14.	Coordinating the maintenance, deployment and rollout of the Community Information System (CIS) database.

Observations

    1. The draft 30-year national vision has been reviewed and updated to adjust projected indicators and targets in light of the emerging national development and global plans.

    2. The Authority has not been able to accomplish the approval and adoption of the Comprehensive National Development Planning Framework (CNDPF) and yet this is key to national development.


    3. According to the National Planning Authority, the National Development Plan will be in place by end of this month, September.

    4. The national manpower survey has dragged on due to failure by the East African Community to mobilise resources required for planning and forecasting the country’s manpower requirements.


    5. The National Planning Authority is implementing the Community Information System with the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, Gender and Local Government. 

    6. Although the National Planning Authority is in charge of development, deployment and maintenance of the Community Information System, database funds for this activity are given to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics.


    7. A lot of funds under the Uganda Country Capacity Building Programme are used for benchmarking abroad by beneficiaries. Capacity building in strategic planning and public expenditure are not taken as a priority.

    8. Shs 821,870,000 has been allocated for short term consultancy services in this financial year. This is a colossal amount of money.

    9. The National Planning Authority’s unfunded activities total Shs 5.7 billion, equivalent to half of the budget required which is Shs 9.7 billion. This is likely to constrain performance and yet planning is cardinal in resource use.

    10. The New Partnership for Africa’s Development and African Peer Review Mechanism Governing Council is under funded to the tune of Shs 2.3 billion. This component is key to promoting good governance and cannot be overlooked.


    11. If not well scrutinised the National Planning Authority may easily duplicate activities carried out by other organisations. For example, the committee was sceptical about it carrying out consultancies related to high value agricultural production and tourism when the same activities would be in agriculture and tourism.

    12. The National Planning Authority is having difficulty in acquiring data in a form suitable for strategic planning. Many ministries and departments have not been trained to collect and store data appropriately.


    13. Both the National Planning Authority Board and Management are constituted without gender considerations as per the Constitution. Only one out of the board members is a woman and this contravenes several international protocols to which the government is a signatory.


Recommendations

    1. The National Planning Authority should carry out wide consultations on the draft 30-year vision to ensure that it stands the test of time.

    2. The Authority should hasten the completion of the National Development Planning Framework since it provides the basis for the five-year National Development Plan. 


    3. The National Development Plan should be fast-tracked with the expiry of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP).

    4. The National Manpower Survey should be carried out to ascertain the country’s manpower needs and facilitate national planning. 


    5. Funds, Shs 3.5 billion, meant for the Community Information System should be provided to the National Planning Authority since it is responsible for development, deployment and maintenance of the system.

    6. The Uganda Country Capacity Building Programme should be evaluated to ensure that it promotes strategic planning and public expenditure management.


    7. The National Planning Authority should consider recruiting more technical staff to reduce costs spent on short-term consultancies.

    8. Parliament should provide funds to enable the National Planning Authority accomplish its mandate. Without proper planning, public funds can never be maximally spent.


    9. The New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) Governing Council, which largely hinges on good governance, should be prioritised among the unfunded activities.

    10. The National Planning Authority should carry out a critical analysis of its programmes to avoid duplicating activities already carried out by other Government bodies.

    11. All government departments and agencies should be facilitated and trained to collect and store data in a format suitable for development planning.

    12. The appointing authority should be advised to be gender sensitive when appointing the next National Planning Authority Board.

Conclusion

The committee recommends the approval of the following funds for Vote 108 - NPA in the financial year 2009/2010: Recurrent expenditure of Shs 5,999,996,000 and development expenditure of Shs 3,799,650,000.

Office of the Auditor-General

The mandate is very clear. 

Funds allocated in the last Financial Year 2008/2009: the Office of the Auditor-General has been accessing funds as a semi-autonomous body under Vote 131, and in the last financial year, the recurrent expenditure was Shs 19,486,000,000 and development expenditure was Shs 1,692,000,000.

The achievements in the Financial Year 2008/09
    1. The office was able to launch the National Audit Act, 2008 which provided for the Auditor–General and gave the office operational independence in terms of finance and human resources. 

    2. A total of 2,471 audits, ranging from financial, value-for-money and other special audits were undertaken. 


    3. Seven additional staff acquired professional accounting qualifications; 250 members of staff were trained in technical skills.

    4. 75 audit warrants were issued to withdraw funds from the Uganda Consolidated Fund.

    5. Recruitment of new members of staff and promotions into vacant positions were implemented.

    6. The Audit House Project designs were completed and the funds for the construction of the three regional branches in Mbale, Jinja and Mbarara were secured, including funds for the commencement of the construction of the Audit House headquarters.


The planned activities for this financial year 

    1. The Auditor-General’s Office intends to carry out 2,496 audits, including 20 value-for-money audits, and these will be in five key sectors of the economy, namely, Education, Agriculture, Health Works and Environment, Water and Energy.

    2. Recruit a Public Relations Officer who will double as the OAG - Parliament Liaison Officer. A senior economist/planner and other professionals such as engineers and doctors will be recruited after recognition and reconstruction of the office.


    3. Under capacity building and rehabilitation undertakings, at least 100 members of staff will be trained during the financial year 2009/2010 to acquire critical performance skills in new areas of operation. 

    4. All the assets of the office will be updated and enhanced: the information and communication technology infrastructure, office equipment, buildings and other logistical assets.

    5. The building undertakings planned for 2009/2010 include: construction of the two branch offices in Jinja and Mbale and phase I of the Audit House.


Observations 

    1. The National Audit Act, 2008 made OAG a corporate body and all staff in the office became staff of the office. 

    2. Salaries, allowances, pension and other benefits payable to staff have been revised to motivate workers to perform effectively. 


    3. The Auditor-General has continued to audit the Consolidated Fund and local governments have been main culprits of non-compliance to the systems as set out by Government regulations. 

    4. The committee notes that parliamentary reports on the Auditor-General’s reports have been laid before the House, but have not been debated. This applies to Public Accounts Committee and Local Government Accounts Committee.


    5. There is still backlog of audits in local governments and yet there are a lot of funds remitted to lower levels. The Auditor-General informed the committee that resources have been provided to clear backlogs by September 2010; Staff are also to be recruited to beef up the capacity so that the backlog is cleared.

    6. Shs 144 million has been provided this financial year for office accommodation.

    7. The donor budgetary resources under FINMAP funding were not included in the institution’s budget as they were planned under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 
    8. The Office has had problems with the software for ministerial policy statements provided by the Ministry of Finance.

    9. A lot of funds, Shs 857,836,000, are spent hiring firms to audit on behalf of the Auditor-General. 

    10. The committee observed that some sectors require special audits like the Road sector and chemical industries. The committee is to request for these audits. 

    11. The committee noted that some funds had been withdrawn from the consolidated fund without audit warrants.

Recommendations 

    1. Since staff salaries have been increased, standards of work are expected to improve greatly. The Auditor-General should set very high standards for staff.

    2. Entities that continue to violate the Audit Act should be dealt with accordingly.

    3. Parliament should debate audit reports that have been laid before the House by Public Accounts Committee and Local Government Accounts Committee.

    4. The Auditor-General should endeavour to clear backlogs as scheduled. Colossal sums of money are being sent to lower levels, which have very minimal technical capacity. 


    5. The Office of the Auditor-General should hasten plans to construct the Audit House to save funds spent on rent. This also applies to district offices.

    6. All budgetary resources benefiting institutions under FINMAP should be reflected in the institution’s budget to provide a clear picture of funds available to the office.

    7. The Ministry of Finance should review and adjust the software used in preparing budget statements to make stakeholders comfortable.

    8. More staff should be recruited to reduce funds spent on consultancies.

    9. The Road sector and chemical industries should be audited to ensure value-for-money. 

    10. All those who withdrew funds from the consolidated fund without audit warrants should be dealt with according to the law.

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the following resources be approved by this House for Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General: Recurrent expenditure, Shs 23,832,350,000 and development expenditure, Shs 3,207,587,000.

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) 

URA’s mandate is very clear and the major functions of URA include:

    1. Administration of tax collection in order to achieve the targets set. 

    2. Improve tax collection systems supported by automation to reduce on the time spent by clients. 

    3. To identify taxpayers’ needs and draw up strategies to meet them. 

    4. To develop a strong staff through adherence to code of conduct. 

    5. To continue implementing government policies and commitments relating to national and regional arrangements.

In the last financial year, the recurrent expenditure for URA was Shs 80,050,000,000 and the development expenditure was Shs 10,360,000,000.

The achievements for the financial year are stated and you can read about them on that page. 

I go to 6.4, the outputs for the Financial Year 2009/2010.

    1. URA intends to have the implementation of the balanced score card project.

    2. Rollout of ITAS to large, medium and Kampala Central tax offices.

    3. Implementation of disaster recovery project.

    4. Enhancement of power for URANET.

    5. Purchase of 300 computers at a cost of Shs 690 million.

    6. Training of all tax auditors in customs, domestic taxes and tax investigation departments.

    7. Adjustment of staff salary by 16 percent. This is equivalent to about Shs 7.81 billion. This adjustment of staff salary applies to supervisors and lower cadres and not the senior management.

Observations 

        1. By the third quarter of 2008/2009, the projected revenue shortfall was Shs 143 billion. 

        2. The shortfall was as a result of shortfalls in domestic taxes, VAT and international trade taxes. 

        3. There are some policies and mitigation measures that have been put in place and they include: Close monitoring of tax payers, strengthening the audit function and strengthening customs enforcement. This has to do with increasing efficiency, but there are no measures to increase revenue collection. 

        4. Uganda Revenue Authority’s current stock of arrears includes, Shs 103,397,991,336 arising from collectable taxes. This is an unacceptable figure as they are collectable and raises the question of efficiency of URA staff. 

        5. The committee visited URA upcountry offices and found that staff do not have proper facilities like accommodation and transportation. They were informed that URA requires US $19 million for accommodation. A few vehicles (57) have also been procured; 40 of them are, however, saloon cars for internal travel. 

        6. URA plans to increase staff salaries. This will include supervisors and below, which will cost a total of Shs 3.9 billion. 

        7. There are many resignations at URA; we noted about 125; management attributes it to low pay. There is need to establish the real cause of low morale among staff and address it appropriately.

        8. Border posts like Malaba, Busia, Mutukula and Katuna, which are to be done under the World Bank funded East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project are still undone as the project lags behind schedule.

        9. URA plans to secure funding from National Social Security Fund to build their headquarters. The project requires US$ 10.3 million. The committee noted that this would reduce costs spent on rent. Members had reservations about borrowing from National Social Security Fund as it has been ridden with scandals and they said it was a cheap source for commercial banks.

        10. URA instituted an audit which exposed the number plate scam. 400 number plates were identified. They have now put in place measures to handle this, which includes accommodating manufacturers of number plates in the URA premises for close monitoring and reconciliations.

        11. Although refunds for motor vehicle licenses are being issued, the process is lengthy and many people have not been paid.

        12. Currently, URA is not fully involved in collecting non-tax revenue (NTR) in ministries and other government organisations, leading to loss of revenue.
         
Recommendations

    1. URA should explore means of expanding the tax base instead of relying on efficiency gains.

    2. URA should be more vigilant in collecting taxes; high standards should be set for staff.

    3. URA should explore other means of retaining staff. Salary increase may necessarily not be a solution; they should, for example, assess their current system of promoting staff.

    4. Accommodation, transport and hardship allowances should be a priority for upcountry staff in hard-to-reach areas like Oraba. (Interjections) Bukwo is not very far; possibly Kitgum.

    5. URA should follow up progress of the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project so that Malaba, Busia, Jinja and Mutukula are rehabilitated.

    6. URA should consider getting funds for its new home from development agencies like the World Bank and ADB. These could be cheaper and may have a grant financial benefit.

    7. URA should continually monitor their system to ensure that scams like the number plate one do not re-occur.

    8. Refunds for motor vehicle licenses should be made faster and simpler to encourage people claim their money. This activity should be given a timeframe.

    9. URA should get fully involved in collection of non-tax revenue to avoid diversion and misuse of Government funds by departments.

Conclusion 

The committee recommends that the following resources be allocated to Vote 141 – URA, as the total funding for the Financial Year 2009/2010: recurrent expenditure Shs 100,050,370,000 and development expenditure Shs 7,944,472,327.

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) 

The mandate is clear as stated and last financial year UBOS had a recurrent expenditure of Shs 20,496,000,000 and development expenditure of Shs 2,188,000,000, and the achievements are stated.

The planned output for the Financial Year 2009/2010

    1. To implement and improve on the regular core programmes of UBOS.

    2. Complete data collection and continue with cartography activities for 2012 National Population and Housing Census.

    3. Conduct the panel survey.

    4. Conduct census of agriculture in 2009/2010.

    5. Mapping for Population and Housing Census in 2012.

    6. Implementation of the Community Information System by conducting the fourth Uganda National Household Survey.

    7. Implementing the Plan for National Statistical Development (PNSD).

    8. Conduct industrial surveys/ Biennial Business Inquiry.

    9. Improving ICT infrastructure.

    10. Statistical capacity building; and maintaining the existing infrastructure and utilities.

    11. Human Resource development and motivation.

    12. Public relations and communication.

    13. Expansion and improvement of core statistical programmes.

The committee made the following observations:

    1. There was a shortfall in funds required by UBOS despite the importance of data in the planning development process. This affected several programmes like mapping activities for the 2012 Census, Community Information System Programme and the Uganda Census of Agriculture.

    2. Delay in mapping activities for the 2012 Census is likely to affect the plans for the census. This may lead to last minute preparations that can affect quality of the entire programme. The activity is expected to be completed within three years, starting with the last financial year.

    3. Although the community information system is key in promoting and enhancing rural development, it could not be rolled out to new districts due to lack of funds. Under the decentralisation programme, a lot of funds are remitted to the districts and need monitoring. Only 28 districts have been handled.

    4. The funds available for the Financial Year 2009/10 are not adequate to fully implement the Plan for National Statistical Development. This leads to continued existence of data gaps within key sectors.

    5. The National Data Bank Programme is faced with a shortfall of Shs 120 million. This is critical as ministries, departments and agencies have statistical information that needs central storage.

    6. The methods used by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics to disseminate information needs to be improved. Even members of parliament are not with this information. So it was realised that dissemination of information is too slow and restrictive which makes members of the public and members of parliament not to appreciate the information that is collected by UBOS.

    7. The Uganda Bureau of Statistics Board and senior staff line-up are not gender sensitive; only two out of the eight members are women. (Interjections) This one has two.

    8.    There are many vacant positions, 23 in the organisational structure. This is likely to affect organisational output. In addition, the organisation did not have a recruitment plan.

    9. The procurement procedure is quite centralised, user departments do not seem to be fully involved in the process.

Recommendations

    1. Uganda Bureau of Statistics should be provided with enough funds to collect and disseminate data as it is the principle agency responsible for the national statistical systems. 

    2. Special attention should be drawn to large census and surveying which produce indicators on poverty, health, population and agriculture, as these are critical for national development. 

    3. UBOS should improve the circulation and dissemination of its report. 

    4. UBOS should come up with a recruitment plan and fill the vacant positions in its structure. 

    5. UBOS should take into consideration gender when carrying out its recruitment. The appointing authority should also be advised on gender sensitivity when appointing the next board. 

    6. User departments should play a central role in procurement of goods, services and equipments within their domain as they have specialised knowledge. 

Conclusion 

The committee recommends that the following resource be allocated to vote 143 – UBOS, as the total funding for the financial year 2009/10; recurrent expenditure, Shs 20,495,968,000 and development expenditure, Shs 6,313,849,748. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we end with Vote 153, which is the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA). 

Their mandate is very clear. In the last financial year, PPDA had a recurrent expenditure of Shs 3,371,000,000 and development expenditure of Shs 5,970,000,000. The achievements in the financial year are stated in our report; there were about 12 achievements made by PPDA. 

Planned output for the Financial Year 2009/10
 
    1. 68 procurement audits are to be completed. 

    2. 2000 people in local governments and Central Government will be trained and sensitised in the way they procure and manage public assets. 

    3. Compliance checks carried out in 110 procurement audits. 

    4. 30 common specification standards will be issued.

    5. An effective procurement performance measurement system will be developed. 

    6. A register of providers will be put in place. 

    7. Activities and operations of PPDA restored and streamlined; will be in place this financial year. 

Observations

1. 	PPDA is developing a performance measurement system to assist in tracking the performance of Uganda Public Procurement System.

2. 	PPDA is in the process of promoting procurement planning by Procuring Disposal Entities (PDEs), but there are still weaknesses in record keeping and contract management. All accounting officers were requested to prepare and submit their procurement plans for the financial year 2009/10. 

3. 	There is an improvement in the preparation and submission of procurement plans. Some entities, however, did not have approved procurement plans for financial year 2009/10 leading to haphazard procurements. 

4. 	Suppliers who are not pre-qualified are sometimes invited to bid alongside those who are pre-qualified without justifiable reasons. 

5. 	Contracts committee approvals are sometimes not sought at key stages of the procurement and disposal cycle.

6. 	Records keeping is still a problem in all Procuring and Disposing Entities (PDEs)

7. 	The occurrence of the PDEs using direct procurement without justification is still high and sometimes entities do not seek a waiver from PPDA. 

8. 	The requirement to seek the Solicitor General’s approval of contracts exceeding Shs 50 million is cumbersome and slows the process of procurement. 

9. 	There is a problem of contract management in majority of PDEs, both in the central and local governments. 

10. 	A number of PDEs have not implemented the PPDA recommendations after completion of audits and investigations. 

11. 	Bank of Uganda has refused to comply with PPDA claiming that it does not apply to them as an independent body. Efforts by PPDA to seek redress through the minister and the Secretary to the Treasury using section 9 of the PPDA Act have been futile. The Solicitor General has interpreted the law and given direction in favour of PPDA, but there has been no change. Parliament has also pronounced itself on this matter several times.

12. 	Donor funding to PPDA has grossly reduced: European Union, DANIDA and Royal Netherlands Government have stopped funding it. 

13. 	Staffing at PPDA is thin on the ground. They highly rely on consultancies which are quite costly.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, these are the recommendations:

    1. The Minister of Finance should use all available means to ensure that Bank of Uganda complies with the PPDA Act.

    2. Government should set up funding for PPDA as donor funds have dwindled. Failure to do this may mean losing gains made over the years. 

    3. PPDA should consider employing more technical staff to avoid funds spent on consultancies. Regional offices should also be set up to reduce costs associated with movement of staff from the headquarters to those areas.

    4. The establishment of a national measurement system should be fast-tracked to evaluate the Uganda procurement system. 

    5. When accounting officers do not submit procurement plans, they should be punished as provided by the law. 

    6. PDEs that do not adhere to the PPDA Act should be acted upon as a matter of urgency. There is no satisfactory indication that this is being done.

    7. Capacity building should be conducted periodically to increase technical competencies of PDEs, for example, contract management, pre-qualification of supplies etc.

    8. The statutory requirement to seek approval from the Solicitor-General for contracts exceeding Shs 50 million should be reviewed as it slows the process of procurement. This figure could be pushed upwards to cater for inflation.

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the following resources be approved by this august House for Vote 153 - PPDA for the Financial Year 2009/10: recurrent expenditure, Shs 3,351,105,000 and development expenditure, Shs 3,433,000,299. 

This sector is key for the development of our economy. The committee has scrutinised the relevant policy statements comprehensively and made critical recommendations as we have read in this report. I, therefore, urge the House to adopt this report. I thank you, hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Let us hear from the Opposition shadow minister. 

11.54
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Charles Oduman): Rt. Hon. Deputy Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to first thank the committee chairperson and fellow members for the good job they did to scrutinise the policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the related votes under its mandate.

Secondly, as you are aware, the Opposition delivered a response to the Government Budget statement last month. That response covered detailed aspects of the votes analysed by the committee, and made a wide range of observations and recommendations, which we still believe should be very helpful to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For example, it raised the need for the Minister of Finance to refocus on the budget approach and guide the country in setting smart micro economic objectives and policies.

We also raised concerns regarding the national planning approach and the vacuum in the country, and made recommendations to improve the functions.

Further, we highlighted the need to fully fund the Office of the Auditor-General to enable it conduct urgently-needed special audits in the recommended sectors such as road works and industrial parks. 

It also dwells on the matter of local revenue vis-à-vis external borrowing, making clear recommendations towards widening the tax base and restructuring government, thereby liberating and making available, some Shs 3.396 trillion. This can help all those who still live in mud houses.

Madam Speaker, that response also raises concerns over lack of reliable national agriculture and poverty statistics and makes recommendations thereof.

We also dealt with the need to fix loopholes in the procurement process that have been identified as one of the greatest causes of the problems regarding public finance.

Whereas the hon. Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development attempted in another 19-page statement to respond to the Opposition statement, the issues raised by us still remain alive with eyes wide open and staring at government. We advise that the minister of finance provides government with the necessary leadership to deal with those matters for common good.

Based on that, we now wish to limit this response to only a few policy issues that have come out of the sector’s exposition of its policy statement, and which may not have been part of our response to the budget statement.

I will start with encroachment on the functions of other ministries by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The mission of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is to formulate sound economic policies and maximise revenue mobilisation to achieve the most rapid sustainable economic growth and development. We believe that this is a noble task, which should preoccupy the ministry. 

However, it is apparent that the ministry has chosen to engage in activities that should ordinarily be functions of other line ministries. For example, this ministry aided the mechanisation of agriculture in the financial year 2008/2009. It also plans to put in place tractor-hire schemes this financial year. As part of its core outputs, the latest is that the ministry is also responsible for paying agricultural extension workers and the funds are included in its budget.

Our position is that these are functions that should be clearly carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries –(Applause)– and not Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The ministry of finance is also involved in the Presidential Initiative for Bananas. In our view, this is a purely scientific research function for which ministry of finance is not best placed to be involved in. We believe that agricultural research innovations would best be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries where capacity exists.

Despite our previous recommendations, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development continues to soil itself into matters of cooperatives by keeping the SACCOs and their development close to their chests instead of transferring the functions fully to rightful homes, for example, the Department of Cooperative Development in the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry whose functions are clearly spelt in their policy statements.

It also continues to be engaged in the running and operation of both the Energy and Road funds as if these are part of the Consolidated Fund. 

Our view is that these are special funds as provided for in the Constitution and the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Section 9, whose operation should be left to the line ministries. The results include illegal diversions of funds, for example, from the Public Enterprises, Reform and Divestiture Accounts, and the delayed operationalisation of the Road Fund Board.

The ministry of finance has kept the NSSF firmly in its armpits -(Laughter)- yet it does not say anything in its ministerial policy statement about this Fund, nor does the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development do it. It has, therefore, been left in a no-man’s land like a carcass in the forest available to be sniffed at by any beast passing by.

Our belief is that this lacuna is deliberately created with the results being well known to you, honourable members. Therefore, by diverting from the core functions, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has curtailed its capacity to carryout its rightful roles. Many of its core planned activities are falling behind due to over engagement in non-line activities. For example, the ministry is yet to bring the Contingencies Fund Bill, which is reported to be lying in Cabinet for the last two years.

The four-tier regulatory framework, which has been sung about since the Seventh Parliament and finally promised to be here by September 2008, is nowhere to be seen. There are many other very urgent laws that are also still outstanding like the Anti-Money Laundering Bill and the recent Retirement Benefits Authority Bill. There are many questions for oral answers sent to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development from this Parliament, to which the ministry is yet to respond. 

Our position is that the Ministry of Finance must, therefore, decide either to limit itself to its core functions and do them well or perform all other functions of government, and fail to deliver on any of them. (Laughter)

Recommendations

The Ministry of Finance should streamline its operations and mainstream the misplaced non-core activities into the line sector ministries and concentrate efforts on formulating sound economic policies. 

The Shs 3.424 billion included in the Ministry of Finance’s Vote for salaries of agricultural extension workers should be transferred to the agricultural sector under the local government component, Vote 501-850. 

The Shs 17.5 billion for the Presidential Banana Initiative should be moved from the Ministry of Finance Vote 008 to NARO - Vote 142, for research. (Applause) 

Public/Private Partnership Arrangements

The committee has informed you that the ministry plans to put in place a public/private partnership framework as a successor arrangement to the public enterprise reform and divesture regime, whose mandate expires on completion of the divesture of listed public enterprises. However, the transition from PERD to the PPP framework has not been properly conceptualised and concretised. We recommend that:
    i. The ministry should engage in public dialogue to evaluate the performance of the privatisation programme and document lessons learnt for posterity.
    ii. The ministry should draft a Bill for a specific law under which PPP arrangements will be governed. We believe that PPP arrangements should be governed by a specific law rather than leaving them to be loosely administered under the PERD Act, which was specific to listed public enterprises. In this way, Parliament will also be duly engaged in rationalising the proposed PPM arrangements. Madam Speaker, we are aware that there is an administrative arrangement being made to transform from PERD to PPP; we believe that should be brought here and we deal with it as a matter of law. 

Capitalisation Loans and Non-Performing Assets

Madam Speaker, the worst thing to happen in a free economy is a situation where a few firms or people are given free money from public funds. This leads to waste of public funds and kills the competitive spirit, which is the foundation of entrepreneurship. Money is now again lined up for UDB and EADB in the name of capitalisation and also other agricultural credit guarantee schemes. We are concerned that money taken purportedly for capitalisation ends up being diverted and squandered as discovered in the past. 

PAC found out that money earlier sent to UDB in the name of capitalisation ended up in the hands of private individuals and their companies, that is, Phenix Logistics, Tristar Apparel and others - where over Shs 17.5 billion was lost! The references are all there at the end of the document. Two public officials who facilitated this discreet diversion were named and recommended for disciplinary action. To date, the said officials are still in government going about their duties, while more money is now required for further capitalisation. 

The law requires that the decision to capitalise must be backed up by a board resolution. However, no such resolutions have been made rendering the capitalisation proposals illegal, as were the earlier capitalisation instances as cited above. That is exactly how the non-performing assets under the NPART arose, where loans were extended to connected persons and entities. The reported interventions from State House and others are self explanatory, hon. Members. 

Recommendations

    i. The proposed expenditure of Shs 7.0 billion on capitalisation is illegal and suspect and should be removed from the supply to Ministry of Finance - Vote 008; and transferred to the National Agricultural Research Organisation - Vote 142 for the badly needed agricultural research. 
    ii. All expenditure towards NPART is illegal and should be disallowed. NPART must be quickly wound up. Those involved in sustaining this illegality must account for their actions. State House and others involved should be brought to order for unduly interfering in the work of established institutions.
    iii. The Shs 17.5 billion must be recovered from individuals who got money from Ministry of Finance through UDB without authority of this Parliament. The errant officials involved must be punished as recommended.
    iv. We need a dedicated agricultural bank for agricultural development in this country and we shall in this regard take separate action and we will report to this House in due course. 

Conduct of public affairs by Bank of Uganda and its officers 

Madam Speaker, we note with concern the conduct of Bank of Uganda and its officers who are charged with the housing and management of taxpayers’ funds. Allow me to make only two references: 

First, the Bank of Uganda has literally refused to comply with PPDA guidelines and rules as reported by the committee as if it does not spend public funds. The matter has dragged on since July 2003. The Solicitor-General issued an opinion cited in a letter dated 1 June 2006 from the Governor of the Bank of Uganda to the Attorney-General, advising that Bank of Uganda is required to comply with the PPDA. However, in that letter, the governor tries to put aside the advice of the Solicitor General preferring to seek the opinion of the Attorney-General, who has since 1 June 2007 refused to reply. However, according to the PPDA, the Uganda Government Standing Orders section Y-A3 provides that the Attorney-General’s opinion expressed personally or through the Solicitor General is final. 

While the PPDA Act, Section 9 mandates the PS to enforce compliance, he has also kept silent since 13 February 2005 when the matter was referred to his desk. We are, therefore, unable to rule out conspiracy of silence to allow wasteful use of public resources. We cannot guarantee whether there is any value for money from Bank of Uganda procurements as public procurement rules have not been allowed in the Bank and the PPDA cannot conduct an audit there.

Secondly, Bank of Uganda is the official custodian of the Consolidated Fund accounts which should be run in accordance with the Constitution and the Public Finance and Accountability Act. Those funds cannot be withdrawn without audit warrants. However, several times monies have been withdrawn from the accounts without audit warrants, the latest is that Shs 26 billion was withdrawn from Bank of Uganda and spent without audit warrants. In spite of public outcry over this vice, those responsible for the custody and management of the Uganda Consolidated Fund seem to be having a nice time when people are dying of hunger.

Recommendations

    • The Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury should be sanctioned to explain why no action has been taken by him/her to enforce compliance by Bank of Uganda to the PPDA rules.
    • The Minister for Finance and the Secretary to the Treasury must be held responsible for allowing funds to be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund without audit warrants thereby causing financial losses.
    • We recommend that the Auditor-General personally audits the Bank of Uganda rather than outsourcing the private auditors in the interest of the public.

Planned Construction of URA Headquarters

The URA is planning to construct its headquarters and they want money from the NSSF. It is well known that the function of borrowing funds on behalf of the public is constitutionally vested in the Ministry of Finance as we have recommended before. We agree as a matter of policy that government needs to invest in putting up office accommodation as opposed to renting. However, we are sceptical about why URA should specifically want NSSF money.

Recommendations 

    • While the planned construction of URA offices is a noble idea, the issue of NSSF funds at this time should be abandoned.
    • The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be left to source funds from appropriate sources.

National Planning and Statistics

We take great exception in the shortfall in the funding to the NPA amounting to Shs 5.79 billion. In our view, to run a country without national plans is like flying a plane with a non-functioning dash board. You will never know where you are, where you are going or even where you came from as a result you will still find people without food and with jiggers in their feet and fingers. This money must be found to enable NPA fulfil its crucial mandate including the activities under the APRM.

We earlier talked about the need for a comprehensive census of agriculture and other survey in our response. Government must find money to carryout these surveys and censuses in a proper and planned manner. Cases where computers are delivered to the districts and abandoned to dust for two years, without being installed, must be avoided to save taxpayers’ resources.

Recommendation
    • As a matter of standard policy, national planning and statistics must always be fully funded as a matter of special priority.

Conclusion
The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and her constituent entities are extremely well placed to deliver this country to the next generation through proper planning and keeping proper watch over our money.

We believe that the necessary capacity exists in this institution, what we are however not sure about is the freedom, independence and the will to do so. But this Parliament must send a clear message - 

    • That nobody is above the law;
    • That public funds must be respected;
    • That public funds are not the same as personal money; 
    • That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must play its leading role; and
    • That if they don’t, they may be recalled individually to account one day.  

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, one of the issues we deferred last week was the issue of the Road Fund, when we were debating the report on infrastructure, and we said it would be answered today so if you could prepare for it - I am just alerting him.

12.18 
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): I want to make a small comment in support of the funding of the National Planning Authority. I wish to observe that indeed the committee said they should be given additional money and the response from the Opposition equally supports this view and indeed we realised that a shortfall of Shs 3.3 billion, as reflected on page 18, paragraph 9 of the report, is to be taken seriously.

Fortunately, I also wish to observe that the committee recommended that the money intended for the Custodian Board be reduced from Shs 5 billion to Shs 2.0 billion. That is on page 14 paragraph 16. That makes it interesting in a sense that the Shs 3.0 billion to be saved from the Custodian Board should be allocated to the National Planning Authority and specifically to the African Peer Review Mechanism, which is monitoring the plan of action as promised by His Excellency, the President when he was in Sharm El Sheikh in Egypt. Therefore, I propose that money to be saved from the custodian board be allocated to the National Planning Authority.
 
12.20
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also thank the committee for the report; but I want this House to applaud the Shadow Minister for Finance -(Applause)- for raising the issues that we have been talking about. 

This country belongs to all of us. The Ministry of Finance, this arrogance that you have - a good example is here: whenever we have ministries considering the budget we have a permanent secretary and all the important heads of departments there. Madam Speaker, look behind you; there is no senior person from the Ministry of Finance. There are just officers there -(Interjections)- where is he? I would expect the director of budget and the permanent secretary to be there. Really, let us call a spade a spade. 

Ministry of Finance, you have been allocating a lot of money. You have a big empire and yet you are starving the ministries that actually render services to this country. Take an example of the industrial parks. Members, the industrial parks are air supply again. A lot of money is allocated for industrial parks but ask yourselves, “Where are they?” There is one in Mbarara but it is a white elephant! It is not being utilised. We would rather have one industrial park in Namanve - look at it, and if it is effective, we move on. Why do you have to allocate Shs 55 billion for industrial parks? We thought it should be diverted to either Ministry of Health or Ministry of Education and many other things. We must reallocate it.

And then, there is no mention of the Road Fund in this report of theirs yet we all know that the Road Fund is now under their mandate. I am happy that the shadow minister has mentioned it. Mr Minister, take note that this country is concerned about our roads. The Road Fund that falls under your mandate - road funds in the East African countries are funds that are supposed to cater for both routine and periodic maintenance but for them they have opted to give us Shs 116 billion. So, I think Ministry of Finance should wake up to this call so that you can let the money be there for everybody to see. 

You also mentioned that you do not know the workings of the industrial parks and other things. If the committee itself is not sure of what is happening in Ministry of Finance, tell me, what are you there for? For us we cannot sit with you; you are representing the whole Parliament in that committee but you do not know much about the workings of the ministry. You have left so many things hanging in this report saying you do not know. Who knows about this sector? 

This sector of finance tends to control the whole economy. That is why our economy is really stuck; it is because of Ministry of Finance. Why don’t we give this money to all the relevant home sectors so that they can be able to effectively handle them? You have too much on your plate and that is why you are not letting this economy grow as fast as it would have grown.

Madam Speaker, I beg that the Ministry of Finance should not hold us hostage. They should not keep too much money to themselves. Look at the budget itself. What do they do? They do not monitor but they have first class vehicles. The bosses are up there. Look at their offices. They repair offices everyday. You look up there. They are always painting. Why don’t they consider other ministries as important? Look at the President’ Office. I am happy that the Vice-President is here. Look at his offices –(Laughter)- enter his office and see. He is here. He hardly comes here because the offices are not good. But you enter Ministry of Finance one of these days; they have executive offices that are air conditioned and that are being renovated everyday. Kindly, this is a wake up call to Ministry of Finance: consider other ministries to be as important as you are.

I am happy that hon. Omach is here. Hon. Omach, I commend you for being here to track the budget. But this time we want a real budget delivering goods to end users, our people, so that we can be able to get votes for this country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, on the question of the offices you have used a distant example. Parliament requires a new chamber but we do not have money. Anyway, let us hear from hon. Nsubuga and then Mulumba.

12.26
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the shadow minister for the policy alternatives. I want to continue from where hon. Byanyima has just ended. When you turn to page 11, bullet 11, you realise that the committee has ably advised us that even in the policy statement, there is little said about the Uganda Investment Authority; and this is not the first time. Uganda Investment Authority is supposed to lay on the Table, through the Ministry of Finance, annual reports, but to date none has been laid on the Table and this Parliament continues allocating money.

I always pass Namanve but apart from seeing the dust being added to the atmosphere, very little is being done. So, I really want to urge the committee - because if the committee cannot help Parliament, what are we going to do! We are going to appropriate the second day yet even the committee is not satisfied. There is need to increase the fund for Parliament regarding monitoring because if we have the funds this committee would have been there yesterday to really ascertain. 

On the issue of non -(Interruption)   

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way. The honourable member has stated that whenever he passes Namanve, other than seeing dust being added to the atmosphere - I would like to know how the roads could be constructed in Namanve without moving the earth, raising the dust, excavating and removing unnecessary earth. (Laughter) 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, the Hon. Minister knows what I meant because if you consider the amount of funds allocated for the last three years and the work done, even a P7 child can really tell that nothing has been done.

We were supposed to have received the Bill for non-performing assets because this expired in October 2007 but to date, they are still operating. Under what law are they operating? 

The same applies to tier 4 regulations to regulate the SACCOs. My colleague hon. Omach came to this Parliament two years ago and said that within six months, he would have been put on the committee to draft the regulations and that we shall be having the tier 4 regulations. But to date what do we have? 

Lastly is the Presidential Initiative on Banana Development. On page 12, even the committee has ably told us that they do not know whether the partnership is going to be a public/private partnership. Madam Speaker, if you recall, this project began under NPA and NPA was a conduit. Now it was transferred and is under the President’s Office. I do not see the reason why the entire project does not go to the President’s Office and we debate it from there because the committee, which is reporting about it, has scanty information or nothing on it. We believe the President can incubate industries but when an industry reaches maturity, it must be transferred to the relevant sector. There is no problem. But if the committee is going to report yet they have nothing, the Shs 5 billion, which is going to be appropriated - we really need value for money for some of these projects rather than just appropriating.

My last concern is about PPDA. The committee on page 37 was saying that we should increase the threshold for seeking approval. (Member timed out_)

12.33
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish first of all to thank the committee for the good work done. Notwithstanding that, I have a number of issues for which I am seeking clarification. 

When it comes to the issue of the strategic intervention policy, I would like the ministry to clearly tell us how they choose who to strategically help or not. We have realised that the ministry has helped Basajjabalaba, Quality Chemicals, Tri-Star, but there is one thing in common with all those ventures - the government has lost money; public funds have been swindled. We wish the ministry would come up with a clear strategic intervention policy. 

I also want to talk about URA. On page 28 of the report, NSSF money is needed to do some work for URA, but NSSF funds have been a subject of abuse year-in year-out. I think URA should get money from elsewhere and not NSSF.

I want clarification on the issue of the vehicle registration scam. There was a lot of scam. People dubiously registered vehicles, government lost funds and it was with the connivance of URA management. They raised hell, they confiscated people’s vehicles and somehow, it is now dying quietly. Spear Motors, led by Wavamuno, is suing URA because it is saying the scam emanated from URA and URA is quiet. The chairperson of the committee said there is going to be a shortfall but if you are going to be losing money just like that - so many vehicles were registered dubiously without government getting money, what happened? How did they resolve it? I think if there is an issue like that, we need a logical conclusion to it. 

On the issue of industrial parks; these were supposed to be regionalised. Last year, Iganga was supposed to be one of the beneficiaries of industrial parks but nothing has been done. We want to find out what exactly is happening or we are going to be waiting year in year out. I thank you.

12.35
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. However, I want to add my voice to hon. Nathan Byanyima’s and thank the Opposition for their report. Really, if we followed this, I think our country would go a long way in helping us. This is because Uganda belongs to all of us. You do not have to be in the Opposition, you do not have to be in the ruling party, to see issues pertaining to our country. And if we must move forward, we should start saying the truth. We should start seeing things positively and when you talk positive things, people should not think that you are in the Opposition or you want to “kill” a programme. So, I want to applaud hon. Okello Oduman for this good report.

I also want to comment on the Ministry of Finance. Really, monitoring of government programmes is still lacking. You look at the way they are sending money to areas, to districts, to projects - monitoring of these projects is not done properly! And you find that by the time they monitor a programme like a road, the road has already been washed away. Maybe they monitor after two years! Now what are you monitoring? What have you supervised? 

When you look at many of these loans, which this country is getting, so much money is lying somewhere, including money for roads. Yet for so many years, those roads have not taken off. Last year we passed so much money in loans, but nothing has taken off. I want to give an example of the road to Bundibugyo. We passed the money last year, we have passed it this year and we are going to pass it another year. So, what is -  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the Minister of Works.

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable member for accepting my information. When I was a backbencher, I used to think that things are simple and very straight forward. I want to inform the honourable member that whenever a loan is passed here, as a condition, as the law requires, there is another process that takes place to negotiate the channelling agreement with those banks. I want to inform my fellow colleagues that for Bundibugyo road, the channelling agreement negotiations have just taken place, I think, two weeks ago. I want this to be noted so that every Member knows that whenever we pass a loan, it is not immediately effected; there is another process to go through. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mama, for yielding the Floor. You have spoken very well minister but can you clarify on the Northern Bypass, where we secured money ten years ago. It is just 21 kilometres but up to now some people are still working on the road. What is going on in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are taking up hon. Alisemera’s time. We handled the report on Works and you were not here. Please, proceed. 

MS ALISEMERA: Honourable, we shall talk but I still want to insist that we are taking too long to do this work. Ministry of Finance, I want you to start looking at some of the projects. I visited Masindi District last Friday and I was shown structures called CHOGM banks. There are such shelters all over the place. CHOGM is over so how are these ones going to be completed? What are they for? The district cannot even complete these shells. I wish the Committee on National Economy could visit those areas. We are very wasteful; we need to work for our people. We are Ugandans. We must make sure that we help our people. Thank you. 

12.41
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee for the good work done in the report. I have two issues.

I was excited by the plans of the Ministry of Finance to revive the tractor hire service because poor technology has been one of the hindrances to improving agriculture. I would like to be educated on how this scheme will be operated. Uganda has operated a tractor hire service scheme before but by then there was a lot of infrastructure which was put in place for it. For example, there were regional workshops; and they had established a special college in Busitema to train manpower to handle the tractors. But right now it has been converted into a university. 

So, I would like the ministry to throw more light on how this will be operated in the absence of such systems; because it was even backed by what we would call a bush clearing unit so that the tractors would be able to operate. How will this operate, hon. Minister?

Secondly, on the Road Fund, we have been informed that the Road Fund is in place but will not be operationalised until January. Lucky enough, a number of our roads have been taken over by the central government and at this juncture I want to thank the Members of the Finance Committee who recently went to Buhweju to visit the area. They had it rough on the road from Bushenyi to Buhweju. We were moving at a speed of about 10 kilometres per hour. That road has been taken over by the central government but right now that road is in bad shape. And now that the funds are not going to be operationalised until January, what will happen to these roads? Can there be a mechanism of making sure that these funds are operationalised as soon as possible so that these areas are passable? 

Finally, Uganda Revenue Authority; I believe that the core function of Uganda Revenue Authority is to collect revenue. I have seen banks operating because the core function of a bank is not owning capital; banks have been running in rented places. In the absence of funds, must we go an extra mile to borrow money at exorbitant rates to finance the headquarters of URA whose function is basically to collect revenue and yet revenue can be collected from wherever they are as long as the ministry rents them office space? 

I feel that if funds are not there now, we can plan gradually but not to borrow as if this unit cannot function without a headquarters. I thank you.

12.45
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise an issue that cuts across the Ministry of Finance regarding the way money is disbursed to ministries and departments of government.

Last night we were on Vision Voice radio and a policeman called in stating his names; I thought this was dangerous for him but he spoke out. He said that he has been in the force for a long time but he does not receive a salary. This actually goes back to public service. There are teachers, and there are nurses under Ministry of Health, Internal Affairs and Education and Sports where people get payslips but never receive their salaries. At the end of the day they get salary arrears but the money that has been paid to someone for years in the end is not accounted for. The Auditor-General does not query the money that has been going onto somebody else’s account and yet they ask for the money, pay arrears and the money that had been disbursed before is never queried. 

I also want to agree with hon. Okello Oduman that the Ministry of Finance has got its hand in every pie and this is quite a crisis, but a matter we can discuss as Parliament for further scrutiny and recommendations. 

I want to lay on the Table a pay slip for further scrutiny by Parliament and follow-up of a teacher in Kabarole District, Eribankya Kateba John, who has been getting pay slips since last year, but has never found a coin on his account for a very long time -(Interruption)- this is an original pay slip, but I will keep the rest so that I can follow it up. The vote number is 153 Kabarole and the name is Eribankya Kateba John - county 91 and the sub-county is, I think, the same number. His gross pay is Shs 200,000. The slip is dated 29 May 2009. I think this is the latest he could give me – he has been submitting to so many places waiting to be paid. 

I would like to lay this on the Table so that we can make a follow-up of so many people who have been recruited by the government but they have not been paid. Others have been recruited and put on the payroll but they never get their money. 

12.48
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you. I would also like to thank the committee for the well elaborated report. I would like to mainly talk about the Uganda Revenue Authority and commend them for collecting money for us. 

They are working very hard and every year the money increases except for this credit crunch which has affected everybody. But I would like to comment on the method of collecting revenue from the various parts. 

It is true that naturally, people do not like to pay taxes, but at the same time, we need the money. In the process of collecting the revenue, people are hurt – the URA officials use violent methods to collect the taxes and in the end, people die. I would like to quote an example in Koboko where Uganda Revenue Authority officials killed two people and up to now, their families have not been compensated. May I find out from the Ministry of Finance as to when these families will be compensated because the relatives are becoming very impatient and they are asking us about what is happening?   

I am sure the Uganda Revenue Authority cannot get money to give directly - it is through the Ministry of Finance. I would really like this exercise to be expedited, otherwise people are becoming desperate and they are not happy.

I would also want to ask about why the Uganda Revenue Authority is giving a hard time to local government councils. You will find that local governments collect revenue like Income Tax; a certain tax for business. The money is remitted to URA but they do not provide receipts and in the end, when the auditors come, they will find that money has not been remitted. 

Actually, the Local Government Accounts Committee was in Jinja and we saw how the accounts officers were suffering to explain. I would really like to ask the revenue authority to provide the receipts immediately so that the books of the local governments can be smart.

I would also like to thank UBOS for the work well done. Definitely, we need statistics if we have to plan very well. Therefore, they should be well facilitated to do their work.

12.52
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for its very good report and to congratulate the Shadow Minister of Finance for a report that was spot on. 

My comments are mainly on the PPDA. The main mandate of PPDA is to regulate public procurement at both central and local government level by setting standards and monitoring compliance to ensure value for money. The committee brings out issues in its observations which are of my concern. 

Issue number one is that the suppliers who are not pre-qualified are still being invited alongside those pre-qualified suppliers. 

The second issue is that the contracts committee’s approvals are sometimes not sought at key stages of procurement. 

The third issue is that the rate of involvement of the procuring and dispensing entities in direct procurement is still very high.
 
These anomalies will create loopholes for embezzlement and at times these procuring entities collude with suppliers and this leads to supply of air. This is something that should be addressed expeditiously so that whoever is carrying out procurement follows the procurement law. 

Something else that bothers me is the issue of Bank of Uganda refusing to comply with the PPDA Act. The report states that in spite of pronouncements by Parliament and the Solicitor-General, Bank of Uganda is still adamant. My concern here is, is Bank of Uganda above the law, and if so, in whose interest is it operating?

On page 33, the committee notes that communication and information dissemination by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics leaves a lot to be desired, to the extent that even Members of Parliament are not informed on what is going on. I wonder: if Members of Parliament who are the representatives of the people are not informed; who is the bureau of statistics informing? This means that there is actually information breakdown and that is a very serious issue that must be addressed. 

Similarly, we have heard that while the unemployment issue is biting in the public, the bureau of statistics still has 23 vacant positions in its organisation. To make matters worse, it is not gender sensitive. Only two out of eight of the senior staff members are women. This concerns me very much. I recommend that the bureau of statistics addresses the issue of recruitment and more so takes into regard the issue of gender.

My other concern is on pension arrears. The committee notes that the stock of pension arrears is still colossal to the tune of Shs 130 billion –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Finance, there is an area I am interested in - the Shs 3.4 billion for the extension workers, which is in your ministry. I will give you an example. When I was inspecting the NAADS programmes in my district, I found out that the sub-county of Namwendwa, which has nine parishes, was sharing a veterinary officer with the sub-county of Bulopa. That sub-county also does not have a CDO. You need to explain why that money has not gone and why those sub-counties do not have the full compliment. You will have to explain that later.

Hon. Members, I want to address the Opposition. The price you pay for sitting there is that you should surrender your time to other Members; you are competing with the back benchers. You have had an opportunity and sometimes you talk for 40 minutes or even an hour. Leave the back benchers to speak first, please. You can see on this side that the ministers are seated. Let me give the opportunity to the back benchers because you have your own time.

12.59
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start with the issue of NSSF. I am terribly disappointed with the committee that we are sitting today when there is a national crisis in the docket being supervised by Finance, and that is NSSF, and the committee does not mention a thing to do with it.

We need reform in NSSF. When the Nsimbe project was brought to this Floor in the last Parliament, we questioned under what authority and legal framework NSSF was being transferred from Gender to Finance. It was done haphazardly that purportedly Ministry of Finance would do a better job. I want to ask this Parliament to assess whether or not Finance has done a better job than Ministry of Gender where NSSF was transferred from in terms of saving the funds of the workers of this country.

It is a shame that when NSSF got a saga, Bakoko Bakoru who was a minister then, was issued with an arrest warrant, but now Jamwa, Kagonyera and Suruma who have glaring evidence against them are not even questioned by Police on what happened with NSSF under their care. Can you explain why Bakoko is hiding from an arrest warrant in USA while at the moment Police cannot question Suruma, Omach, Kagonyera or Jamwa?

This is not a joking matter. I think we need an overhaul of the NSSF. We need to open the sector up to privatisation and let workers choose where to put their hard-earned money. Let the workers make a choice. We need total reform to disband the current structures and put new ones. We need that reform and I want the committee to take this seriously. I want the minister to tell us what they are going to do to tackle the current problems in NSSF, and also in regard to the court award. You need to tell us.

My second issue is on page 11, where our senior Vice-President has been mentioned, as well as State House, under NPART. We have not been told in this Parliament what value this country got out of the sale of properties under NPART. Can the committee tell us how much money we have earned out of the properties sold under NPART? 

On page 11, you go ahead to tell us that ten NPART debtors with debts worth Shs 10.275 billion encountered intervention from State House, the Vice-President, and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, but you fall short of telling us what to do with these people who do not pay the debts, and yet they are seated in this House. What do we do with them? These are the monies which should go to the Consolidated Fund. I have seen the Vice-President seated there and you have not told me what we should do with it as Parliament.  

What has happened with State House, the Vice-President and Ministry in respect to this NPART? We need to investigate the sale of all the properties under NPART because we are not even sure how much money has been deposited and what the total debt is as of now –(Member timed out_)

1.10
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report but above all, the shadow minister. I think he has presented a better alternative. The committee has glossed over a number of issues, which the shadow minister has brought out more convincingly and I will not go into the specific issues that he raised apart from advising the minister to take the shadow minister’s paper very seriously.

On page 14 of the committee’s report, the committee made a recommendation that a decision should be taken on Entebbe International Airport without Parliament being committed. I was in this House when that issue was raised on whether the airport was on sale or not. A directive was made that a statement on the sale of this airport be made.

I am now learning that there is Dorsal Infrastructure Development Limited which is engaged in the expansion of Entebbe Airport to international standards. I have also learnt that the Civil Aviation Authority has leased out land to this same Dorsal to construct a base to host the UN Mission to Darfur. 

I did raise, sometime last week, our concern as Teso Parliamentary Group, because it came up in our meeting with his Excellency the President when he gave assurance –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to my honourable colleague, I did not want to interrupt you, but I have been compelled to do so. A few weeks ago when the Committee of Infrastructure was scrutinising our policy statement, my minister brought the land title of CAA to the committee and he showed it to all Members of Parliament that no lease of even one inch of the land of CAA has taken place. The land title was intact and no lease of land to the UN has taken place. He went ahead to tell this committee that there is no Dorsal engaging in the expansion of Entebbe Airport even if you went on the ground.

Therefore, is it in order for a whole hon. Member of Parliament to deceive this House and the public that Dorsal is engaging in expansion of Entebbe Airport and that CAA has leased out land to the UN? Is it in order to deceive without facts? Can he substantiate his statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, while you were away, a Memorandum of Understanding was laid on the Table of this House relating to the affairs of that airport and we are still awaiting a statement from your minister, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance. It was laid here. (Laughter)

MR EKEMU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that ruling. You can all see that the honourable minister is not abreast with what was happening in the House. But the concerns I am raising are serious. There is Dorsal and I am still confused. I want that clarification as much as the minister himself is confused because he has not understood what was in the House two weeks ago.

I am also concerned about the Presidential Initiative on Bananas. I want to concur with the committee that the public-private partnership that is being proposed be adopted. My concern on this presidential initiative is that if this money cannot be re-allocated to the relevant research agency, why doesn’t this initiative extend to millet and cassava growers as well? I am urging that re-allocation be done.

On the industrial park, I am also aware that Soroti was one of the beneficiaries among the 13 or so municipalities. But as observed by an honourable member on the other side, there is no sign of murram or dust or any activity in the industrial park of Soroti. I know that out of all the six industrial parks, Soroti is now second to the Namanve Industrial Park in having met the requirements for the park, and yet there is no sign of work there. I would like to understand why that is so.

On the issue of violation of the Audit Act, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the first culprit. You are involved in double budgeting - double payments as reported by the Auditor-General. In fact, the Auditor-General carried out a special audit for the last four years and I expected that to have come up here -(Member timed out_)

1.12
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, hon. Oduman has asked a very pregnant question that I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should go back and think about. The question is; do you have the independence and the will to deliver this country to the next generation through proper planning and keeping proper watch over our money? Two, are you willing to shade off excess baggage and allow other ministries to perform their roles?

Last week when we were considering the policy statement from Gender, I did ask, where the home of NSSF is. One minister jumped up and told this House that, “The NSSF has been transferred to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development”. Another one stood up immediately and said “No, it is still under the Ministry of Gender”. Where is the home of NSSF? Does the theory of the leaf and the fly in the tea still apply? That if a fly falls in your tea, you pour it, and if a leaf falls in the same tea, you just remove the leave and continue drinking the tea? Is that the theory we are using to run NSSF. If it is Bakoko Bakoru, arrest her. But if they are other people, just ignore –(Interjections)– why is Kagonyera still Chancellor of Makerere University amidst all this confusion?

I want to make a few comments on Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor-General. I want to appreciate the work that has been carried out by the Office of the Auditor-General. They have cleared a lot of backlog, but we still have a lot of challenges. One of them has been highlighted in the report of the committee. Under observations four and five, this committee has noted that parliamentary reports on the Auditor-General reports have been laid before the House, but have not been debated.

Corruption is the biggest leprosy we have in this country. I believe the reports of the Office of the Auditor-General will help us to identify the linkages in the utilisation of public funds, and also send messages to the corrupt to keep their hands off public funds.  

But now the problem is coming to our doorsteps; we produce reports and we do not debate them. Therefore, we do not take any decisions even if the Auditor-General has identified a big linkage. What is the problem? I thought Parliament was a very serious institution? 

The other big challenges we have are the Godfathers in our country. Let me give an example. The District Public Accounts Committee of Budaka identified that somebody had misappropriated Shs 16 million. It was paid on road works which were not complete. The district PAC decided to interdict the officer but then there was a letter written from the Ministry of Public Service to reinstate the officer and also raise his scale. 

How are we going to fight corruption in this country when we have God-parents who know the law but still do their underground work and ignore the other institutions? (Member timed out_)

1.17
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by asking these questions. I know we have very many ministers in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; they are about five. I do not know whether it is the politicians supervising the technocrats or the technocrats supervising the politicians. There is a lot of confusion in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Unlike other ministries where the politicians are in charge, in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it looks like the technocrats are in charge. Therefore, they supervise the politicians. In other ministries, things are different.

The second issue is about the National Planning Authority. I think this Parliament must think beyond this. National Planning Authority needs greater autonomy; how do you plan when you are under somebody’s armpits? They are under the armpits of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. And I think this autonomy can only be pushed for by this House and that is when we will see what we call planning. Therefore, Ministry of Finance must only handle issues of finance. 

The issue of fusing planning with finance is also another total confusion. I think that is why there is a big problem in that ministry. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must really be left alone to handle matters of finance only. We must have planning established under the National Planning Authority. When you fuse finance with treasury, it again compounds into a problem. That is why you see some people’s titles read, “The Secretary” and also, “Secretary to the Treasury” and so on. I think treasury should also be separated from Ministry of Finance to create a check and balance. You cannot be in charge of finance and at the same time in charge of the treasury. Until we arrive at that stage of clear demarcation and separation of these roles, we are going to continue having this quagmire in that ministry.

Let me say something about Bank of Uganda. I think some people have a false impression that they live on Mars and so they are not part of the state agency. Also, some of these state institutions have a false belief that they are above Parliament and so completely autonomous. They forget that the law that established them was passed by Parliament.

As Parliament, we have a big problem with the Ministry of Finance. My committee, for example, oversees Bank of Uganda. But when I wrote to the Governor, Bank of Uganda, who is the accounting officer, to submit matters concerning accountability, he said thus: “Even the other meeting where you invited all the accounting officers, I attended as a matter of courtesy. It was not an obligation for me to attend that meeting because I am not answerable to Parliament at all.” He has also always told Members of Parliament that they should leave him alone. This mentality must be checked because when it comes to accountability, there is no way Bank of Uganda can claim to be autonomous. That is why they are audited by the Auditor-General, who is an officer of Parliament, irrespective of whether he does it directly or indirectly. I support the recommendation of the committee. The Bank of Uganda Governor must be brought to order.

There was something on the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. It is good to have a government body doing work for Government. But of what usefulness would it be - there is a lot of data being generated by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, but how much of it is used by government bodies? I can hear some of my colleagues complaining that Uganda Bureau of Statistics does not give data to members of parliament. At least –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issue raised by the committee and hon. Malinga on the failure to debate the reports of the Public Accounts Committee and that of local governments is a serious indictment on this institution. We need to put in more effort. Really, when we finish this budget, we should bring up two of those reports before we handle the Statutory Bills from the Ministry of Finance. This will let the country know they are doing some work.

1.23
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasiro County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I wish the Vice President was still around, because I wanted to ask him to respond to the issues I am going to raise. Anyway, I hope there is someone taking charge. 

I am talking about attendance of parliamentary proceedings during the Budget Session by the Cabinet ministers, and especially the Minister of Finance. It is disheartening that the ministers of finance have decided to leave hon. Omach alone – I really pity him – yet we know that there are about six ministers in that ministry. Right, I can see hon. Chekamondo, but as people who have regularly attended proceedings, we know which minister from Finance has been labouring to answer questions in the House.

I shared some information with hon. Omach about Kenya and I recall telling him that in Kenya, the Minister of Finance, on the day he/she is appointed, he/she is told that the Minister of Finance of Kenya is not entitled to leave at all. Actually, it is more specific that during the budgeting process, no minister of finance is allowed to travel out of the country or even to absent him/herself. That is the issue that I want the Vice-President to respond to, but maybe, to also take this message to the appointing authority. It is very important to have all the ministers here. There are issues of investment, microfinance, privatisation, treasury – hon. Omach cannot be an all-round person. He has a specific portfolio. He could have knowledge on about 50 or 60 per cent of the information required – I really pity him though he has done his best in the circumstances. I thank you, hon. Omach.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, yesterday I mentioned this at the close of business in the evening. In the past, we used to have an embargo on traveling during the Budget Session. I just see letters of ministers telling me they have gone out of the country – they do not even inform me in advance. Then members of my committees are also away with chairpersons disappearing. I do not know – 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, with due respect, that is what it should be but when even the Speaker of this Parliament carries with him ten Members of Parliament at the time when we are debating the Budget, for some business in America, who do we value? Let us start from here. The Speaker himself had to abandon this House –(Laughter)- with Members, including a chairperson of a committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I am also complaining about.

MR BYANYIMA: Even the Leader of the Opposition –(Laughter)– together with the Chief Whip of the Opposition went away.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think you can see the gravity of the matter. I was discussing this issue with the acting Opposition Chief Whip concerning the absence of the Leader of the Opposition and Opposition Chief Whip during this critical moment. All of us must take this seriously. [Hon. Member: “Motion.”] I wonder which motion you are talking about - the motion to ask the Speaker to come back or what? (Laughter) 

You know that we owe a lot to this country; we must be very serious as Cabinet, as Opposition and as chairpersons especially during this Budget season. Madam Speaker, I had expected some very serious issues among those raised by the Shadow Minister for Finance who has done quite very well, to be addressed. 

In 2006, the Government of Uganda entered into shareholding with Victoria International Airways Ltd to establish a new airline to replace Uganda Airlines. To-date, despite the Government of Uganda paying US $250,000 to this company that was supposed to start operations on 1 November 2006, nothing has taken place. Where is the airline? Can the Minister of Finance tell us where the airline is or if they have refunded this money?

I have a document here to that effect from the then Minister of Finance, Dr Ezra Suruma, and I would like to lay this on the Table so that the Minister of Finance can explain to Parliament what has happened to this airline and what has happened to this money. His letter is dated 4 August 2006 from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Managing Director, Civil Aviation Authority: 

“Government shareholding in Victoria International Airways Limited (VIA Uganda) 
I refer to the letter by the Solicitor-General, reference no. ADM 11/158/01, dated 25 July 2006 on the above subject. The above letter was a response to my request regarding the payment for the investment by the Government of Uganda in Victoria International Airlines Limited (VIA Uganda). 

I wish to forward to you the Standard Chartered Bank cheque, No. 10052 dated 21 July 2006 for US $250,000 issued in the names of Victoria International Airways Ltd on the same subject.” 

It is signed by Dr Ezra Suruma, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I also have a copy of that cheque here. The shareholders of that company are Intercorp Holding AG of Switzerland, Government of the Republic of Uganda, City Square Trading 678 (Pty) Ltd of South Africa, Praflex Global Ltd of Switzerland and Decklan. 

Madam Speaker, during the meeting held on Wednesday 4 October 2006, VIA Uganda updated CAA as follows: final arrangements have been made to secure the balance of US $108,804 planned to commence operations on 1 November 2006 on the routes of Entebbe-Nairobi-Mombasa, Entebbe-Juba, and Entebbe-Johannesburg via Lusaka. To date, it is a shame to this country and to the Ministry of Finance that we leave money to go just like that. It is four years and we have not seen any airline in this country operating on those routes. What happened? Can they tell us where this money is?

A lot has been said about NSSF and NPA. These are serious issues and we have seen what happened. I had expected the committee of Parliament to take a strong stand on this. I expected them to either throw out the Minister of Finance during this budget time until we get the Bill for the transfer of NSSF, or to transfer NPA to establish an autonomous body. But now that we are discussing this Budget, I want to ask Parliament that other than lamenting all the time in this House – we have seen how workers are losing their money – let us stand over any loan after this Budget until we see the issue of NSSF sorted out. 

The issue of NPA –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members of the Shadow Cabinet, you are competing with your colleagues in the committees. I think it is not fair. Let me finish with them and if there are any vacancies, I will come here.  

1.33
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, let me thank the committee chair, and I want to express special appreciation to the Shadow Minister for Finance over simplifying the report, which makes it very clear for even a lay person who is not an economist to understand the problems in the Ministry of Finance. 

For a long time we have suspected that this ministry is a super ministry. There was no clear evidence but today, we have really been treated to quantitative understanding that it is what it is suspected to be. First of all, the ministry mission is very clear. Its work is to formulate sound economic policies, maximise revenue mobilisation and ensure efficient allocation and accountability of public resources. That is its mission and the key mandate, but if you look at what has been enumerated as activities that were undertaken and which the ministry plans to continue with, I will give only two or three examples and explain clearly why this ministry has overshadowed all other ministries. 

On the issue of tractor hire services, hon. Deus Bikwasizehi explained what is required for an effective implementation of the programme but he left it hanging at original level. In the past, tractor hire services used to be established further down at district level through district farm institutes, which had the department of agricultural mechanisation. When we challenged the officials from the Ministry of Finance on whether or not they knew the importance of agriculture in our economy, they did not understand and they did not see the value of keeping more resources invested in the Ministry of Agriculture, and here we are seeing them sitting on the key functions of agriculture like tractor hire services. I do not know whether they have prepared themselves and the institutions which are meant to service the tractor hire services.

On the question of the banana initiative, I can state clearly that there is an officer in the President’s Office, an individual who has a personal friend who has been serving in the Faculty of Food Science and Technology, who is very interested in public funds. For us in the Seventh Parliament, when this lady came demanding for funds from PMA under non-sectoral conditional grants, we chased her away. She wanted Shs 1.9 billion and we literally chased her away from the committee. They encroached on the budget after it was approved. That Shs 1.5 billion was given to them in the Seventh Parliament and the budget continued being revised upwards. 

This initiative is supposed to have established a factory but I am surprised that up to now they are still demanding for Shs 5 billion to put up a factory for banana value addition in Bushenyi. This is a scientist, and as hon. Oduman recommended, the initiative was basically supposed to be a research initiative at Kawanda -(Interruption) 

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, my colleague. I would like to inform the House that the same was budgeted for under the Ministry of Education with exactly the same amount. So, we need some clarification -(Interjections)– yes! I sit on the Committee of Social Services and it is budgeted for under the Ministry of Education. So -(Interjections)- we just need to know what is happening. 

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker that is additional information. There is a strong possibility that under strategic interventions for export, a lot of money was spent on the banana research by this same lady. So, I call upon the committee to take special interest and investigate what it is that has attracted a lot of money into this banana initiative in Bushenyi.
 
Number two -(Member timed out_)

1.39
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I have only two areas to comment on. Before I do that, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting the report and the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the down-to-earth explanation of the ministry functions. 

I would like to comment on the National Planning Authority. One thing, which I think the NRM Government has downplayed, is planning, and I think that has been a fatal mistake. Planning for a country is fundamental in development. The National Planning Authority has been sidelined for a long time and I think we are now seeing the consequences of this sidelining. Planning without observation or without including human rights elements is also fatal, and I think this has been overlooked by the government. I hope that from now onwards, government will include all elements of human rights in its development planning.

Secondly, I would like to request for an explanation; NPART expired in 2007 and we are being told by the committee that there are 333 properties which are still under that plan. These cannot be disposed of because of the expiry of NPART, but we are being told that the Bill to wind up the activities of NPART has been with the Cabinet for two years. Now, what are we doing? Are we serious in what we are doing? Money is actually lying in these 333 properties which cannot be disposed of. I think the honourable minister will have the opportunity to enlighten us on what has happened. 

Last but not least, the Shadow Minister has pointed out a lot of loopholes which they are saying this Parliament should follow up. They should not just be left hanging; if these are followed up I think we will have better planning in future. Thank you very much.

1.42
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and of course my Shadow Minister of Finance. Now I have no doubt whatsoever that should things happen the way we want them to happen, we have a very efficient minister.

I want to talk about three areas. The first one is pension. I note here that the pension arrears are Shs 130 billion and yet we have provided for Shs 12 billion for the current pension arrears for this year. We are being very unfair to a group of people who have spent all their lives working for this country. I do not know how my colleagues handle it but every time I go home, I am encountered by these old people. Last Sunday I had a very embarrassing episode. I woke up and found a group of 25 very old men in my compound. I asked them what the problem was and they said they were representing 80 other people who had not received their pension for the last four years. 

Every year we talk about this money and I had hoped that this time the committee would come out with a recommendation that every year, to clear these arrears, a good sum of money be put aside in the budget and that government should own up to it. Begging government to do something about these arrears is not going to take us anywhere. 

We have been talking about these pension arrears, as far as I am concerned since we were in the Sixth Parliament, but nothing is happening. Honourable members, chairperson and ministers, please do something. One of these people who came to see me said, “My son, if you do not straighten up this matter, what is happening to us will one day happen to you”, and I felt very small. Please, let us do something. We cannot be seen to be subjecting these people to misery.   

Secondly, National Planning Authority; for 23 years with the NRM Government in power, no development plan has been seen by this country. I find this deliberate because without a development plan, you give avenue to patronage. What happens is that anytime groups of people want a road in their district, they will run to the President. If something happens that needs to be done, it is still the President they run to. 

At least I was old enough during the first UPC government; there were five-year development plans and you would know that next year, such and such a thing would happen in such and such a district; and it would happen. I think we have had four boards under the National Planning Authority. The first one -(Dr Baryomunsi rose_)- I hope I will be given more time. Chris, you will tell that to me later. 

I remember that the first board was headed by an old man from western Uganda. He was frustrated and he resigned. It was said that the Ministry of Finance frustrated him. The second board was headed by a young intelligent, I think, Musoga doctor. He invited us to Ridar Hotel and outlined his views for the National Planning Authority. I told him, “Young man, the way you are handling this thing, with the enthusiasm that you have shown, you are going to work yourself out of job”, and indeed he was frustrated and he resigned. 

Now with the Kisamba Mugerwa one, they said they are going to produce a plan in September 2009. Now it is September 2009, you ask me if they will come up with a plan. They want patronage so that they can – and it is very unfortunate -(Member timed out_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if you have been absent in the last few days, you will have to speak in the afternoon. I am giving priority to those who have been here. Yes, affirmative action to those who have been attending regularly. 

1.48
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is a very good policy. 

I am really touched when the committee says that Bank of Uganda has refused to comply with the PPDA Act. This is very disheartening. I remember one time telling Parliament that before the Ministry of Finance comes here to appropriate funds, they should first of all give us the balance brought forward. Hon. Okecho then said that they have asked for this too for so many years and it is yet to come.  

I think the time is now for Parliament to act. The chairperson of PAC can bear me witness; Bank of Uganda used a deferred account and gave out US $4.8 million to UCTU to buy trucks. When they were queried on where they got the money from, it was traced to a deferred account and it later came down to the Consolidated Fund. I think that is why they are flouting the PPDA Act.

Hon. Members, we should get serious on this one. The Ministry of Finance should come out with a statement telling us the balance they have from the money we have appropriated. It is high time you told us the amount of money left. Even Bank of Uganda –(Interruption)   

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Mutumba. The information I would like to give is that Bank of Uganda is in the habit of debiting accounts and where they take the money is not known. An example that we recently identified under the DPP’s office is the Shs 640 million they removed and we cannot trace it. I can assure you that Bank of Uganda is a monster. Unless the Auditor-General or Parliament deals with Bank of Uganda, they will continue taking us for a ride.     

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, you hear that. That is the problem and that is why hon. Reagan Okumu raised it. They do not want to appear before Parliament to bring in their accountability. This is where we have problems and why certain projects are run down. 

Secondly, on page 33, I am again dismayed to read that Uganda Bureau of Statistics does not have money. What are we basing our planning on? This is what hon. Ben Wacha was talking about in regard to the National Planning Authority. What do they base their budget on? We know that the Poverty Eradication Action Programme has expired. So, between the Poverty Eradication Action Programme and now, what are we basing our monies on? 

Madam Speaker, you remember when we were tackling the budget I think in 2006/07, we asked the minister responsible for local government what formula he was using to allocate money to districts. According to the statement from the Ministry of Finance, they were not following that formula. That is why we have a problem, and I think that is why government does not want to come out with a national planning authority. 

Hon. Members, it is our responsibility now, as part of our oversight function, to demand for the National Planning Authority to be in place. We are not going to ask for Prosperity-for-All or ad hoc programmes coming in. We should get down and task government to come out with these programmes. That is why you hear monies being channelled to Matooke initiatives under the Office of the President when that money should have done better in other areas. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to give a little information. We are supposed to be going on a retreat to examine a five-year plan for the country. I think this information is valid mainly because some of us have also been concerned about not having that strategic plan document. We have had to postpone the Cabinet retreat because of the need to finish up with this budget. However, let me assure you that I have looked at the draft and I am sure that by the end of this week, the Minister of Finance will have the document.

I must acknowledge the shadow minister because of the precise way that you have done your job. I think that if you continue like this, we shall develop this country. Thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I think the time we were going to allocate the Vice-President should be re-allocated to me. Needless to say, I would wish His Excellency the Vice-President to also task the Ministry of Finance to bring to us, as they are planning, the unspent balances of whatever we appropriate here. It has taken long and every time they start from zero. We doubt this because at the end of the day after appropriating all the monies, they will come with supplementaries. We have been asking ourselves: where are they getting money for the supplementaries? Is there money they have not declared? Are they operating deferred accounts? These are the questions. When we have distributed all the money, we want to know the source of the supplementary budgets.

1.56
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker and Members, I stand to support the motion to adopt the report of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. My issue is on the Auditor-General’s office. I believe that if the Auditor-General’s office worked very well and was very strict with auditing all government ministries, the corruption that we have in Uganda would reduce. 

In the report, it is stated that salaries for the staff of the Auditor-General’s office have been increased. If the staff pay has been increased to motivate workers as a result of the Audit Act, why are there still backlogs of audit in the local governments? Why is the government spending a lot of money hiring consultants when this money could be used to employ more staff? Hiring of consultants is very expensive and should only be done when something is difficult for the staff. I urge the Auditor-General’s office to become more serious about audits and accounts of all the funds in Uganda.

I am a bit worried about the diversion of funds. We approve ministries’ budgets, which have been made for specific purposes, but when the money is allocated to the ministry they divert this money to different activities. That is where corruption comes in because accountability will not be clear and there will be a lot of reasons given.

I also want to talk a bit about pensioners. The people who are asking for pensions have worked very hard for this country and if we are here today, it is because they were very honest and developed this country. They were not corrupt like us today. They deserve their pensions because they worked for them. If somebody has worked for something, the person must be paid.

Last year we allocated funds for paying pensioners and this year I am surprised again to see pension arrears of about Shs 130 billion. When are we going to finish payments for people who were committed and worked for this country? It is very unfair. We get supplementary budgets; can we get a supplementary budget for paying pensioners? 

Some of the pensioners worked during the time of Obote and others during the time of Amin and they worked in State House. They have letters, which they have brought to me to help them follow up their pensions from the President’s office. There are also many teachers and nurses who are waiting to be paid their pension but they are not being paid. When you go to the Ministry of Public Service, you are not received the way you are supposed to. We need to give respect to people who have worked for this country.

Regarding diversion of funds, Ministry of Finance should be strict on the allocation and use of funds in this country. There must be value for money. The government gives a lot of money for carrying out all types of activities but the activities are not carried out because most of the money ends up in the wrong hands. It is time for Ugandans to leave corruption and do the correct thing so that we can develop.

On NSSF, I am worried about how we apply our loans to Ugandans –(Member timed out_)

2.01
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and the shadow minister for their reports. 

I want to talk about the bank interest rates. It is unfortunate that Bank of Uganda does not want to listen to Parliament for any advice. Our interest rates are almost the highest in the region and they are prohibitive to development. I can give an example: if you take a loan, you are charged interest and you have to pay back the principal, and that is not good for a developing country like Uganda. 

If you are saving with a bank, your interest can be six percent but a borrower at the same bank pays up to twenty-six percent; that gap is too big. We want Bank of Uganda to regulate the interest rates so that they can be favourable for the people who want to borrow for development. 

I also want to talk about vision 2030. His Excellency the Vice-President has told us that we are developing the NDP, but we had vision 2015 and we also upgraded it to 2025. I do not know what happened to these visions because we do not even reflect on them. Are we going to speak these nice phrases all the time to Ugandans and do nothing more? I am not comfortable with this vision 2030; we have not evaluated vision 2015, vision 2025, why should we now jump to the bandwagon of vision 2030?

That brings me to the issue of NDP, which is going to replace PEAP. We have had PEAP in this country and we are now leaving it completely for NDP. First of all, we have not done enough consultations with the stakeholders for NDP. You can see that now NPA is telling us that they have not adopted a report or approved the framework yet we expect this framework to be operational this month. I think we are taking Ugandans for granted. 

I am surprised that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not even alluding to MDGs, which are the international and regional framework that help us implement programmes for our people. I think Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be more serious. I want to concur with the shadow minister that they want to do everything and succeed in nothing. I think Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should adhere to its core principles, duties and economic policy. They should implement these policies fully, not jumping onto other programmes that belong to other ministries. 

I support the recommendations of the shadow minister that all functions of other ministries that are in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be taken to the relevant ministries. Even the money should be re-allocated to those ministries. We have been crying about meagre resources in agriculture when money is laying in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We must be serious on this matter.

I want to conclude by informing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about the central government transfers that are given to autonomous bodies in local governments - the national youth councils, the women councils and disability councils. It is high time they changed the guidelines because we want value for money. We no longer want this money for meetings and workshops; we want this money to help in poverty alleviation. These guidelines must be changed from now on. If not, we will either reject the money or use it according to our interests as the people at the grassroots. 

2.06
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the members of the committee and also the shadow minister for their reports. 

I had earlier on wanted to give information to hon. Ben Wacha. I do not see him around, but I can still give the information. It is not true that we have not had a planning framework in this country. As some members have commented, since 1997 we have been having the Poverty Eradication Action Plan that is informed by the various visions, and every five years it has been undergoing revisions. 

The PEAP has been having strategic pillars, and I am sure hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows. It is from these that the various sectors draw the sectoral plans, usually five-year plans, like the health sector strategic plan, the education strategic plan and so on. 

My next comment is that the report is silent on issues of population yet we know that population falls under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. There is even a department called the Population Secretariat. This country must pronounce itself on a population policy. I know we have a written policy but we seem to have expressed a different policy - especially political leaders. 

We shall not reach very far in terms of achieving our targets unless we have a very strong population policy in this country. We have one of the highest population growth rates, at about 3.3 percent per annum, which is one of the highest, being driven by high fertility. We know that countries that have been able to transform had strong economic policies but also put in place rigorous population policies. This is particularly true with the Asian tigers. I, therefore, want to urge government that we should be very clear and serious on the issue of population in this country. 

On page 27, I see that URA intends to revise the salaries of its staff by 17 percent. This is good because I would want all the civil servants to get a good pay. However, what is the policy of government on this? 

Different corporations seem to have autonomy in determining salary structures. For instance, I was reading in the papers that the managers of NSSF earn over Shs 10 million each. Sometime back we were told that the Managing Director of National Water earns Shs 36 million per month and the Commissioner-General of URA earns Shs 28 million, yet those in the traditional civil service earn peanuts. So, what is the policy of government in terms of rationalising and leveraging the salary structure, whether you are in the traditional service or corporations? I believe this could be a driving force for corruption in respect of those who are in the traditional service like the Ministry of Finance. If they are earning very little while those in government corporations seem to increase their salaries unchecked, then that is a problem.

My other point relates to the issue of Bank of Uganda. As Parliament, we should be serious. Why should Bank of Uganda refuse to abide by the laws? Why shouldn’t we take action when it comes to appropriation? Just a few months ago, we had a scuffle with the former IGG when she refused to appear before Parliament. Why is it a habit of institutions of government to increasingly see Parliament as a useless institution? The responsibility is on us to ensure we utilise our powers. 

So, either the Leader of Government Business or the Minister of finance should tell us why the Governor of Bank of Uganda and the entire institution refused to abide by the PPDA Act. I think there is a problem in trying power centres in the different departments of government.  I would like to ask the Leader of Government Business, while winding up this debate, to assure this Parliament that he is in charge of the government.

And lastly –(Member timed out_)

2.11
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me go straight to my concerns in respect of revenues which appear on page 27. The committee reports that revenue collections under URA performances will be 93.24 percent by the end of this financial year. This is really very good; it nears 100 percent of performance. We should commend URA for this great job.

However, I see a very big disparity between what the committee is reporting and what we heard from the Budget Speech. I recall very well that in that speech, the Minister of Finance reported that our budget performance was 99.8 percent, which suggests that there is an undisclosed amount of money somewhere. I wonder who can tell us. But I think the Ministry of Finance should be able to tell us where this undisclosed amount of money is. I am saying this because the disparity between 99 percent and 93 percent is very big; this money must be lying somewhere and somebody should tell us where it is.

Secondly, I want to emphasise the point put across by hon. Mutumba about how much money we have in our consolidated fund accounts. I know it is there, but how much is it? Citizens of Uganda ought to know this. I sit on the Budget Committee, but time and again the Ministry of Finance comes to tell us they have got some drawbacks from the Consolidated Fund. What I am saying is that that is done without the approval of Parliament, which is a legal requirement. So, how much money do we exactly have? We need to plan for that money. Taxpayers’ money should be accounted for and a high level of transparency is required in whatever we do with our money.

Lastly, URA collects money from the natural resources, which we have in this country. But all these natural resources belong to some local governments. I would like to suggest - and this is a requirement - that some percentage be remitted to the particular local governments that host a given natural resource. For instance, Amuru District has a national park – we are aware that some percentage has to be remitted to us after URA has collected the taxes, but there is no mechanism through which the local governments receive such remittances. Can know how much URA has collected and how much should be remitted to their accounts? Normally, URA just remits whatever amount of money. 

I am saying this because you are aware, Madam Speaker, that local governments in Uganda are facing a lot of difficulties in as far as implementing government programmes is concerned. They have got to wait – they rely on grants from the central government. So, it becomes very difficult for the districts to fully implement their plans. The remittances –(Member timed out_)

2.17
DR FRANCIS EPATAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to particularly thank you for guiding us on the smart approach we have taken in this financial year in debating our budget. Honestly to receive reports from all committees and have them debated in-depth with supply being allocated time, is a great approach. It enables us to know what is in each ministry and what recommendations each committee may have come out with as far as budget allocations are concerned. It also helps us to know what is where at the stage of supply. I think this is the best approach. I pray it continues.

Let me say something about the issue regarding National Planning Authority as commented on by a number of Members. It is true that those who have served in the authority have had various degrees of frustration, but to me, this frustration is strategically pushed onto NPA officials by the Ministry of Finance. 

First of all, the nomenclature of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requires an amendment, now that we have a National Planning Authority. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as it is today should remain as Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. Let us pull out the planning element because it is the planning that makes them think that NPA is over stepping their activities. 

More to that, whereas I agree with the committee’s recommendation that Uganda Investment Authority be given a separate vote, I pray that that should also be the direction for the National Planning Authority in order to make them semi-autonomous. 

Madam Speaker, we are particularly concerned about this disease called Parliament phobia – the excessive fear for Parliament – which not long ago had affected Madam Faith Mwondha. The disease has turned out to be contagious and has also affected the Bank of Uganda. First of all, we need to ask ourselves: who is more knowledgeable in law? Is it Emmanuel Mutebile the Governor of Bank of Uganda or is it the Solicitor-General? I think if there are any legal misinterpretations about the autonomy of the Bank of Uganda, we need to review this closely and make sure that all bodies, all departments, and all ministries in this country have certain control and direction. There must be some responsibility and there must be a chain of command. There is no way Bank of Uganda can decide to just look down on Parliament and say, “I just came to Parliament as a matter of courtesy.” I think that is uncalled for. 

I would like to touch the issue of the terminal benefits – the pension arrears. The Lord listens to the prayers of the elderly so much. I think we will be attracting curses on ourselves if we keep tormenting the elders, and tormenting those who have very clean money that is owed to them by government. We are tormenting them by denying them what duly belongs to them. In my opinion, we should put aside every other matter. In fact, debate on these pension arrears has been going on for so long in this House and Members even agreed that according to the law, it has to be charged directly on the Consolidated Fund. I do not see why we should make the pension arrears issue a subject of debate here. It should be automatic. Once somebody has retired, he should be able to access what is due to him or her. 

On that note, I am also concerned about the activities of the Ministry of Public Service –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Twenty seven Members have contributed to this report and it is about our daily average. I now invite the minister to respond. Those who want to speak can remain here in the afternoon. I will give you the last opportunity on the final report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

2.22 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to thank the committee for a very good report and I would also like to thank the shadow minister for agreeing with the position of the committee. As hon. Odit said, it is in a more down-to-earth manner and therefore has been appreciated by everybody, including our beloved Vice-President. 

While the shadow minister crosses the Floor, I would like to thank Members for appreciating this report and I would like to start from what hon. Franca Akello raised, which is on page 10 of the Budget Speech. The 99.8 percent that is reported is on the budget expenditure and not on the collection of revenue but I would like to commend the URA for the work that they have been doing very well. When we started, URA was collecting only Shs 3.5 trillion and they are now approaching Shs 4 trillion and they have been collecting up to 67 percent of our domestic revenue. Part of this is coming from non tax revenue and part of this is coming from our development partners. As we move forward, the Uganda Revenue Authority has already surpassed their collections for what was proposed for this financial year. 

We have noted the issue that was raised about the Uganda Revenue Authority building their headquarters and we shall look for other sources of funding to put up these very important headquarters, and this is to let you know that currently, they are spending over 	Shs 2.9 billion in rent alone. 

Madam Speaker, the issues that have been raised by the Shadow Minister of Finance about the Ministry of Finance trying to take the lion’s share of everything is not exactly right. First of all, we have already shared of a number of issues that were under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and in the committee, we did make it very clear that we are ready to give back or give away issues which do not directly fall under us and we are ready to do that. Having said that, we are very compliant. For instance, Madam Speaker, you did ask me to mention something about the Road Fund. Parliament did pass the Uganda Road Fund Act, 2008 and mandated the Ministry of Finance to be responsible. The definition of minister under section 4 means the minister responsible for finance. So, once you ask us to do this, we religiously obey and do this. Some of you possibly felt that the Uganda Road Fund should belong to another ministry but we are following what Parliament has directed.

Having said this -(Interruption) 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I am happy that you were able to tell the minister right from the beginning that he needs to explain a lot about the Road Fund. Our concern is not because it is under you; no! You have taken so long to operationalise the Road Fund. The intention of Ugandans was to have the fuel levy, first registration and traffic offences’ money put into one basket as a Road Fund but not you apportioning money for the Road Fund. Take it from us, please. That is what is happening in Kenya and Tanzania and all over Africa to cater for road maintenance, which had been relegated to the back seat of the car. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I was responding first to the issue raised by the Shadow Minister of Finance that we are grabbing and I am saying that some of these areas come when we are directed by Parliament; unless you are saying that we should not be responsive to the directives of Parliament.

On the issue that hon. Byanyima has raised, we as Ministry of Finance have appointed a board and we have just finished interviewing the Executive Director for the Road Fund. We are going to have the secretariat established and once this secretariat is established they will be in a position to ensure that they run the affairs of the Road Fund. This process will take us up to December 2009. Starting 1 January 2010, the Road Fund will be operated in accordance with the law.

The Road Fund of course is being brought in the Finance Bill, which will be discussed during this week. 

Issues have been raised about the extension workers in the current financial year, under the Ministry of Finance, as an interim measure. When we talk about NEC handling the issues of mechanisation in agriculture, the Shs 30 billion that was proposed for the facilitation through the various commercial banks, the memorandum of understanding between the Ministry of Finance, the Bank of Uganda and financial institutions will be presented here in Parliament. But we are still working on the draft and the draft proposal has been given to the Committee on Finance.

On the issue of the presidential initiative for bananas, which was initially under the National Council of Science and Technology, it expanded its scope in research and it has since been transferred to the Ministry of Finance and we expect that the operations -(Hon. Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you let the minister respond? I do not know what he is going to say. Let the minister respond first.

MR OMACH: The ministry has given the Shs 5 billion to enable a factory to be implemented. This project will eventually be taken over by Uganda Development Corporation which is going to be handling all bodies which are under the government or have some shares of government. As far as policies on SACCOs and interests in the regulations of SACCOs are concerned, we are currently handling these because there are areas of the credit institutions which we think should belong to the Ministry of Finance. We are open to further discussions on this matter.

On the issue of the Energy Fund, as you are aware, we have already transferred this to the Ministry of Energy. 

On the issue of the retirement benefits and regulatory authority that is currently expected to be supervised and regulated through the institutions, in future this will definitely be regulated through a regulatory authority that is now being considered in Cabinet. Subsequently, the Regulatory Authority Bill will be passed here in Parliament.

On the issue of the Contingencies Fund Bill, this has already been submitted to Cabinet. The formal approval by Cabinet will then be sent to Parliament for final approval.

On the issue of the tier 4 regulatory framework, this was ready to be submitted to Cabinet but unfortunately stakeholders requested that it should be sent back for further stakeholder intervention but now we are in the final process of ensuring that it is brought to Parliament. 

About the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, this has been gazetted and it will soon be submitted to Parliament for first reading.

On the Presidential Bananas Initiative, I have already mentioned this and the figure is actually not 17.5; it is a total of 10.2 billion.

On the issues that deal with the Custodian Board and NPART, Madam Speaker, we are going to send substantive papers to Parliament for their input and for their discussion. We have already assured the committee that this will be handled in that manner so that each of them will be discussed in more detail and we are able to give all the inputs that the Members will require. 

On the Shs 7 billion that we intend to give to the East African Development Bank and Uganda Development Bank as recapitalisation, as far as the East African Development Bank is concerned, a total of US $3 million is required of us to be given. This is being done by each of the community members who are partners in the East African Development Bank. That will leave us with only a residue for the Uganda Development Bank.

On the issue of the conduct of the Governor Bank of Uganda, we have noted this and we shall handle it appropriately.

The National Planning Authority is a body that has been initiated by an Act of Parliament and we do respect them. In the previous years they used to get appropriation of only up to about Shs 4 billion but last financial year, we gave them a total of Shs 10 billion and I think this was in the right direction. This year, we have requested for appropriation of over Shs 9 billion to ensure that they are able to effectively rollout their plan as indicated in their policy statement. 

We have no intention of holding the National Planning Authority captive. Once the Authority that be considers that the two functions, that is, Finance and Planning be separated, we shall be more than happy to let this go but as it stands now, we have appointed a five-member board. We do apologise that out of the five-member board, only one of them is a lady and we take note of this indication by government and by Parliament. We will endeavour to do better in future. This is the same with UBOS, where out of eight members of the board, two are ladies. 

On the issue of pension, we take serious recognition of what has been said by the committee and Parliament but on the pensions question, this year we have given a total of Shs 103 billion to the pension payroll and this is Shs 30 billion more than what was given last financial year and this excludes the Shs 12 billion that was given for the arrears. 

As for the outstanding Shs 130 billion in the pension arrears; right now we are cleaning up the exercise. We are doing some auditing to ensure that the actual stock is confirmed so that we take appropriate action to see how we can fully retire these pension arrears. We share your concerns about the importance of ensuring that this is finalised. 

Madam Speaker, you made mention of the issue of Shs 3.424 billion for the agricultural extension workers under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. This money is salary for the extension workers and the District Service Commission which will have an operation of up to Shs 0.5 billion. We discussed this with the Ministry of Agriculture and with the Ministry of Public Service. This is an interim arrangement which should take us up to October 2009 when we believe that the new NAADS would have effectively taken responsibility of the extension workers. So, we pray that this be left under Ministry of Finance and it is already planned to be spent under the Vote-on-Account. 

On the issue of Victoria Airlines that has been raised, I will give you a substantive report on this. I am not in a position to make any comments on it as of now but we do receive what hon. Okupa has given us. I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like you to join me in welcoming two groups of visitors. We have visitors from the House of Commons Library and the Royal African Society of the UK. They have come here to visit our Library and Research Service. I think we are now a point of reference. You are very welcome. (Applause)

We also have students from Maganjo Institute of Career Education, Kawempe Division. I do not know whether it is North or South but it is Kawempe. So, they are our people, you are also welcome. (Applause)

I want to put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As we have agreed, the Committee of Supply will be tomorrow. So, I would like to suspend the House for one hour. We shall return to deal with the Report on Foreign Affairs. We shall resume at 3.45 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 2.40 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.03 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Lule Mawiya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to present the report on the Committee on Foreign Affairs. My report is not lengthy, so I intend to take very little time.

Page 1 contains a list of abbreviations and acronyms. In the interest of time, once I refer to these abbreviations and acronyms, it will be easy for you to look them up on page 1. 

Introduction

In accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution of the Budget Act 2001 and rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Committee on Foreign Affairs examined the recurrent and development estimates of Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Votes 201-231, Missions Abroad; and Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs. Madam Speaker, the committee further examined the mandates of these ministries/agencies, the policies they are implementing to fulfil their mandates and administrative/institutional setup in place to actualise their mission and goals. 

The committee analysed the background to the Budget Speech and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations as follows:

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the political and technical leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of East African Affairs and Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development. It also held meetings with members of the East African Legislative Assembly Uganda chapter, the board Management of Uganda Properties Ltd. The committee also analysed previous ministerial statements and parliamentary reports on the sector. 

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Mandate
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is mandated to maximise benefits for harmonisation of Uganda’s foreign policy and domestic policy objectives. The minister is charged with the responsibility of promoting Uganda’s international interests abroad. In the table that follows, that was the budget performance in the fiscal year 2008/09. For interest of time, I will skip that one.

Achievements for Financial Year 2008/09
    1. The ministry spearheaded regional peace initiatives and conflict resolution and post conflict building.

    2. The ministry executed the UN Security Council and AU peace and Security Council mandate through the missions in New York and that in Addis Ababa.

    3. It promoted trade investments, tourism and technology transfers.

    4. It drafted a five year investment plan.

    5. It successfully acquired office equipment including computers and server, LDC projectors and other officer accessories. 

    6. It configured a virtual private network between the ministry headquarters and the UN Mission.

    7. It drafted a human resource development policy covering the scheme of services, training needs assessments and training policy for staff. 

Funds Allocation
Recurrent was Shs 18,960,137,000 whereas the development budget was Shs 818,591,000. It also received supplementary funding of Shs 4.527 billion as recurrent expenditure. 

Planned Activities during Financial Year 2009/10
Recurrent Activities:
    i) The ministry plans to conclude the process of streamlining the staff structure in missions to a single spine.
    ii) It also plans to develop a human resource development policy on acquisition, development and management of Uganda’s properties abroad. 
    iii) Hosting the Africa Union summit in June 2010
    iv) Providing support to other summits and conferences taking place in 2009/10.
    v) Holding annual ambassadors conference.
    vi) Holding the join permanent commissions (JPC) meeting with targeted countries.
    vii) Engaging in maintenance of regional and international peace and security, promotion of trade, investment and security, promotion of trade and investment, resource mobilisation and transfer to technology.

Development Activities:
    i) The ministry plans to open a new mission in the United Arab Emirates and Bujumbura in Burundi.
    ii) It intends to implement a five year investment plan.
    iii) It intends to embark on the review of Uganda’s foreign policy taking into account the deepening globalisation and changing geographical landscape.
    iv) It intends to complete the linking of all missions abroad over a virtual private net work.

Madam Speaker, the funds requested for by the votes for Financial Year 2009/10 under headquarters – there is wage which is Shs 2,613,980,000 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just leave that; it is clear.

MR MAWIYA: Those are the figures. 
Unfunded Priorities
    i) The ministry’s travels abroad;
    ii) Funding of planned seven permanent commissions with countries like Egypt, Sudan, DR. Congo, Southern Sudan, Kenya and South Africa;
    iii) Construction of residence for the ambassador in Brussels in the first phase.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed the following under Vote 201-231, Missions Abroad
    1) Acquisition, development and management of properties abroad;
        a) Almost all Uganda government properties in missions abroad are in deplorable state due to inadequate or poor maintenance. Some of these, as is the case with Brussels, have been condemned by the host governments because they pose a security threat. Suffice it to say that the publicity these properties have attracted over the years has created a negative image of our country.
        b) It was established that Uganda Government received land offers in prime areas of Lagos and Beijing from the Nigerian and the Chinese Government respectively, over four years back, but to date no effort has been made by our government to develop these plots of land. These lands will soon return to the said governments because of our failure to develop them.
        c) Despite previous parliamentary recommendations, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development have failed to come up with a clear policy for the acquisition, development and management of properties abroad. Over the years, the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development has failed to allocate resources for the maintenance of the said properties and even in case where missions have requested for authority to utilise part of NTR for these purpose, the former has not honoured the request.
        d) Uganda government owns over twenty properties including warehouses, depots and residential houses in Mombasa, Kenya. They are currently managed on behalf of government by Uganda Property Holdings Ltd, superintended over by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It must be noted that whereas these properties have generated substantial revenue every year, the management of this revenue is not streamlined.
        e) Whereas the committee had in its report of Financial Year 2008/09 recommended the transfer of Uganda’s properties abroad under Uganda Property Holdings Ltd to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, upon further investigations, it was established that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not have the requisite technical personnel to manage these properties. However, this is not to say that Uganda Property Holdings has delivered to the satisfaction of the Ugandan citizenry.
        f) The committee established that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs plans to construct a market in Juba in Southern Sudan at a cost of Shs 1.733 billion in the Financial Year 2009/10 in an effort to support Ugandan traders. While this is a good thing, no modalities for the management of this property are in place. In the absence of a policy of acquisition, development and management of Uganda properties abroad, the committee strongly considered this project untenable until such a framework is in place. 

Recommendations
    1. Government should urgently come up with a law regulating the acquisition and management of properties abroad and explore the option of entering a mortgage scheme to acquire office space for ministries/agencies.
    2. The proposed transfer of Uganda agencies under Uganda Property Holdings Ltd to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be halted until a comprehensive study is done by the committee. 
    3. The construction of a market in Juba should be shelved until government comes up with a policy on the acquisition, development and management of properties abroad. Therefore, the Shs 1.733 billion that had been earmarked for the construction of the market in Juba should be reallocated as follows:
        a) Shs 200 million should go to the Abu Dhabi Mission, 
        b) Shs 600 million for the Bujumbura Mission. We are reallocating because money has already been budgeted for but these funds are not enough to fund a fully-fledged mission. 
        c) Shs 723 million should go as commitment fee for the acquisition of a plot of land in Beijing or back to the Uganda Government by the Chinese Government. 
        d) Shs 210 million should go to facilitate the joint permanent commissions which are also among the planned activities to be done by the ministry but are not funded. 

The Great Lakes Region Project

Despite last year’s recommendation that the ministry reflects in its policy statement budget this project, the ministry has deliberately continued to leave it out.  It was established that the administrative and finance management of this project is not streamlined. 

The project has for a number of years been under the sole management of Ms Sarah Birete with minimum supervision from the accounting officer of Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This laxity in supervision led to gross mismanagement of this project. And Rt. Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I think you are aware; I know you are aware that this lady was apprehended and charged in court, although she is now out on bail.

Recommendations


Madam Speaker, we recommend that the Auditor-General urgently institutes a special audit into the management of the Great Lakes Region project.

Opening of new missions and consulates abroad 

Government has opened new missions in Abu Dhabi and Bujumbura and intends to open consulates in Dubai and Mombasa come next financial year. Given Uganda’s business interests in the Middle East, the strategic importance of Mombasa, and the political and economic relevance of Bujumbura, the committee considers this development a timely one. 

However, the budget line of Shs 1.5 billion provided is not adequate for the effective operationalisation of these missions, which leaves a funding gap of Shs 800 million.

Therefore, the committee strongly feels that opening of a mission in Hague in Netherlands, which is a business hub in the Scandinavian Region, will go a long way in boosting trade and tourism in Uganda.

The committee recommends that the Abu Dhabi and Bujumbura missions should be allocated additional Shs 200 million and Shs 600 million, respectively from the Shs 1.733 billion that was meant for the construction of the market in Juba.

We also recommend that government explores the possibility of opening a mission in Hague, and a consulate in Jeddah and Dubai in the coming fiscal year 2010/2011.

Non-Tax Revenue (NTR)

In the Financial Year 2008/2009, missions abroad had projected to collect NTR amounting to Shs 6.356 billion. While in the fiscal year 2009/2010 NTR projections stand at Shs 7.568 billion, the actual amount collected and remitted to the Treasury could not be established because the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development were cagey about the matter. The committee did not establish the amount of NTR utilised at source since no authority for its utilisation at source could be availed.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, whereas the committee supports the utilisation at source - part of this NTR by missions especially in emergence cases like minor repairs on the buildings - this arrangement is not checked through strict financial controls and is subject to abuse.

It was further established that even in cases where missions have remitted NTR to the Consolidated Fund, no receipts or acknowledgement of such monies have been issued.

Arising from the aforementioned, the committee was concluded that there could be gross mismanagement of NTR by missions abroad and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The committee recommends that:

The NTR collected by missions abroad should be audited so as to streamline its management.

The Ministry of Finance should allow missions abroad to utilise part of NTR at source, but under strict controls to avoid any mismanagement.

Government should design a comprehensive policy on the administration of NTR taking cognisance of penalties for non-remittance by the collecting agencies, as well as non-issuance of receipts by the receiving agencies.

Travel Documents

The committee observed that a number of Ugandans some of whom are holding diplomatic passports, have been apprehended, prosecuted and convicted from abroad for involvement in criminal acts like drug trafficking and money laundering; such acts have significantly damaged our national image.

The committee noted with concern, the unchecked abuse of issuance of passports, especially the diplomatic ones, to people who do not qualify to have them. It was found out that a number of - even junior - officers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Immigration Directorate, among others, commissioners, State House employees, religious leaders, children and spouses of such people, hold diplomatic passports. This partly explains why some unscrupulous elements have acquired and used diplomatic passports for dubious activities.

It came to the knowledge of the committee that the British Government has shifted its visa office from Kampala to Nairobi and of late, from Nairobi to Addis Ababa in Ethiopia. This has significantly affected visa applicants since the process has become lengthy and increasingly expensive.

Madam Speaker, I am aware –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members. I know it is exciting, but please let the chair present the report.

MR MAWIYA: As I was saying, Madam Speaker, I am aware that you have already communicated to the relevant authorities as far as this issue is concerned, but we are yet to receive any feedback.

Our committee, in conjunction with that of Defence and Internal Affairs, will carry out a comprehensive study on the ongoing passport scam and report to this House before the end of this financial year.

The committee recommends that the issuance of passports in the country is urgently reviewed. 

The committee implores the Government of Uganda to engage their British counterparts on the possibility of reinstating the visa office in Kampala.

Conclusion

The committee recommends the approval of the following resources for Vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs and from Vote 201 to Vote 301 for missions abroad for the fiscal year 2009/2010, to enable them carry out the above outlined programmes and activities. Vote 006 – Ministry of Foreign Affairs; recurrent expenditure, Shs 9,068,409,000 and development expenditure, Shs 668,590,000.


It should be note that the recurrent expenditure for vote 006 increased from the initial amount of Shs 8,858,409,000 to Shs 9,068,409,000. This is due to the re-allocation of the Shs 210 million to cater for the Joint Permanent Commissions (JPCs). 

Hon. Members, while on official duty in Addis Ababa, the Deputy Speaker interacted with our officials who expressed lack of facilitation of the JPCs. On return, she wrote to the Committee on Foreign Affairs to explore the possibility of funding the JPCs. The ministry had actually reported this as an item, which had been non-funded yet it is within the activities they are planning to carry out this fiscal year. That is how this re-allocation came about.

Under Votes 201 to 301 for missions abroad, recurrent expenditure is Shs 43,242,756,145 while development expenditure is Shs 3,284,200,000. 

I have also put a note down here to explain the development expenditures for votes 201 to 301; it has also reduced from the initial Shs 3,494,200,000, and this is due to re-allocation of Shs 210 million to cater for the JPCs under vote 006.

All the initially proposed Shs 1.733 billon as development expenditure for Vote 229 for the Juba Mission, has been re-allocated as follows: Shs 200 million will go to Vote –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have already said that.

MR MAWIYA: Okay, I have already said that. Thank you so much. Let us move to Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs.

This ministry is mandated to promote Uganda’s interests in the East African Region. The budget allocated is tabulated as below and I think honourable members will go through that.

This ministry achieved the following during the fiscal year 2008/2009.

The committee established that this ministry carried out public awareness on the integration process –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can also leave those -

MR MAWIYA: I can leave this. As said earlier, you can look at the achievements as indicated. You will also see the funds allocated. 

Planned activities for the fiscal year 2009/2010

Recurrent activities
These include: 
    1. Upgrading the memorandum on foreign policy coordination and cooperation in Defence into protocols.

    2. Harmonising five thematic areas in Defence and the element of good governance in the East African Community context.

    3. The ministry intends to harmonise the municipal laws.

    4. The ministry will hold radio talk shows.

    5. Upgrading the East African Community/SADC/COMESA memorandums of understanding into protocols.

    6. Ratifying protocols for tourism and wildlife management, natural resources and environment and health research commission.

    7. Harmonising gender, community development; labour and employment laws.

    8. Harmonising the East African Community Education curricula to help regional protocols, transport, communication, meteorology policies and natural resources and environment.

    9. Finishing the East African Community Food Security Action Plan.

    10. Reducing the non-trade barriers.

    11. Approximating national policies and laws in accordance with the Common Market Protocol.

    12. Monitoring the implementation of the Customs Union and the East African Community decisions, policies and programmes.

    13. Filling the twelve remaining vacant posts.

    14. Carrying out training needs assessment and developing a training plan.

    15. Holding four workshops, 40 talk shows, 10 press conferences, 30 newspaper supplements and 10 promotional events. 

    16. Attending 31 local and 50 international meetings.

Development activities

These include:
    1. Establishing resource centres and archives.
    2. Drafting the criteria and procedures for the establishment of the EAC institutions.
    3. Procurement of two vehicles, five computers and telephones and so forth.

Unfunded priorities under the said fiscal year:
These will include the creation of awareness of the East African Community Regional Integration and travel abroad.

Amount of funds requested for under Vote 01 for the fiscal year 2009/2010: recurrent expenditure, Shs 14,928,578,830 and development expenditure, Shs 280,000,000.

Observations and recommendations

Awareness creation on the integration process:
The committee, Madam Speaker, observed that in view of the ministry’s mandate and strategic objectives, it is pertinent to note that the creation of awareness on the integration process stands out as one of the key activities that the ministry should carry out if Uganda’s interests are to be promoted in the East African Community. 

However, apart from fast-tracking the consultation programme, there have been minimum efforts to reach out to the various Ugandan communities and other stakeholders to keep them informed and to enable them participate in the integration process.

The committee also established that whereas the ministry in the Financial Year 2008/2009 submitted a budget of Shs 2.9 billion for the outreach programme on the integration process, it was only able to be allocated Shs 200 million while this fiscal year it has been allocated Shs 300 million. 

Whereas the committee appreciates the limited national resource envelop, it equally questions the relevance and effectiveness of this ministry if awareness and participation of the Ugandan populace is not given consideration in the integration process. 

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should appreciate the mandate and relevance of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs and allocate substantial resources for the outreach programme on the integration process in the course of the financial year. 

Common Market, EU-EPAs negotiations

The committee observed that whereas the summit that sat in 2006 resolved that the fast-tracking of the Political Federation of the East African Community be shelved; it was at the same time resolved that work underpinning this pillar be sustained through fast-tracking the Common Market and Monetary Union within the timeframe stated, that is, 2013. 

A series of negotiations have been ongoing among the East African Community partner states and they are in the final stages with the signing of the protocol just a few months away.  

It must be noted that the process of Common Market, EU-EPAs negotiations has been exclusively undertaken on behalf of Uganda by selected ministries coordinated by the Ministry of East African Community Affairs without involving other key stakeholders like the civil society, the media, Parliament, the business community, local government, among others; yet the decisions to be taken have a far-reaching bearing on these organs. One wonders whose interests the Ugandan team is negotiating for. Surprisingly, even the membership of this is not known to the public. 

In May 2009, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry presented to the House a comprehensive report on a petition from the civil society organisations on the hurried signing of Economic Partnership Agreements but debate on this report was deferred. 

It must be noted that the committee findings and recommendations therein are very pertinent and critical to the Ugandan citizenry. 

In March 2009, members of the East African Legislative Assembly wrote a report on the findings from the public hearing workshops on the proposed Common Market Protocol. This report equally contains pertinent issues. 

The committee, therefore, recommended that the membership of the Common Market, EU-EPAs negotiation team should be reviewed and replaced by high level national teams of experts (negotiators) drawn from different sectors. 

A think tank of people from various stakeholders, namely, political, technocrats, civil society organisations, the business community, academia and the media, should be established from whom the negotiators will be drawn. 

The signing of the EU-EPAs should be deferred until all stakeholders have been brought on board. 

Parliament should urgently debate and pronounce itself on the report of the Committee on Tourism Trade and Industry on the hurried signing of Economic Partnership Agreements.

The East African Legislative Assembly findings from public hearing workshops on the proposed Common Market Protocol should also be looked into. 

Multiple Memberships to Regional Blocs

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee observed that the principle behind the signing and subsequent ratification of the Customs Union, Common Market by the East African Community member states and the envisaged ultimate attainment of the Monetary Union is to have a strong regional economic bloc that will yield greater dividends to the people of East Africa. 

However, most, if not all, the five East African member states belong to other regional economic blocs, thus having divided loyalty. This partly explains why the negotiations have been at a snail’s pace; the non-involvement of key stakeholders notwithstanding. For example, whereas Uganda and Kenya subscribe to COMESA, Tanzania remains a member of SADC while Rwanda and Burundi still belong to ECCAS. 

Recommendation

There is need for East African Community member states to edge out of the various regional economic blocs by the end of 2010 and focus on strengthening that of East Africa. 

Minister of State for East African Community Affairs

The committee observed that in a bid to ensure effective functioning of government and timely service delivery, every substantive minister in our country is assisted by a minister of state, if not two or three, which, however, is not the case with this ministry. 

This leadership gap has significantly affected the level of political supervision at the ministry and the East African Community in Arusha, as well as in scaling down on the interface between the committee and the ministry, especially in cases where the substantive minister is out of the country on official duty or when on sick leave. 

The committee, therefore, recommended that there is urgent need for creation of the portfolio of Minister of State for East African Community Affairs to scale up the level of political supervision and effective service delivery. 

Functional relations between national parliaments and the East African Legislative Assembly

The committee strongly appreciates the fundamental and operational principles of the East African Community integration. Several efforts have been made to ensure that work underpinning the political federation is sustained through a number of activities such as Customs Union, Common Market and EU-EPA negotiations. However, minimum efforts have been taken by the Executive to keep Parliament abreast with these negotiations. 

Whereas the tenets of integration are undoubtedly good, the treaty for the establishment of the East African Community does not sufficiently address the functional relationship between the East African Legislative Assembly and the national parliaments. 

There is no established mechanism of consultation between the two organs, and as a result, a number of legislations have been passed in Arusha without the input of the national assemblies of the member states as well as their citizenry. 

It was established that the East African Community budget process is not as participatory and equitable. Whereas Article 132 of the Treaty mandates EALA to pass the budget, the Assembly and other key stakeholders have minimum contribution in determining the priorities for funding. The activities for funding are largely determined by the technocrats at the secretariat. For instance, of the mandated 100 days, the East African Legislative Assembly only sits for 70 days. 

Recommendations

The Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community should be reviewed in a bid to address, among others, the aforementioned inadequacies. 

Government should engage Parliament and other stakeholders in the negotiation process on the key pillars underpinning the integration process. 

Parliament should review our Rules of Procedure to periodically allow Members of the East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Chapter, to access the Chamber and have their reports debated. 

There is need for the EAC to adopt a participatory and equitable budgeting process commencing with a pre-budgeting conference during which key stakeholders like the ministry of finance, MEACA, representatives of national parliaments of member states and EALA, determine the priorities. 

Madam Speaker, I must thank the Parliamentary Commission for facilitating the EALA office with at least two computers, but we still have need for about six computers. We should also look into this so that even the other six members can also be facilitated. 

Domestication of Legislation passed by EALA

The committee observed that since its inauguration in November 2001, the East African Legislation Assembly has passed a good number of legislations. Equally so, the summit has signed a number of protocols which have significant bearing on the people of East Africa. However, little effort, in Uganda’s case, has been made by the Ministry of East African Community Affairs to ensure the domestication of these legislations. For example, the Customs Union Protocol which was signed a good number of years ago has not taken effect. 

Recommendation

There is urgent need for awareness creation on the integration process. Government should ensure active participation of the Ugandan populace in identifying their interests which should form the basis of the agenda for negotiations during the integration process. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee recommends the approval of the following resources for Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs for the Financial Year 2009/2010, in order to carry out the above outlined programmes and activities: recurrent expenditure, Shs 14,929,000,000 and development expenditure, Shs 280,000,000. I beg to move. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is a two-in-one report for the two ministries, but I am surprised that the Minister for East African Community Affairs is not here for Vote 021. We have already heard that he does not have a state minister. I know very well that hon. Musumba is here to represent Foreign Affairs; but the other one is an independent and specific ministry that is headed by a senior minister at the level of a Deputy Prime Minister. 

So, is it procedurally right for the Minister of East African Community Affairs to continuously be absent from the House even at this time when we want to support the ministry to have more resources so that we are effectively represented in the East African Community? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minster of East African Community Affairs wrote to inform me that he was going to Arusha and that he had assigned Hon. Isaac Musumba to hold his portfolio. I have that letter. 

4.52
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, the Opposition would like to thank you very much for granting us the opportunity to make a response to the policy statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because initially –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you distributed it?

MR EKANYA: Yes; and more copies are being distributed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are they? Who has them? They do not have copies. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: I think that all of us are hon. Members of Parliament; we should honour this House. We know that before you begin reading your report, you must ensure that Members get copies. Since hon. Ekanya has not done this, let us proceed with the report that is available to us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to reiterate the position of the Parliamentary Commission. We facilitate you members of the Opposition to produce these reports. I am speaking as the chair of the commission and I know what I am talking about. We facilitate you and you have no excuse for smuggling small pieces of paper here and there since we give you facilities to produce these copies. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, before we started the meeting, he distributed 20 copies of the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 20 copies for 300 Members?

MR EKANYA: Yes, and he is still bringing more. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this morning I sent away the Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs because he had four copies. Let us start the debate. The rules must be the same for both sides of the House. 

4.55 
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have four points to make. On page 3, last year the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs performed by over 200 percent. I would like to ask the chairperson or the minister to clarify. Why should a budget perform by over 200 percent? What happened? It doesn’t make sense to me.

Secondly, on page 5, we are budgeting for building phase one of a residential house in a whole financial year - just one phase in 12 months, in Brussels! How big is this residential house for which a whole nation can only build one phase in one year? Really, I think we should not put something like this in writing. It is shameful. 

The non-tax revenue collected by foreign missions has been one of the biggest sources of corruption in this government. This matter has been going on for too long. In the Sixth Parliament, the committees on foreign affairs and presidential affairs were combined, and I was a member of the committee on the sector. 

This matter came up that ministers collect their per diem and go to New York or to London or elsewhere and suddenly become broke and demand money from the heads of missions; and when the money is advanced, it is not accounted for and this is still going on up to now. 

The committee noted that the auditing is very weak. It is the same recommendation that was made more than ten years ago. I think we should put a very strong recommendation with a timeframe so that we stop this corruption that is going on. This money is benefiting only a few people. This is national money; it is money for the people of Uganda, but only a few people are benefiting from it year in, year out. When shall we stop lamenting? Let us make a strong recommendation and put a timeframe to it so that we stop this. 

Lastly, in the Sixth Parliament, it was agreed with the President that in view of our missions falling apart psychically, we should regionalise representation around the world. For example, there should be only one mission on the European continent, but more are mushrooming while others collapse behind us. We are not attending to our mission buildings but we are opening up more and more missions instead of paying attention to the few we have. 

In my view, the reason as to why our missions are not doing fine is that politicians have taken over from the career diplomats. The majority of our heads of missions now are politicians. We send them there and they go and sit on career diplomats that have been working for years. They become bosses of the people who actually do the work. I think we should reverse this situation and give opportunity to the career diplomats to run our missions professionally and diplomatically. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.00 
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee although some technicalities have prevented our side from expressing our views. I am going to speak about the issue of the East African Community. 

The mission is to protect the interests of Uganda, and I agree with it, but as a member of the East African Community, there are certain things that some of us from Uganda are not happy about, such as the pace at which the process is moving. 

Let us look at the Common Market; Uganda has opened all its borders for all sorts of commodities from the neighbouring countries, but when we take our goods and services to those countries, we get problems. What is going on with our negotiators, and when are we going to make sure that there is free movement of goods and services on all our borders? If by protecting the interests of this country this is what it means, then I am yet to be briefed. 

There are some institutions within the East African Community, and I do not know which one Uganda will have so that we can also create some of form of employment. There is the Kiswahili Commission and this one will definitely go to Tanzania. There is the Lake Victoria Basin Commission and this one went to Kenya yet the biggest lake is here. What is our take? There is still the Health Commission. 

I propose that our bargaining forces within the East African Community protect our interests so that we have this Health Commission in Uganda. We can motivate these people by giving them free land. We have been giving free land to people with whom we have no interests, and we have been giving free land to people who have even conned us. Why don’t we protect the interests of our country to have this health commission hosted in Uganda?  

There are so many things which are going on within the East African Community of which we do not know, and this is not protecting our interests. Last financial year we gave Shs 0.5 billion to create awareness but if you went to Busongora South Kasese, nobody knows what is going on in East Africa, even the king does not know. Where did you create awareness from? This business of creating awareness in air conditioned houses, in hotels, is not going to help you; we must move along with our people. This is what it means by democratic processes.

For instance, in East Africa they are moving a Bill before the East African Legislative Assembly to have a joint electoral commission and to some of us this is our hope because we no longer rely on these member states’ electoral commissions. Here we do not know; now when we pass it down there, what are we going to do? Definitely if your ears are to the ground, we are moving towards the political federation. You have no option, Africa can only survive if we go big; we cannot survive when we are small things here. Why are we not preparing the minds of our people towards the political federation? Creating awareness, preparing the minds of our people is the most important thing.

This process is not moving on the way we had expected; we expected some of the member states to start ceding some of their authority to the East African Community but there is no member state, which is willing to cede even the smallest authority.

5. 05 
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): I want to talk briefly about Foreign Affairs. Last year we visited Moscow and after our meeting we attended a meeting by African ambassadors and after that meeting we were taken aside by the ambassadors of Ghana and Nigeria when they learnt that we were Members of Parliament from Uganda -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MR OKUMU: No, I am not a member but there has been a technical problem because hon. Ekanya’s should have appeared there.

MR MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, they were supposed to switch with hon. Ekanya but that was not effected from their part so it is yet to be effected by the Leader of the Opposition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, is he still a member?

MR MAWIYA: No, actually he should not be. Hon. Ekanya is supposed to be in our committee so he can contribute.

MR OKUMU: I was saying after our meeting we were taken aside by the ambassadors of Nigeria and of Ghana when they learnt that we were Members of Parliament from Uganda. They put us down and said, “We want you to go home and improve the image of Uganda; Uganda used not to be like this. Look where your ambassador is staying, look where your mission is now!” Because where Uganda’s mission is in Moscow, you cannot really tell; the image is terribly bad.

When we went to Rome, we found out that our ambassador’s official car got stuck in the tunnel and was towed and actually caused a lot of traffic in the tunnel. When we asked the ambassador he said, “You see, this car has been here for over five years”, it is actually in a very dangerous mechanical condition. He also informed us in Rome that they have been staying in a property that belongs to the Government of Zambia and we have not been paying rent for very many years and there are actually rent arrears.

When we moved to Geneva, we found out that while the rest of the team was doing good work, there was a political appointee who was brought from New York and posted to Geneva who was destabilizing the entire staff, who was untouchable. This person could not listen to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs whenever they sent him any circulars to report back, he would not listen and the guy really has destabilized the whole mission.

When we went to Paris, we went to Uganda House; we found out that the 3rd floor of the house is collapsing. It is in a dilapidated state.

We went to Brussels and we were shocked, we saw this building that was condemned. We saw the kind of properties we were in and all these properties are being managed by Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

When we went to Denmark, the ambassador there was doing a good job but it was contaminated because some gentleman who was recalled from Germany refused to leave claiming that he fought the bush war and should be retained on the diplomatic mission. Instead of being recalled back to Kampala, he was posted to Denmark causing a lot of problems. 

I am giving this because there is a big problem in Uganda’s foreign affairs. Our image abroad is dilapidated, our staff are not facilitated and I blame this on the leadership in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, because if the leadership in Foreign Affairs were doing the right thing, I think our foreign staff would be doing more than they are doing today.

MR ISAAC MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that I will have an opportunity to answer, I also appreciate that honourable members of the Opposition can be courteous and listen to me because those are our rules. What I do not appreciate however is the castigation of the leadership of foreign affairs that it is incompetent and so on. 

The honourable member has mentioned that he has been to Geneva, to Rome, to Paris, to Denmark, to everywhere in the world. I want to congratulate him. What I have not seen, however, is the report of his findings. This is the first time I have heard him mention any of these matters. Had he made a report, either to the House or to me, we would be able to address these matters. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Is hon. Isaac Musumba in order to lie to this House that no report by Members who visit these foreign missions has been presented in this House? I remember very well, Madam Speaker, that you led us in a delegation to Belgium, Brussels. We went to the Chancellor and to the dilapidated ambassador’s residence which has been taken over by drug addicts. When we came back, we made a report in this House. We even addressed a press conference to that effect and the journalist from The Daily Monitor, who was with us on that team, made a comprehensive report. I remember Ambassador Mugume made a rebuttal to that effect and said that before the end of last year, money would have been sent there. All that information is available on the Hansard. Is the minister in order to contribute and say that Members of Parliament, including you, Madam Speaker, who led this delegation, have never brought a report to this House?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The record of the Hansard is very clear. These matters have been raised on the Floor of this House. What has not been forthcoming is your response. (Applause)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That further raises the whole issue of leadership. (Laughter) It actually reinforces the issue I am raising about leadership. I believe that for any ministry to function and effectively deliver, the leadership should take a lot of responsibility to deliver on this. 

When I look at the Front Bench, I remember that one time I wrote to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister when he was still the Minister of Education to thank him for his ability to transform the management style in the Ministry of Education. I congratulated him on that. So, when we are raising some of these concerns, I think there is a gap in the leadership in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am coming to you hon. Godi. But before I give hon. Godi the chance - I wanted to say this after hon. Ekanya had spoken but you know what happened - I want to say that the Opposition has been waiting for and listening to several reports; they wait for the committee to publish the report, they read it, and then they design a reply. That is why their papers are late -(Interjections)- yes! That is what you are doing. If you were serious, you would look at the policy statements yourselves and write your own response but you have been waiting until they produce the reports.

Secondly, from the reports which have come, I am hearing complaints: work undone, reports not debated. I think we are not using our time optimally in this House. So I want to call upon the Business Committee and the majority of you are members to it - can we design a better way of doing work in this House so that we can accomplish more? 

I want to call upon the Rules Committee. Really, I hope that by the next Budget we shall have amended rules on the length and the content of a report; the length and the content of the response of the Opposition, and the role of Members of the Opposition who are part of the same committee but decline to sign. Their names are there and they want to contribute and I must allow them because they have not signed. You know, these are some of the things that cause us not to do our work properly. So, we are not doing a good job for this country and we must improve things.

5.16
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank the committee for producing that report. I want to talk about the issue of the prime plots that were given to the Uganda Government in Lagos and in Beijing. You very well remember that in 2007 I had the opportunity to be in Nigeria where I interacted with Uganda’s Ambassador to Nigeria who was based in Abuja. When we asked him about the said land, because I was still a Member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, he told us that there was prime land in a prime location on the Victoria Islands in Lagos but that there was a time in 1999 when the ocean flooded and submerged most of the buildings in that area. So, the ministry came up with a policy that no one was going to construct in the Victoria Islands and they were actually evicting families from Victoria Islands to the mainland in Port Milan Bridge in Lagos City. Now, the only option was to shift that offer to Abuja but as we talk now there is nothing of that kind. That land does not exist. 

Concerning the Beijing Embassy, Uganda Government was advised to buy off that land and the building which houses the embassy at the moment was offered. But the problem came when a powerful minister of this country bought that property for himself and is renting it out to the Uganda Government as the embassy premises. Therefore -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which property is that? 

MR GODI: The embassy building we are operating in Beijing. Madam Speaker, if protection can be given and assurances can be granted, we will be able to come out with the details of who bought that property and is renting out to the government. It brings up the issue of whether our actions are being cost-effective to the taxpayer? 

In this government, there are many ministries operating their businesses on rented premises -(Hon. Mawiya rose_)- allow me to finish. You are the chairman of a whole committee and therefore you will be eating some of my time. Besides, he has the opportunity to research more than to come here and confuse us. 

THE DEPUTY: No, maybe you have made a distortion on his report. You take the clarification. 

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am the chairperson of this committee so I want this to be clarified. The Member has made a serious statement on the Floor and it is on record that one person in this country has bought off the land allocated to the Uganda mission in Beijing but this information has neither come to me nor to any of my committee members. So, I will want information to that effect so that we can take up this matter effectively. Thank you very much.

MR GODI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the chairman and the -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want to give this information. I was in Beijing in June and what the ambassador told us was that there has been a long standing offer by the Chinese Government to the Uganda Government to buy the current premises where Uganda’s embassy is. That offer has been given to all the other countries and that most of them responded and bought these properties. But for Uganda, we have not taken that offer and he fears that the Chinese might reach a stage and withdraw that offer, making us lose that prime property - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but the honourable member says that the property belongs to a Ugandan member of Cabinet. That is what hon. Godi has said.

MR GODI: The information I am giving is about the current official residence where the Ugandan mission is. It is in the same place where the sanctuary and the ambassador’s residence are. Just the same place.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: There are two buildings in that compound. All I want is the assurance, but for the benefit of the chairman of the committee, this information was in the domain before you came to Parliament. Therefore, take it in good faith, I have been a Member of that committee and I will get an opportunity to come and interact with you on that issue.

MR OKUPA: I just want to seek clarification from the chairman of the committee because there has also been a long standing offer from India in New Delhi, but I do not see it among the ones you are raising here. At the time when we were there with the Speaker, the person who was acting as the ambassador, before the lady ambassador moved there, had the same fears that the Indian Government was going to relocate it and the American Embassy was going to buy it and build a residence for their staff. So, I want to know why you have not included it here or is it now clear that it has been taken away because we are so slow in handling this matter?

There is also the issue of visas by the British High Commission. We have been raising this matter in the House. I remember again I raised this matter when the British Government decided to move the issuing of the visas to Nairobi and hon. Isaac Musumba was directed to bring a statement here. I hope today he will deliver the response.

I keep wondering why we continue opening missions and we are not rehabilitating the ones which are getting dilapidated. Like the embarrassment we are facing in Brussels. I was really very disappointed at that time when the Foreign Affairs Ministry issued a statement saying that what was reported about the chancery and the ambassador’s residence that it was a lie. It was reported that it had been taken over by drug addicts and hooligans. We had the photos but I was so disappointed when they came to refute it and said they were handling it and money would be sent there. I went back to Brussels two months after that statement had been issued. No money has been sent to that mission, not even for the preliminary work unless I am assured today that from May this year to date, that money has been sent there.

On page 11, where the committee is listing development activities and has included drafting of the criteria and procedures for the establishment of the East African Community institutions. This   cannot be under development activities! Can you relocate this?

What we need is to be very strong on this to save the image of Uganda because I have seen these missions which are dilapidated and there is no money provided for them. I think when we come to the Committee of Supply we must relocate money to have these missions’ chanceries rehabilitated. We must take a stand and do it tomorrow when we are in the Committee of Supply and help the image of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.26
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start with the issue of investors. It is only in this country where we do not have a policy that guides foreigners who come to do business. We have the Uganda Investment Authority but they have no policy. Any Tom, Dick and Harry can come to this country either to fry pancakes, sell candles or to hawk on the streets of Kampala. So, the government must come up with a policy that regulates foreigners who come to do business here, especially at the expense of Ugandans.

We have a lot of investments that investors have set up in this country, but when you see or when you ask who is benefiting from these investments, it is the foreigners. In other countries, for an investor to go and open business there, he must have some benchmarks. For example, the amount of capital you are bringing to that country and it must be on your account to show that you have the capacity to do business in that country. This does not happen in Uganda. You must show that there are a number of citizens of that country you are going to employ in that investment, which is not in this country. So, I think the ministry must come up or the minister can tell us whether he has a policy that is regulating foreigners who come to this country to do business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs.     

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you so much for giving way. You will recall honourable members that when we were debating the statement on internal affairs, these issues were raised. I explained in very clear terms that we are doing everything possible together with the Uganda Revenue Authority to ensure that people who come here do so under certain conditions. We are developing that policy. We shall bring it before this Parliament when the time comes. So I would like to assure you that the policy is being developed. Sooner than later, it will be with us here.

Secondly, is the question of people coming in here and staying freely. I told you that there were two categories: there is a category of those who come here to look for work but there is also a category of people who come here to look for bibanja. I said as soon as our ID project goes into full swing, then this question of people coming here to sell kabalagala, to sell whatever will be history because before you can get a work permit, you must produce your identity and explain what you are doing in the country. Thank you. I thought I should give you this information.

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Nsubuga for giving way for me to provide further information. The information I want to provide regards the conduct of the investor in this country. It is true that investors are doing good things for us but at the same time, they are abusing the rights of our people.

Last year in October, 47 people from my constituency were ferried by this local investor who is carrying out some investments in Kapeeka - a joint investment with Gen. Salim Saleh. These people were locked up for a month under very hard situations. They were digging from morning to evening and surviving on only a meal a day. When they rang me and when I went with the O/C of Kapeeka to rescue my people, we were locked up by this Chinese company and what saved me and the police officer was the coming of Gen. Salim Saleh. 

Just last week, we were meeting the manufacturers of buveera and we got reports that some of these investors are even beating our children. They have even gone to the extent of abusing them sexually! That is the information I wanted to provide. Thank you.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, for the information.

Madam Speaker, the last one is very serious; it is about the British High Commission transferring the visa office from this country. We very well know that Uganda was a Protectorate of the Britain and we very well know the relationship with our former master. 

I was one of those people who allocated the land where the British High Commission is now in Kamwokya on the understanding that they were going to establish and have a permanent house in this country to be able to serve Ugandans diligently. Can you imagine today our passports being sent not only to Nairobi now but to even Ethiopia which was not even a former colony of Britain and we are chair of the commonwealth! Madam Speaker, has the government diplomatically failed to negotiate or talk to the British Government? Can they also explain to us why the relations between Britain and Uganda are not cordial? They are not normal, otherwise -(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, just to follow up from hon. Mathius Nsubuga’s issue, I have a serious issue with the Swiss Mission. The Swiss have an embassy here and they have also moved the visa office to Nairobi. In May I was leading a delegation of this Parliament to Geneva and they gave me a visa for three days and yet I have been going to Geneva every year and I have never overstayed my visit! I am going back to Geneva to lobby for the 126th IPU to come to Uganda in October. I wrote to them saying, “Friends, I am tired of sending my passport to Addis and then to Nairobi and other places. Can you give me a one-year’s visa?” They have given me two weeks only and so if I want to go back to Geneva in November, I will have to take back my passport. 

How can I take my passport three times in a year to the same mission? So, I want to hand you this letter with a diplomatic note – if it is happening to the Speaker, what about the other Ugandans? 

5.34
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think there is a problem in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. If there is proper planning, China has given us property, Nigeria has given us property, they need payment and then we get Shs 1.7 billion to take to Juba to construct a market! I think we do not know planning. 

If the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is serious, it should look at their employment policy. The reports we are getting are that the people who are being employed in Foreign Affairs are: if I stand as an MP and I lose, I am made an ambassador – political failures. They are employing people from one region and I am very certain that 60 percent of people in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs are from one region and that is the west and yet this country has many regions and they are all equal before God and also equal before Parliament. 

On the foreign missions, we are employing lobbyists like Whitaker and whoever to go and lobby for us and yet we have missions abroad and that is their core function. If the money we are giving to people like Whitaker to write a speech or lead a Minister of Trade we were giving it to a mission we could have got more value than giving it to a single person. These are commission agents and street persons who are not diplomats like our people and it is wrong for us to do that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking any clarification?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No. Five minutes is little. Do all of you have the Auditor-General’s report for –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Oh, have you changed? (Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has asserted that this government is engaging eminent world personalities to write speeches, to act as commission agents. I have worked with some of these eminent personalities as a Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry to solve major and critical problems for this country, to find markets for this country, to find solutions to problems that now afflict our country. Is it in order for the honourable member to down play and maliciously water down the role that these eminent persons are playing in regard to uplifting the image of this country and helping us solve the problems of this country? Is the honourable member in order, let alone his un-parliamentary behaviour?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the problem I have is that the output of those eminent people has never been presented here so the problem the House has is to measure their output in relation to the effect if our diplomats had been facilitated. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to give you an example of one of the deliveries of Whitaker, which was writing a speech for the Minister of Trade.

We have the Auditor-General’s report saying that missions are collecting money but they are not remitting it. I will give an example of New York: Shs 2.4 billion was collected in 2007/08; Washington DC, Shs 1 billion; UK, 300,000 pounds; which is about Shs 1 billion. The law says anybody who uses money without authority must be charged for abuse of office and that any money to be spent must be appropriated by Parliament. Now these people have spent money without authority and we are here sitting! We should have arrested these people long ago. What I am asking is: why are these missions spending the money? I think we are making a mistake. 

Also, you get a mission, which has property but there is no maintenance. We have not appropriated money for that yet there is property to maintain. The missions undertake construction yet this is work for the Ministry of Works. Even if they are in Belgium, they belong to us. If we calculate the money we have not got from missions, it amounts to billions. This country is very rich but a few individuals are using this money on their own behalf.

Hon. Okello-Okello said the money is spent. We have letters written to missions asking them to remit money for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to use and we have the evidence. It has been mentioned in our reports that missions were instructed by ministers to bring money for the activities of the ministry like attending UN –(Member timed out_)

5.41
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I am surprised that despite circulating 45 reports, the reports have disappeared. That is a new strategy and political game here but we shall handle it.

I also wish to put on record that the report of the Opposition is original and that is one of the reasons why I told my Leader of the Opposition that I do not want to belong to the Committee of Foreign Affairs. Because I have a master’s degree, I do not plagiarize. To assume that the Opposition first reads the reports of the Members on the other side then produces their report is to reduce the Opposition to plagiarism. That is intellectual dishonesty, which we do not engage in.

I want to thank government for the dialogue with LRA but our concern is: as you encourage dialogue with the LRA, there is a lot of internal harassment. Internally, the Opposition are harassed. For example, His Majesty the Kabaka Ronald Mutebi is free to visit his subjects in any part of the world but internally he is intimidated. This is unacceptable.

The Opposition –(Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, thank you for the moment. Is hon. Ekanya in order to say that the issue with the Kabaka has to do with the Opposition? Are you in order to suggest that the Kabaka has been refused? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Earlier today, the issue of the Kabaka’s inability to go somewhere was raised as a matter of national importance so it is really a matter for the House.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to summarise key issues. If you look at the policy statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, for the last three years the manner and format of presentation of reports by this ministry does not come out indicating the target outputs, time frame and the intended activities.

This format of presentation of reports poses a very serious challenge to the Members of Parliament whose role is supposed to be oversight. The report leaves out critical issues. Uganda is a member of EXIM Bank but the report does not mention anything about our contribution and benefits accruing from EXIM Bank.

If you look at the report further, you realise that the minister’s policy is only close to Foreign Affairs. The Opposition believes that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should link entire sectors of the economy. This will help us to avoid duplication, cut costs and be able to track quack investors.

His Excellency the President was conned by quack investor who passed through a mission and was granted a visa. He came here with intentions of turning around Lira Spinning Mill. That investor disappeared with Shs 50 billion. To date, the government has failed to track him. We believe that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and missions abroad should have databases indicating all visitors and tourists who come here and that report should be presented to this Parliament every quarter. This would help the Ministry of Internal Affairs while granting work permits so that we prevent foreigners who come here from selling charcoal or biscuits and competing for social services that are very scarce for the people of Uganda. 

While we salute the Government of Uganda for its role in the security council, little can be shown in terms of output and improving the life of the people of Africa. The Opposition demands that the Minister of Foreign Affairs presents to this House the current status and mandate of UPDF in Somalia.

Thank you for the bonus time, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

Are the members of UPDF on a peace keeping mission or combat and under what international obligation?

Lastly, the Opposition is saddened that in spite of the international conferences that are held in this country, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Finance have failed to present direct benefit. The Opposition demands that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and that of Finance table to this House the list of hotels that benefited from CHOGM and why there are still outstanding arrears.

This Parliament should hold the Minister of Foreign Affairs personally accountable for the losses that may have accrued as a result of fake investments with Speke Resort Munyonyo and other hotels that received money that is still in form of shares. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Ekanya, just before CHOGM, I think there was a list of hotels that was tabled here.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, some of these hotels - according to the information we have - that received money did not use the money to build hotels. Some of the hotels are in form of shares. As we speak today, our investment in Munyonyo is likely to go as a bad deal because of the manner in which the deal was entered.

5.49
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the authors of the paper. I think we are satisfied with their comments but I want to comment on a few things.

The first concern is on travel documents. I am one of those people who are hurt and would wish that the British would define their way of dealing with people because they do not deal with us as human beings. The first case is that of the visa. To get a visa, it takes an unbearably long time, and many people have missed their flights because these people do not offer us visas willingly. 

The other thing is that they have treated Ugandans inhumanely. I have two cases. My cousin wanted a visa to go and visit her husband who was on a course for three years. They rejected her application three times until she gave up. 

The other example is that of a woman married to a Briton and the Ugandan was not given a visa for reasons we can never tell. Two years now in marriage, they are separated because the High Commission here has refused to give that girl a visa. Why do they come here and we treat them as nobles, as priests, as whatever we can call them?

What does the changing of the visa office from Uganda to Ethiopia mean? Is it because they do not want to be with us here, to work with us or they no longer trust us? If they cannot trust us, then they should not be here because we are working with them and now you tell me you cannot get a visa from Uganda. 

How worse will it be when the visa office is in Ethiopia? What is the reason? What are they coming to? Are we now saying we are not going to cross roads? They do not come here; we don’t go to their countries. Why? I am so poor and you tell me to go to Ethiopia for a visa. Really is that human?

There is something wrong with their High Commission and we can also say there is something wrong with our government. If they do not want to deal with us, why treat us like this? We are their friends; we have been their friends; we were under their yoke; and now they are telling us to go to Ethiopia! I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.52
MR GAUDIOSO TINDAMANYIRE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I would not want to insist so much on the visa issue, but we should look at a fact that as Members of Parliament, we are lucky to get visas almost free of charge. I was confronted by a voter who said that he wanted a visa. He paid Shs 725,000 and they took the papers to Ethiopia, but declined to offer him a visa. The young boy reapplied and paid Shs 525,000 and his application was again declined. Really in a country like ours, is it prudent for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs not to plead and ensure that our people are not cheated?

I look at this one as outright theft by the British. Let them tell us what we are supposed to do if we are to get visas so that we are able to work with them.

On page 3 of the report, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that they promoted trade, investment, tourism and technology transfer as some of their achievements. Recently, I was with my colleagues in our Embassy in South Africa, and they talked of training ambassadors. The officers in charge of investment did not know anything at all about how to promote trade and investment in Uganda. I am wondering: when Foreign Affairs trains ambassadors, do they disseminate that information to their staff? It is so pathetic that our people in these embassies do not know what to do.

On non-tax revenue - I was with hon. Nandala in Washington and New York. The amount of money that is used as appropriation, without authority, in aid is so much. Sincerely, if all that money was to be well documented and well authorised, we would not have this business of having no money.

We found out actually that there was a certain gentleman in New York who was a contractor doing almost everything -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness in order to sleep in the House and cause a disaster? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As you know, the minister comes from Bushenyi and he was attentively listening to another colleague from Bushenyi. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 7 of the report, the ministry says that they want to open a mission in Abu Dhabi and they go ahead to say that they want to open a consulate in Abu Dhabi. What is this? Are they doing two things at ago? Have they considered the financial implications of that action or statement? 

I would like to appreciate the recommendation of the committee especially on the properties that are owned by the government in Mombasa and in the UK, that they should remain under the Ministry of Finance and not the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. They have told us of what is happening in France and Brussels. You can give away land where you have no interest, but at least people will appreciate that the Ministry of Finance has done something, especially in the development of the port in Mombasa. What we should now look at is how much money we can get so that it comes into the coffers of government –(Interjections)- development means money.

I thank the committee for the report, but let the Ministry of Foreign Affairs appreciate that Ugandans have the right to move just like the British. As you have said, you are lucky that you are going to get your visa, but so many people are suffering at Communications House with the British. What is wrong with us? Here, everybody enters freely and indeed when you go to Entebbe Airport, British Airways offloads almost three times in a week. Why don’t we have a reciprocal way of appreciation? I thank you. 

5.58 
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, I would like to start by posing one fundamental question to the minister: What is the strategic interest of Uganda in the East African Community integration? I am saying this because the strategic interest of Tanzania is tourism; the strategic interest of Rwanda is trade and services; and the strategic interest of Kenya is only to have a large market for their industries. What is the strategic interest of our motherland Uganda in the East African Community? 

Secondly, in the last financial year, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs presented a skeleton staff with so many vacancies. What is the position now as far as staffing this ministry is concerned? I am emphasising this because it has a direct impact on the performance of Uganda. 

Thirdly, under this same ministry, I would like to know what supportive mechanism the ministry has to help Ugandans who are posted either politically or those who get jobs through adverts to work at the secretariat. I am reliably informed that there are controversies surrounding the appointment of the Clerk and the Deputy Clerk of the East African Legislative Assembly. Two Ugandans applied and sat for interviews and beat all their colleagues and they were taken but later on, there were controversies. One Ugandan was about to be appointed Clerk and another also trounced other colleagues and he or she was supposed to be appointed Deputy Clerk, but there are controversies surrounding their appointment. So, what supportive mechanism is there by this ministry to support our very own people who were doing well at that level?

I only need to emphasise this point because the committee recommended the issue of appointing the Deputy Minister in charge of East African Community Affairs. It is very unfortunate that our substantive Minister of East African Community Affairs is at the same time the First Deputy Prime Minister. Honestly speaking, at the East African Community level, Uganda is not doing well as far as the performance of the minister is concerned. I think he has a huge mandate and that is the fact of the matter. All other countries with the exception of Uganda have deputies. Burundi, Kenya and Tanzania have deputies and I think Rwanda also recently appointed theirs. 

Under the mainstream Ministry of Foreign Affairs, much as we are promoting Uganda’s national interests abroad, I think this ministry should be cognisant of the fact that we are moving away from wine tossing to commercial diplomacy, which involves marketing your country as a diplomat wherever you are posted. Commercial diplomacy involves identifying the advantages that your country has over other countries. Commercial diplomacy involves attracting viable investors not investors such as JITCO that took over Lira Spinning Mill. Instead of revamping it, they were stealing spares in broad daylight and we have not even done anything. Shimoni was here – I remember they pleaded with Parliament - but it went. Until tomorrow, we are not seeing anything viable; that is what commercial diplomacy is all about. 

We are killing the career development of our diplomats by making political appointments. Once we kill the initiative, and the innovation and skills of our diplomats, that means we cannot be in a position to do commercial diplomacy wherever we are posted. When you appoint Obua Ambassador to UK because he has lost elections - I do not have anything to do with international relations and collaboration - why would you expect me to market this country? There are so many career diplomats in this country that should be taken to these embassies to market our country diplomatically. 

It is also important that there is strategic emphasis –(Interjections)- Hon. Isaac Musumba, I am not looking for an appointment. I am here in my capacity as a Member of Parliament representing the youth of Northern Uganda, and I have my country at heart. There is strategic emphasis that should be put on strategic embassies that this country has. For instance, Geneva, UN, New York. We need these career diplomats really to be placed in strategic positions. Look at our very own Ruhakana Rugunda and what he is doing for us in the US. I think that is a plus for our country, but when you go to certain embassies we are really doing badly with these political appointments! We have many career diplomats and once we deploy them, we shall market our country and attract viable investors; not these ones that are dealing in popcorns and doughnuts in Lira. Those are not investors in the true sense of investment.

These are my submissions on this committee report that should be taken in good faith and implemented for the betterment of our country. If we are preaching nationalism and patriotism, we must practice it –(Member timed out_)

6.06
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): I thank the committee for the report. On page 11, the committee talks about harmonising the East African Community curriculum, health protocols and others. I hope when the ministers sit, especially when it comes to harmonising health protocols, they look at the harmful socio-cultural aspects of human beings. I am referring particularly, to Female Genital Mutilation. It is practiced in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and other regional countries. And so, if they are going to harmonise these protocols, they should include FGM on the East African agenda so that we all move as an East African Corporation. I have had problems in Kapchorwa where we have circumcision surgeons crossing from Kenya to Uganda, and they continue the practice of circumcising our girls even when ours have said that they have abandoned the practice. This is a critical area that I urge the ministers to look at when they seat to harmonise these protocols.

I am seeking clarification from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; we have had children that are either adopted or taken under guardianship from this country to outside Uganda, notwithstanding that we do not have a guardianship law. There are many loopholes and the Law Reform Commission should be told to expedite this. My concern is about those that have been adopted and are leaving this country - what is the role of the Foreign Affairs Ministry in following up these cases?

Imagine these children that are adopted are gone; does our Ministry of Foreign Affairs have a follow-up mechanism to supervise these children? They may disappear in the crowd in a country like UK or USA.

I had an opportunity as the Chair of the Parliamentary Forum for Children to interact with the CSOs that are concerned with children affairs; they said a child was adopted from this country and the child disappeared only to discover that her kidney was removed. I want the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to tell us whether they have a record of all these issues that concern guardianship and adoption of children.

The last issue is the opening of new missions and consulates abroad. I actually welcome this idea, but my concern is that not only do we benefit from boosting trade and tourism in Uganda, but when you look at Scandinavian countries, we have a very big benefit in terms of educational career development. I want this to be encouraged and emphasised.

6.10
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I want to start with the issue which hon. Okello raised on page 3 about the performance of the budget in the preceding year. Really, how could we have an approved budget of Shs 4.008 billion and then you spend Shs 8.3 billion? That raises questions on whether there is capacity to budget and then to plan in the ministry because I am sure there was no epidemic which the ministry handled. And the committee seems to be silent about it. I do not know whether they got information about it? But when you look at the wage bill, it increased by more than two times and yet there was no recruitment of additional staff. One wonders why you had to spend more than twice what had been approved, and there is no explanation given in the report.

My second comment is on the issue of foreign missions, which most Members have reported to be in a sorry state. That is a fact, but also, when we interact with the staff in most of these missions, you find that there is no mechanism by which government sends regular information to the staff on issues of trade and investment and general statistics in the country. Most of them do not have this information and cannot, therefore, make presentations on Uganda or raise issues that are up-to-date. And this is true for most embassies.

So, we would like the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to coordinate with other ministries and find a way of regularly updating the statistics - the information, and then send it to these embassies for them to use in relating and linking with other countries.

I also want to know from the minister how the Ministry of Foreign Affairs relates with the ministry responsible for labour on issues of externalisation of labour. I know of late it has been the security guards going to Iraq and the Middle East, but I have also been to countries like Botswana which want health workers. They have reached a level of signing a Memorandum of Understanding with countries like Cambodia and others and yet we know there are many health workers in this country who are not employed. I was in Southern Sudan sometime back and they wanted teachers, nurses and other health workers. And actually, they were complaining that this opportunity was going to Kenya and other countries and yet Uganda had contributed a lot to the liberation of Southern Sudan. But it appears that at our level here in Government, we do not take interest in relating to these countries and ensuring that we find employment for our many children who are unemployed.

I also agree with the committee’s observation on page 14 that there is need to actualise the functional relations between the national parliaments and the East African Legislation Assembly. When we look at other sister countries like Tanzania - I have been to the Parliament of Tanzania - the agenda and issues which go to EALA find their way to the national parliament either before the Council of Ministers or the East African Summit of the EALA members. Some of the issues are also debated so that there is informed debate in EALA where members of the national parliament have contributed.

But here, it appears that the Executive arm of government has no interest in bringing some of these issues to Parliament. For instance, if you asked any Member of Parliament how you can access justice in the East African Court of Justice, I am sure most Members do not know.

I was recently in Southern Africa interfacing with judges and I was happy to hear that almost every country and every citizen knows how to go to the SADC Court of Justice, which is in Windhoek, Namibia. They were giving us an update on how citizens from various countries are going to this court. But in our case, only a few people know.

I, therefore, support the recommendation and observation of the committee that the ministry should work out modalities of how EALA and other organs of the East African Community can link with the national structures, including our Parliament, so that the process of integration can be strengthened and taken forward. I thank you very much. 

6.14
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I have just a few comments; on page 3, the committee talks about achievements by the ministry and one of them is Uganda becoming a member of the UN Security Council. However, I feel that although Uganda did a lot to actually become a member of the Security Council, when other countries like Iran, Japan, Turkey and Iceland were suffering - they were busy campaigning and Uganda was able to become member of the Security Council, unopposed, by the African continent.

And just about a few months ago, Uganda was also made Chair of the Security Council. But the challenge is that how is Uganda using the position on the Security Council to promote its interests? For example, while we were chairing the Security Council, how could we fail to get the United Nations to at least support the peacekeepers in Somalia? How can Uganda use the influence it has? Being a member of the Security Council is a very important achievement for a country, but we are not using that chance as expected. Even with Uganda as a member of the Security Council, you find Britain withdrawing its visa office from Uganda! 

The other comment I have in connection with that is the question of promoting trade, investment, tourism and technology transfer, which is highlighted as an achievement. We know very well that Uganda, and especially our President, went a long way to promote AGOA. But what has Uganda benefited from AGOA? Uganda tries its level best and we get chances and opportunities to promote our country and our trade, but we miss because maybe there is a missing link between Foreign Affairs and other sectors of government. 

The other comment I have is on page 6. The committee recommends that the money which was earmarked for building a market in Juba, Shs 1.733 billion, should be reallocated for building an embassy in Abu Dhabi; and Shs 600 million for the Bujumbura mission. But I feel that the committee should have gone further to evaluate how much we need to build a mission in Abu Dhabi because for sure, I do not know if it takes Shs 200 million to build a mission. Maybe you will have to just work on the foundation alone. You need to look at this. Rather than putting Shs 200 million in Abu Dhabi and Shs 600 million in Bujumbura, why don’t you consolidate and say, “This year, let us build just one mission in one place and complete that.” And that will be done.

The other point is that our missions need to be business-like and our country needs to tap opportunities where they exist. I had an opportunity to visit our embassy in New York which was built by somebody that has often been maligned, that is, Amin. Amin was able to go to New York and say, “Okay, I am going to look for a plot adjacent to the American Embassy and I am going to build a building taller than the American Embassy.” And he did it. And that place is a prime area. Just opposite New York. So, rather than spend a lot of money elsewhere - building markets in Juba - you could actually increase the number of floors on that plot in New York and make more money for our country. But that requires a lot of thinking and planning.

I also want to talk about regional co-operation and our ability to study the geo-politics in our region. Recently, we had the Migingo and Rukwanzi issues and it is so shocking that even from Sudan we had an attack in Moyo. And these are happening at a time when in Southern Sudan there are elections in the offing. We shall also be having elections in DRC very soon. This is also happening at a time when a number of donors are reducing their assistance to Uganda. 

So, can the Ministry of Foreign Affairs tell Parliament what could be happening to our country? Why can’t we use our position to be able to make Uganda felt on the international scene, let alone even solve these simple problems? Why are these problems emerging at this time? (Member timed out_)

6.20
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the committee for the good report. I would like to restrict myself to the East African Community. I am extremely happy that the East African Community is a ministry of its own, but I am not yet happy with the location of the ministry. Today, if you went to visit the Ministry of East African Community Affairs - even the accessibility - it would require a bit of money to make it a better ministry. It is young, has good quality people –(Interjections)- I am talking about the East African Community. But the problem is that they do not have enough money. The lift in that building is archaic - very old. You cannot determine where you want to go - it will take you anywhere. It is important to consider that because we are now competing as somebody put it, to see how we can get something out of the East African Community. Imagine if people from Tanzania or Kenya came to visit the East African Community’s offices, I think they would not be happy. 

I have a problem with the way we are negotiating with partner states. Recently, I saw a proposal for the roads and railway transport in East Africa. When you look at the whole map, you see that Uganda is being edged out; you see Kenya trying to reach out to Sudan and Tanzania crossing to Rwanda by railway. So, you wonder; what are we left with as Uganda? This rhymes with what my colleague said that most likely the Minister of East African Community Affairs is not vigilant in negotiating for a reasonable share, especially bearing in mind that at one time, we lost out completely from the East African Community. 

We thought we would have Soroti Flying School as a centre of excellence, but there is no effort in that direction. I think now the Government of Uganda is looking for funds to buy some training planes, but there is no effort to secure some funding from the East African basket. In this case, it is important that we get a Minister of State who can stay in Arusha and negotiate with other East African ministers so that we get a share from whatever is apportioned -(Interjection)- no, he is hardly there.

I am also happy that when we visited Arusha in Tanzania and even Kenya, we found out that Uganda is the only country that has paid almost its full contribution to East Africa. We must thank the government, especially the Foreign Affairs Ministry and Ministry of Finance for doing that. We met the people from Kenya and Tanzania and all of them are behind in their remittances to the East African Community but Uganda has done its job, which is a rare quality in Uganda, and I am sure we shall continue to do well.

When you look at the East African Community today, the Tanzanians are hostile to Ugandans. Some of you have a constituency neighbouring Tanzania, but nobody cares to bridge the relationship between Uganda and Tanzania, yet we think we are one. We do not see that oneness - our people who cross over to Tanzania get their cows held up while others have committed suicide because their cows have been taken by Tanzanians and yet we belong to one home. I have appealed to the Minister for East Africa, hon. Kategaya - I do not think he has been able to help us in that direction. Otherwise, the people of Isingiro have suffered so much at the hands of Tanzanians. We do not have water - Kagera is a river where we can get water - but we cannot allow our animals to go to Kagera. So we still have a problem of oneness between Uganda and Tanzania. This means that the East African Community you are talking about is not about to be there for us in Isingiro.

Finally, I would think that Foreign Affairs, and especially when we have the President who is in for investors, should send ambassadors of high quality. I remember as a young boy in school, Mugume, who is now the PS was in New Delhi. He is a person of quality - even Baba in Tokyo. They know what they are doing. But nowadays you pick somebody I have defeated in a constituency and you reward him to be an ambassador - what do you expect from him? (Laughter) 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to assume that everybody who has had a constituency and lost it is irrelevant to society? Is it in order for people in this House to forget that a time will come when they will cease being Members of Parliament and that does not mean that they are irrelevant to society? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, I think you should be suggesting that we get different criteria, but not to say that because someone lost, they are not good people. I think it is not right.

MR BYANYIMA: No, but what I am saying is that with an ambassador, you do not wake up one day and become an ambassador. You must go in your area of competence. You do not pick anybody on the street and make them ambassadors. We want people of quality. For example, if I am appointed today as a minister, I must sit with the PS, the under-secretary and the technical people to train me and help me. But ambassadors are people who roam in different countries. Some of them cannot differentiate their right from the left –(Interjections)- no, I cannot accept that one. (Laughter) If I do not become a Member of Parliament today, I will go to an area where I have competence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, I want to add something to what you are saying about what we are benefiting from the community. You know the community is based in Arusha. So, the Tanzanians remain in their country and the Kenyans drive there. It is us who use foreign exchange to fly there; we live in the hotels using foreign exchange and it costs us more to be there than those people. 

6.28
MS ANGUFIRU MARGARET (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I rise to commend the report of the Foreign Affairs Committee - it has been elaborate. But is it in order for people to continue talking and laughing when a Member is on the Floor? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us protect the Member for Ayivu.

MS ANGUFIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with the committee in saying they disagreed with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ plans to construct a market in Juba, Southern Sudan at a cost of Shs 1.733 billion. In an effort to support Ugandan traders, I believe this is completely wrong. We, in Uganda, fail to select our priorities. The government should build a market at the border at Keri, between Koboko and Sudan, and not in Juba. The market is for people to trade, but Uganda cannot spend Shs 1.733 billion to build a market in Juba. What will our Ugandan traders benefit from such a market? There is nothing we benefit. Ugandan traders cannot be supported by the construction of a market, but rather by giving them soft loans and trainers from the Uganda Investment Authority. A market at Keri will serve both Ugandans and Sudanese. 

How will government ensure the security of Ugandan traders in Juba when our traders have always been harassed, beaten up, robbed, raped and even killed in Sudan? Uganda has done so much for Sudan, but when will the people appreciate and thank the Ugandan Government for all it has done - even to the extent of shading blood for Sudan? What will Ugandan –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you for giving way. The information I want to give you is that anybody else other than a Sudanese citizen cannot invest in Sudan. This means that a Ugandan cannot just move from Uganda to Sudan and trade freely. However, the Sudanese come here very freely and harass Ugandans and yet after coming here very freely, they are not harassed but welcomed.

MS ANGUFIRU: Thank you very much for that very correct information. It is quite true the Sudanese are very hostile and our Ugandans cannot move freely to go and trade in Juba. Even when they are there, we know that they have been facing a lot of problems. So, why should government go and use Shs 1.733 billion to construct a market in Juba? Is there such a market in Uganda? If so, where is it? Why can’t we plan properly and build Uganda instead of spending money to build Sudan.

6.33
MR THEODORE SEKIKUUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much. I would like to pick up from where my colleague, hon. Angufiru, has ended. I too stand here to express my dismay at how government can choose to construct a Shs 1.733 billion market in Juba as our properties abroad have been condemned and brought down. I think before you stretch out to put up new properties, it is rational that you sustain those that you have in place. 

As a point of observation, I thought that as we look at policy statements as we are doing, Cabinet ministers ought to be present to take charge. In a sense, I find myself handicapped when I see only hon. Musumba here. It is as if we are back biting his other senior colleagues. I would have wanted them here so that they can take it from the horse’s mouth rather than delegating the paperwork to hon. Musumba, and when there is something juicy, others are there to take charge. It is really terrible. (Laughter) I am constrained. 

Having said that, I can see we were given offers in Lagos and Beijing by the Nigerian and Chinese governments. To realise that the land we were given is going to be taken back by December is a bit disturbing. It is disturbing to know that the Wanume Kibedis of the 1970s and the 20th Century could be more effective and patriotic than the current crop of foreign ministers. They really moved out to consolidate and put up Ugandan assets abroad – in New York, London and even these ones that are being condemned now. All these were in place during the tenure of those past leaders. 

History is strange; history is rehabilitating Amin, I am afraid. History is rehabilitating the Wanume Kibedis of this world whereas the supposed polished members are here. When they know it is time to exchange views with Parliament, they keep away and they are at a safe distance. They are in the country but they allow Musumba to come here and he makes us feel sympathetic for him. I do not think we should go on like this. We really demand that senior Cabinet ministers come and take charge.

I also see how Uganda Property Holdings Ltd, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, is demanding, even moving by hook or crook, to have it transferred to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Just a few years ago, while hon. Musumba and hon. Kutesa were in Finance, they placed Uganda Property Holdings Ltd in the Ministry of Finance. Now that they are in Foreign Affairs, they are running to grab it and take it to Foreign Affairs. (Laughter) This is excessive appetite -(Laughter)– and it should not be allowed. 

This is the same case with NSSF. As you all remember, it was under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. They pulled it to Finance and when they left Finance, some of our colleagues were crying that it be pushed back to Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Why is history being so harsh to some of us who are seeing all this? Where shall we end? Why should personal interests take over and override national interests? These are not “person to holder” but national assets. 

Let me make a humble request to hon. Musumba and hon. Sam Kutesa, wherever he is; let him keep off. It is not proper. Enough is enough! I think you cannot take this country too far. Sometimes it is revolting and nobody can be –(Member timed out_)

6.38
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for their report, but at the same time, the report paints a grave picture about the non-tax revenue. They go on to say that the Minister of Foreign Affairs and that of Planning and Economic Development, almost hampered them in their quest to know how these finances are being remitted back. They go on to say there is gross mismanagement of non-tax revenue.

If this ministry wants more money, like they are crying out that all embassies are in dire need of money, if they are not transparent with the little they have, where will Parliament get the confidence to give them more money? They are already using their hands to dip into the little they have, which is not so little, but at the same time they say, “Please give us more”. Parliament can only do that after they have shown us that they are transparent concerning money, and that they will be faithful with whatever little they have.

Recently, I was approached by the mother of a deceased youth in Iraq. The lady claimed that her son died in Iraq. When I tried to inquire about which organisation was responsible for delivering this young man to Iraq, how many months this person was supposed to spend in Iraq, and how much money they were claiming, they did not have any information. I did not know whether to run to Ministry of Foreign Affairs to get this information or to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This should be clarified. Where can somebody run to for information regarding people employed in Iraq, Afghanistan or any other foreign country? 

Thirdly, when we were in Mombasa, the Consulate there tried to appeal to Members of Parliament to talk to the Government of Uganda such that the Government of Uganda engages the Government of Kenya, so that they can secure a license for a car depot for a Ugandan company. Is that done? I hear the minister confirming that it is done. It is unfortunate that the Consulate does not have information on how we can go about securing a license for one of our companies in Mombasa.

I thank you, Madam Speaker, and let me hope that I will get that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the issue of the market, I want the Minister of Finance to advise me on how to explain to the people of Jinja that the Ministry of Finance has failed to repair Jinja central market but is providing money for a market in Juba. You will explain later.

6.41
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, allow me to speak this evening like an economic policy analyst. I am both a teacher and an economic policy analyst. I will tell you more about that later.

There is a very high level of paradox regarding crowding out local investments in this country in the name of regional and international cooperation or relations. I am not against international and regional cooperation, but our local investors in Uganda are denied a lot of opportunities by big companies that come under the blessing of regional cooperation; companies like Unilever, for example. 

Unilever produces a lot and Ugandans cannot come and out-compete them because first of all, they do not have the money to invest to the extent of Unilever’s productions. I want to call upon this country to act patriotically and protect the interests of Uganda’s local investors against the interests of national and regional cooperation.

Secondly, I want to advise that this country adopts a mortgage programme instead of buying out properties or missions abroad. Buying becomes more expensive and yet mortgaging would also allow you to slowly buy out the property. This is more beneficial than considering buying it right away, as we claim we do not have enough money to acquire properties abroad.

Thirdly, I want to condemn, in the strongest terms, this business of Uganda budgeting huge sums of money for international meetings yet Ugandans are not seeing the benefits that we are reaping from the meetings. I think this should be taken a little more seriously. We are not given reports of how we benefit, and you find that the guests that come for these big international meetings end up paying their own costs. 

Why are we investing in these big meetings? We are putting a lot of taxpayers’ money into these big meetings and we are not given reports of how we are benefiting. We do not see the profits made and yet Ugandans who go as guests abroad also incur a lot of costs by meeting their bills as they go for those meetings. 

I rest my case by thanking the Government of Uganda –(Member timed out_)

6.46
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to share my views. I want to thank the committee for the job well done. 

I have some issues that need clarification regarding our relationship with the international community and neighbouring countries. Sometime back in June, we were put in a very difficult situation when we got communication from the ICC about the indictment of President Bashir. Our own minister came out with a position, which was in support of the indictment, and that as a country, we must take it. Unfortunately, the position was disowned by His Excellency the President. I now want to know where we belong. Where do we belong regarding the ICC indictment? 

Are we still part of these signatories to the Rome Statute or not? The position taken by Government has put us in a very awkward position. We have an obligation to stand by the international commitment because we are signatories to the International Criminal Court and the Rome Statute. 

I would like to comment on the Shs 1.733 billion directed for the Juba market. I am proposing that that money be directed to Brussels for strategic reasons. We have the EU, the ACP-EU and the European Parliament in Brussels. If we direct that money to Brussels, we are going to see the impact, and we are getting a lot of money from the European Union, the ACP-EU and so forth. Why must we divide this money into small percentages that will not have any impact? I strongly recommend that that money should be directed to one mission and then in the next financial year, we plan for another mission. Gradually, we can then recover and regain the glory of our foreign missions.

I would like to comment on the ICC conference. In May next year, we are supposed to host the ICC meeting to review the Rome Statute in Uganda. On page 11 of this report, it is not mentioned as one of the activities to be carried out in the FY 2009/2010. Where do we belong? Are we going to host the meeting or not?

On EALA, the Minister for East African Community is requesting for some money to carry out workshops, 40 talk shows, press conferences and so forth. Why don’t we give this money to EALA so that they can move countrywide and gather information, so that when they are deliberating on our behalf, they have information. Their capacity is not being built and yet they speak for us. These are people who make laws on our behalf.

Finally, I have a comment on the federation of East Africa. We have been interacting with the neighbouring countries, Tanzania and Kenya. They are saying in order for them to federate, we must agree on term limits. That is what the Tanzanians and the Kenyans are saying. Must term limits deny us a federation for the East African Community? Must they deny us? I think we have got to move and put ourselves above personal egos and personal interests. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have just realised that the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Finance, the chair of the committee and one of my clerks are all fasting. When I looked at the time, I think we are about to interfere with their rights. So far, 20 members have contributed; so let me ask the Minister of Foreign Affairs to respond so that we can allow you to go and break your fast.

6.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS, REGIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I also want to thank the chairperson of the committee and I have the following responses to give.

On the acquisition, development and management of properties abroad, I agree with the parliamentary committee’s observation about the deplorable state of the properties abroad, which has indeed created a negative image of our country. However, there is a reason for this; it is due to the cumulative lack of funds to maintain these properties, and this has been going on for a long time.

The ministry has not failed to develop this policy. It has taken a long time for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come up with a policy on acquisition, development and management of properties abroad due to the extensive consultations required in the development of such a policy. Many stakeholders have had to be consulted, including this very parliamentary committee on foreign affairs. Our presentation has been consistent. We have enlisted the support of this Parliament year in, year out and of course the committee relevant to us, for increased funding to ensure that these properties are developed. 

The first people who get embarrassed when buildings abroad are substandard are the officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ourselves. It does not have to take somebody from here to go out there and tell us that our properties are embarrassing us - (Mr Okupa rose_) Madam Speaker, the honourable from Kasilo is supposed to be my friend; I beg that he allows me to continue uninterrupted. We would be pleased if the Parliament continued their support and translated it into allocation of money to the area of property improvement.

There was an issue that was raised relating to the figures that appear to be at 200 percent from the approved budget release. The question was: Is this lack of planning or not? There were two elements that caused this increase. The first one was our securing the seat at the UN Security Council. We came to this House after we secured it and a supplementary was created, which was used to finance the Security Council —(Interjection)- We could not have budgeted for the Security Council until we got it. Anybody who knows budgeting guidelines knows that you can only budget for that which you already have.

Secondly, we also had a wage bill. There was a policy review, which was mid-term. This policy review was to the effect that foreign service officers who originally were not receiving money as employees of the Government here locally are now receiving their salaries in local currency here as part of the single spine structure of salary payments. It is only those two aspects that caused the overrun, and that was appropriated by this Parliament through supplementaries.

There have been a number of questions that have come up as well. The hon. Kibanzanga did ask about our strategic interest, the common market, and that we get problems when we try to take goods to the neighbouring countries. He also asked for the various commissions that have been allocated in various countries. He gave the example of Kiswahili, and that the Lake Victoria Basin Commission is in Kenya. He asked, “What do we have?” 

In Uganda, we have a number of these East African Community agencies. The East African Development Bank is headquartered here, the Inter University Council, the Civil Aviation Security and Safety Oversight Agency is also based here –(Interjections)– it is here. We have a number of them here, but with the community now growing to five member states, we must bear in mind the rules of equity. For whatever other organisations that come up, we have to consider all the five countries and have an equitable allocation throughout the countries. 

There were questions relating to the construction of the market in Juba. This came up in the committee report and it was raised by hon. Nandala, among others. Even you, Madam Speaker, asked why we should build a market in Juba when a market in Jinja is not yet constructed. I want to inform you that the market in Jinja has been provided for –(Interjections)– Yes, the Cabinet has made special funding arrangements for the markets around here. The market in Juba, however –(Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to disrupt the minister, but we would want the records of Parliament to be very clear. That provision about the markets has not been very clear, and also the issue of the budget rising from Shs 4 billion to Shs 8 billion for Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In his explanation, he is saying that it is because of the supplementary for the New York Mission. The votes for the mission are 201 and 301, so it is not correct to say that the New York Mission is 006. Surely, the records of Parliament should be very clear. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, when I talk about –(Interjections)– my senior colleague, hon. Kutesa, is not here. He is in Ssembabule, but I am here –(Interruption) 

MR SEKIKUUBO: Madam Speaker, on a number of occasions I tried to catch your eye though I had not succeeded yet.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you accusing the Speaker of not seeing you? I am not obliged on that. I gave you the chance to speak so do not accuse me.

MR SEKIKUUBO: Madam Speaker, I was seeking to address a matter that is of parliamentary importance in the sense that even the approved budget plus the supplementary reached Shs 8 billion as reflected on page 3. However, the money down here is Shs 19 – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we shall deal with the issues of money in the Committee of Supply. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to recommend that in the course of time, the parliamentary committee may wish to visit Juba and satisfy itself as to why the government made this recommendation. 

I had the opportunity of leading a delegation to Juba and we found over 30,000 Ugandans who are actively selling many agricultural products of Uganda in the Juba markets. Despite that, by virtue of that market being available to us, substantial amounts of money had come into our economy but prices of our agricultural foodstuffs have gone up. Despite that, the conditions under which these people operate are so deplorable. There is no market and as a consequence –(Interruption) 

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am forced to rise on a point of order. Everyone knows that matters of trade are handled by the Ministry of Trade. We know very clearly that the responsibility of Ministry of Foreign Affairs is to protect Ugandans wherever they are. Is it, therefore, in order for the minister to continue defending Ministry of Foreign Affairs building a market in Juba yet that is under the docket of Ministry of Trade?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, why haven’t you been to markets in Kenya, Congo – there are also Ugandans trading there!

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I will leave the matter of markets in the able hands of this Parliament. At this time, we have no problem with the recommendation of the committee that the building of the market be deferred. I wanted to only recommend that the House can continue to do further investigations in this matter if it so wishes. 

Hon. Magoola raised the issue of visas. I can only say that we will continue to engage the British and the other people. Now that you have brought it to our attention, in the usual diplomatic way, we will see that this matter is resolved.

The only problem is that sometimes the way Ugandans use the privileges that other countries give to us, tends to make those countries develop second thoughts about how to treat us. This is with exception of the Deputy Speaker. (Laughter) Anyway, we will take it up using the appropriate channels.

Finally, I would like to thank the committee and Members for their opinions and comments. I would like to say that we have taken note of all your opinions as raised. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that this House adopts the report of the Committee of Foreign Affairs.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As we said, the Committee of Supply will be dealt with tomorrow. I am really appealing to the Minister of Finance and committee chairpersons, together with the Shadow Finance Minister to harmonise the figures. 

Secondly, we expected a statement on the issue of the Kabaka, but when I looked at the statement which the minister brought, I realised that it was incomplete; it did not include the issue of what happened in Jinja yesterday. So, we want a full statement on the Kabaka’s issue and on what happened in Jinja yesterday. Please go and review your statement in completion. You will present it tomorrow. House adjourned to 10 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 7.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 September 2009 at 10.00 a.m.)

