Thursday, 07 September 2006

Parliament met at 11.10 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to begin by altering the Order Paper to permit the motion, that is, item No. 5, to replace item No. 4, which will be answered in the afternoon. So we shall have the motion this morning and the questions for oral answer will be attended to in the afternoon. Similarly, the report on the Civil Aviation Authority upgrading has been completed. If the power behaves, we shall also have it in the afternoon.  

The second matter concerns our Budget process. We have mentioned many things in passing but we have never quite concretised them. So I would now instruct the Clerk and his team to generate a paper for consideration of this House and our committees on the sequencing of the Budget process. That is because we keep talking about it but we have never actually taken a decision on what should come first and what should come last. So it is time we took a decision after examining that process specifically. It may even require amendment of the Budget Act, so the Clerk and his team should start on it and we shall pursue it later in the year.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2006

11.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I beg to move that a bill entitled “The Appropriations Bill, 2006” be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

11.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Certificate of Financial Implications thereto on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is committed to the joint team of the Budget Committee and the Finance Committee. Yesterday we referred the Supplementary Appropriations Bill to the Budget Committee, the advantage being that all the chairpersons of all the committees are Members of the Budget Committee and can sit together in one session. But also, we know that the Committee on Finance has the right to deal with these matters, so I ask them to team up on both of these Bills so that they sit in one session, deal with the matters and report back at the earliest opportunity.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE ONGOING PEACE TALKS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA AND LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY IN JUBA, SOUTHERN SUDAN

11.18
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This motion is quite comprehensive, it is self-explanatory and, therefore, I will not dwell much on the background. But just allow me to give a very brief justification for this motion. 

To share grief –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wasike, first present the motion. It will be seconded, and then we can allow you to proceed with its justification.

MR WASIKE: Madam Speaker, I beg to move the motion that Parliament do resolve as will be indicated in the details. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the heading of your motion?

MR WASIKE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, read it.

MR WASIKE: “Whereas the Parliament of Uganda has –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the copy of your motion?

MR WASIKE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read the heading only.

MR WASIKE: It is, “A motion for a resolution of Parliament on the ongoing peace talks between the government of Uganda and Lord’s Resistance Army in Juba, Southern Sudan.”

MR EUKU: Madam Speaker, I second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MR WASIKE: Madam Speaker, there was no induction in this respect, so you will bear with me. I will not dwell on the detailed –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wasike, read the text of the motion.  

MR WASIKE: This motion is moved under rules 43 and 50 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda has a mandate to ensure the protection of the Constitution and to promote democratic governance in Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS for the last 18 years, the Northern part of Uganda has been riddled with insurgency and strife brought about by the conflict between the government of Uganda Armed Forces and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), on a number of occasions requiring a response from both the national and international community; 

AWARE THAT the armed conflict has negatively impacted on the lives of many as well as devastating the economy by destabilising people’s lives, destruction and loss of properties and hindering development of the country -evident in the internal displacement of over one million people, increased poverty levels, deterioration of delivery of health, education and other social services and an increase in mortality rates, thereby hindering the government’s commitment to achieving the Millennium Development Goals; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT the government of Southern Sudan (GOSS) headed by the President, His Excellency Salva Kiir, and the Vice-President, His Excellency Dr Riek Machar, have spearheaded efforts to have a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Northern Uganda, currently the subject of the peace talks in Juba, Southern Sudan; 

NOTING THAT some honourable members of this Parliament in their individual capacities have shown tremendous support for the peace talks and have been involved in activities to that effect; 

REAFFIRMING Parliament’s support for all achievements so far made, including the agreement to have a cessation of hostilities among others; 

RECOGNISING THAT the successes of these talks and the peaceful resolution of the conflict are dependent on the goodwill and utmost good faith of all the parties involved; 

NOW THEREFORE this motion is moved that this House resolves as follows:
1.	That it appreciates and commends the effort and resolve on the part of the government of Uganda to participate in the peace talks.
2.	That it supports the ongoing negotiations between the government of Uganda and the Lords Resistance Army and associates itself with the on-going talks.
3.	That it pays glowing tribute to the government of Southern Sudan (GOSS) in general and to His Excellency, President Salva Kiir and His Excellency the Vice President Dr Riek Machar for the tireless efforts that they have put in and continue to put in as the mediators.
4.	That it implores all the people of Uganda wherever they are to give their unreserved support to this initiative and process.
5.	That it calls upon the government of Uganda to continue being more open hearted and reconciliatory and to continue with the process to its final logical conclusion in the interest of peace in Northern Uganda as well as the whole of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

11.28
MR SIMON EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me an opportunity to second this motion –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the justification of the motion?

MR WASIKE: Madam Speaker, to share grief is actually to express brotherhood. For us in Busia and other parts of the country, we share the grief that our Northern brothers and sisters are going through. Surely, we share that grief in the spirit of universal brotherhood and sisterhood.

It is also discipline to say thank you - it is to show good manners. The efforts that have been shown by the government of Southern Sudan - today I was reading in the press the Vice-President is camped somewhere to make sure that the process is successful. So, to say thank you to such a person is really to show good manners. 

When you look at the process, what has been demonstrated by all parties: the LRA, the government of Uganda, the mediators, Members of Parliament and everybody involved, finally when the dust settles, the real enemy of the people of Northern Uganda will be exposed. The issue will be easier to deal with because all of us will be united in the interest of peace. When we say that Northern Uganda is suffering and we are not affected, we shall only be deceiving ourselves. So, when we come up and identify the problem and expose the real enemy it will be easier to deal with. 

So, Madam Speaker, the rest of the text is very clear, it is self-explanatory, some Members here have sacrificed and spent their own money to go to Garamba, and they have made it clear that they support the process. We all support the process and that is the spirit in which this motion is brought before this Parliament.

You may also be aware that it is quite clear that as Parliament we need to pronounce ourselves and have a resolution. When we just talk without a resolution, then Parliament as an institution has not talked. So, this motion is meant to come up to show the views or position of Parliament as an institution. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EUKU: Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion moved by my colleague, hon. Wasike. 

Madam Speaker, I am mindful of the long suffering of the people of Northern Uganda generally and part of Eastern Uganda particularly Teso where I come from. The war has inflicted a lot of injury and made a lot of deterioration in aspects of life.

This war has spilled over to Southern Sudan, the DRC and the Central African Republic. In other words, the LRA conflict in Northern Uganda has become an international war in nature. Most of the countries in Africa are suffering the spill over effects of the Northern war waged by the LRA. The insecurity that is caused by LRA should not be narrowed down to only one head fighting against the government in power. I am grateful to the government of Uganda for taking it upon itself to talk peace in order to bring this war to its logical end. 

I appreciate that Ugandans have learnt a very great lesson from this war. The example, which the government has shown Ugandans to unite and end this war, is the one that this august House should appreciate and commend.

This conflict of the LRA against the government of Uganda has assumed a chunk of our budget. Much of the social services that would have been improved upon or built by our meager resources have been consumed by this war. I know our Government is so much committed to building on its accomplishments, but unfortunately this war has made a lot of deterioration on the development of this country.

I appreciate that Ugandans pay taxes, but this war has denied them an opportunity to enjoy their taxes. So, the position that Government has taken to end the war in a peaceful manner other than engaging our sons and daughters in this war is good and I pray that this Parliament supports it. I have been longing for a time when this war would come to a logical end, and an opportunity has now come where the government has fully committed itself.  

I would also like to take this opportunity to ask the government of Uganda that while negotiating peace with the LRA - because when I read in papers the leaders of the LRA are a bit afraid of the role of the International Criminal Court (ICC). I would like to ask my colleagues to support the government to withdraw the case from the ICC so that our brothers, who waged the war in Northern Uganda, can be set free.  

I appreciate that from 1986 when NRA assumed power, there have been a lot of conflicts, but most of these conflicts have been resolved through peaceful means and the former rebels or dissidents were integrated into the UPDF. So I would also like to ask colleagues to support the four members of the High Command of the LRA who are indicted, to be given a blanket amnesty as the government of Uganda has already agreed.

I want to thank the leadership of the government of Southern Sudan led by His Excellency Dr Salva Kiir, and the Vice-President, His Excellency Dr Riek Machar, for initiating the peace talks and also facilitating the process to-date. I would like to extend my prayers and invitation to Gen. Joseph Kony, the leader of the LRA, together with his deputy and the team of negotiators to pursue this line ceaselessly until it is brought to a logical conclusion.  

Finally, I want to urge my colleagues in this august House to support the motion. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

11.35
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I am standing to support the motion, but I want to move an amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Later. Do you not want to speak to it? Do you not want to speak to the motion or go straight to the amendment? Speak to the motion then you can propose later.

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, we are at a time when questions are being asked from outside Parliament, “What is Parliament doing as an institution?” It is our responsibility to come out and pronounce ourselves in specific terms as has been clearly laid out in this motion so that we can have appropriate answers - in a common voice - to the people out there.  

There has been a misunderstanding within the communities outside this Parliament to the effect that there is a division in this House. It is said that there are those of us who support the efforts and those who don’t. This proposed motion will help to clear the air because it will come out with the support of all the sides. My strongest appeal is that we all give it the support it requires so that we clean ourselves in the face of the people we represent. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

11.38
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank God that we have reached this point because the war in the North has taken such a long time. In reality, we have no excuse before God that we have allowed this war to go on up to this time.  

I remember when I was in this House in the Sixth Parliament, the issue of peace talks and methods of resolving this conflict were discussed but for a long time we never came to a conclusion on the right way of resolving it. It is not the first war to have taken place in the world since humanity was created, but it has shown that unless we accept to humble ourselves and stop being proud – pride is a very bad thing. Sometimes to talk - people think that talking is a weakness, but it is the best thing to do when there is a conflict at any level. Even at family level, it is only when you accept to talk that there will be peace within your family.  

Even Biblically, reconciliation, forgiveness and tolerance are very important principles. They are very clearly stated in the Bible, and if only we had the humility to accept it, we would not have gone to this level! We cannot mention how much our people have suffered; the humiliation that our people have faced in the North; the kidnapping of young children; the suffering of the women and the whole population is very vivid in the memories of the people of Northern Uganda especially the Acholi sub-region.  

From 1991 to 1993, I had the opportunity to participate in persuasion, peace and reconciliation of the people of the North to see how we could abandon this war. Such a rich region agriculturally and economically has been left to waste. This gives me the strength to say that we must support this motion. We must support and thank our Government for having accepted to come to this level now. It has not been easy - 20 years is a very long period but I agree and accept strongly that we must support all those who are involved in the peace talks now taking place in Juba.

Let this be a lesson for the future. I hope and pray that this war will come to an end through the process that we are having now. But even as we do it, let it be a lesson to this country and other African countries. Africa has suffered so much because of very long, extended and protracted wars, which are useless because what do you gain out of it? Africa has suffered and we shall continue to suffer. When you look at the countries that are involved in wars now: Southern Sudan, which has taken such a long time, the Congo, and many more, these should be lessons that when situations like this come let us use all efforts to end them.  

I know you cannot rule out military action because it is part of resolving conflicts but it should not be the only method because alone, it shall never resolve a conflict. There is no conflict I can think of which has been solved only militarily. Some peace talks must always come in. So, we pray that these are lessons so that in future whenever we have such conflicts, we should be able to come to a round table and talk.

I want to appreciate the efforts of the government of Southern Sudan and actually the whole Government of Sudan because this war could not have been sustained for a long time, especially by Kony. How could Kony have been able to sustain this war up to this time? There must have been people who were helping him. Therefore, I thank God that the people who have been helping Kony have now seen the sense and accepted to have peace talks.  

I also want to thank those Ugandans who have been supporting the war. I am happy that people are now accepting that we should talk peace because if we did not also support it internally, this war would not have taken this long. I also pray that as we do this we also forgive those who have been supporting the war.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for having given me this opportunity and also to thank Members for listening to me.  

11.45
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to first thank the mover of this motion. I really believe that this motion has come at a time when the support of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda as an institution and as the legislative organ of Government should be on record.  

Madam Speaker, we have been wondering and saying that the success of these peace talks is going to be the success for all Ugandans, but their failure will affect the entire country, although we hope and pray that they succeed. I have a strong conviction that this time we have decided as a country to really talk peace with Joseph Kony and the LRA. I believe that time is up for any right thinking Ugandan to begin spreading the gospel of sustainable peace, unity in diversity, justice, and having reconciliation.  

As a representative of the young people of the Northern region I must submit in this Parliament that the young people have been at the forefront as victims in this Northern conflict. They have been the main and the major target for abduction, rape and recruitment as child soldiers. They are very many; even some of them have been infected with HIV/AIDS. I pray that this Parliament supports this motion because I believe that once it is supported, the message will be clear to Joseph Kony and his team. It will act as a message of building confidence in him and that will also act as a message of hope. I humbly pray that this Parliament supports this motion so that the whole world knows the position of Parliament.

My colleague on the other side has been asking me questions when we were outside. I have also been receiving calls from the youth of the Northern region about the position of Parliament, but I could not give its position. I have been giving them my personal position. I really pray that today we are going to set a fundamental record by giving our position and passing a resolution in support of the ongoing peace talks between the government of Uganda and the LRA. With this submission I beg to support this motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.48
MR SANTOS PIRO (Independent, East Moyo County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion in the House. The war in the North has caused untold suffering not only to the people of the Northern region but to Uganda at large. I support the motion because it is very important for Ugandans to realise that this has not only happened in Uganda: there has been war in Angola, Congo, Ethiopia, in Sudan itself and elsewhere. And all these wars have been stopped through amicable discussions and peace talks.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, while we support the peace process and pray that it succeeds we should also prepare ourselves for the post-war problems, which are likely to come. On the 28th of August it was reported that in Jie Pee sub-county, Adjumani some thugs mobilised and looted the wanainchi in the area. They are called thugs, so you can see what is likely to come after the peace talks. The Government should be prepared to handle the post-war problems, the looting and so on.

There is likely to be war by people who lost their property during the war in the North. So, while we support this motion we should also prepare ourselves to counter the problems, which are likely to come from the so many people who lost their valuables, they lost their capital and iron sheets. Unfortunately, I happen to be one of the victims of the northern war. I lost five buses of Lowi Bus Services, most of you know about them; and I have not been paid a single cent. I have accepted the loss because I know that force majeure is not applicable during wars and the government does not take any responsibility. Even insurance companies do not cover such situations. 

So if we can as leaders, we should go to our areas, especially people from the Northern region, and start talking to the local communities to prepare them to accept the Lord’s Resistance Army after the peace talks have succeeded. They should be ready to amicably assimilate the Lord’s Resistance Army members into the community. This is very important towards reconciliation after the peace talks. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

11.51
LT COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this resolution and the distinguished Member who moved it. One would have to read the Saturday contribution of Gen. David Tinyefuza in the papers to appreciate the genesis, the beginning, continuation and envisaged end of this conflict. He does really trace the history of this insurgency for a very long time and he of course ends by saying that Kony cannot be the winner, which I entirely agree with.

This country has gone through so many deaths perpetrated by people who think that they can contribute to impunity. Nevertheless, Ugandans should be happy that maybe the end is near, the end is nigh, to use the old language. There is no doubt and we hope that definitely the peace talks will succeed although there are still hurdles to face before the final day of signing.

It is almost ten years ever since the Amnesty law was passed. You remember that Cabinet divided itself into four committees, which went through the four regions of Uganda. Their task was to ask the people of Uganda what they thought the government could do to end this unfortunate conflict in the North. I headed the committee, which went to the North in Lango and Acholi. We were in all those places and when we came back and reported to Cabinet, it was clear that even parents whose children had been abducted were ready to forgive for the purpose of peace and tranquility in Uganda and the Northern region. That is when some of us learnt the word “matoput”. I had never heard of it because that is not my language but I came to learn it when I was in Gulu. I can even explain what actually matoput does mean.

However, that is the effort that demonstrates how much Government itself has been striving and concerned to see an end to this unfortunate conflict in the Northern part of our country. People should appreciate that up to today Government still continues to make sure that these talks end peacefully. That is the real spirit of the National Resistance Movement Government, which took it to the bush and which continues to propel it today - peace and development in this country.

Uganda, through our mission in Nairobi, worked so hard to make sure that there was a comprehensive peace agreement for Sudan. We worked so hard that when that peace agreement was signed in Nairobi, everybody jubilated. There is no wonder, therefore, that the President and Vice-President of Southern Sudan and the entire people of Sudan should reciprocate and work tirelessly so that there is peace in Uganda. We worked for peace in Sudan and the Sudanese Government is also working for peace in Northern Uganda and the whole of Uganda. Therefore, I thank the Vice-President of Sudan and the Sudan Government’s reciprocity. Reciprocity is a principle in international diplomacy, which I know, having been a foreign affairs minister.

I read an article in the papers by the notorious Olara Otunnu, that notorious character having failed to pin down the government of Uganda for having been the perpetrator of genocide; he has now through frustration failed to see that documented. He has now raised a new issue that it is the LRA in collaboration with the Uganda Government, which committed genocide in the North. That is total frustration and I hope that one day he will come to Uganda when peace, stability and development has been re-established in the North. He will see for himself that it could never have happened that the government of Uganda could commit genocide against its people, especially the NRM Government. That can not happen at all!  

Genocide is when a Government deliberately targets an ethnic group, or a sect, a denomination, or a people, to exterminate it. The Government of Uganda really can never target to exterminate a people, which are part of the people of Uganda. That cannot happen. But there you are, again! He was in New York - I was reading in the papers, saying, “It is now LRA with the government of Uganda in collaboration to exterminate and commit genocide in Northern Uganda”. It is really a shame! And wherever he is, he should remember that he has been a disaster as a national of Uganda. He has been a disaster wherever he will be for us as a national having been born here. I know he has a different passport, but one day he will come home.

Finally, let us support and encourage the team of Uganda so that they have all the courage, all the support to reach the final conclusion for peace in Northern Uganda. Let our brothers and sisters in the North know forever that everybody has been bleeding. All of us, south and north of Karuma, east of Kiira and wherever, we have all been bleeding. We are looking forward to the day when somebody will wake up and drive from Kampala at 6 O’clock and arrive in Gulu at 9 O’clock, sleep there peacefully and come back the following day. This is what we used to do: leave Kampala at 6 O’clock and arrive in Gulu at 9 O’clock; we would leave Gulu at 5 O’clock in the morning, come and be back here at 9 O’clock. We would go beyond Gulu, Pader and other areas. I support the motion. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.01
MR PETER NYOMBI (Independent, Buruli County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My constituency has had the opportunity of hosting some of the victims of this war and we have seen the pathetic conditions in which they live. It is really terrible and we really want to thank God that there have been discussions, there have been talks and we appear to be coming to the end of this war.  

I want to support this motion and to thank the mover for bringing this brilliant motion at this time. Yesterday, the Leader of Opposition told us of what he learnt when he went to the North. He pleaded for every support that can be rendered towards the talks that are going on. The Leader of Government Business rose in support and pledged that he would try to ensure that the media supports the talks that are going on but as I was going home yesterday evening, I was listening in to the discussion on one FM radio station. It was apparent that there are some people who would like to give a picture that definitely these talks will fail.  

This morning as I was coming, still I listened in to one of the FM radio stations. Again the discussions that were going on were to the effect that the talks appear to be failing. My plea, Madam Speaker, is that at this moment the thrust of everybody should be supportive of the talks that are going on. I want to plead with the media to be supportive. This is the time when we should all support the talks that are going on.

I also want to plead with the media and everybody that we should now begin to think about what is going to happen after the talks have been concluded. So, it is really good that Parliament is coming out to stand as one in support of the talks that are going on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.04
MR PETER LOKERIS (NRM, Chekwii County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion. When I went to Gulu to check on primary schools recently, I was taken to one camp whose enrollment is at 8,000 children, cramped in one place. With humanitarian assistance and that of the government of Uganda, they are able to handle the situation. But when you look at the congestion, you can shade tears! The parents are also there. So if there is a suggestion for peace to be achieved, we must all support it so that these noble people of Northern Uganda can go back to their homes to till that fertile land and live out there. The land is so fertile and idle and yet we are continuing to feed people on relief food, begging the World Food Programme everyday, running everywhere to feed a society, which was able to feed itself!

I know when people are fighting and there is a suggestion to reconcile, some people think that those who want to reconcile are cowards. They are not. When you decide to fight, you are a brave person and when you decide to reconcile, you must be brave. Everything entails bravery. If Kony with the government of Uganda, I know I am a Government minister and I know the President has come out and openly said, “Let us reconcile with our people.” There are ways, cultural traditions through which we can cleanse people; we can reprimand them. If that can do, why don’t we use those? For judges and the ICC, there is only one way: to punish. Reconciliation is not part of their vocabulary and to us as Members representing the people, reconciliation is part of our vocabulary. We had better encourage Kony, Otti and group to know that the act they are about to take is an act of bravery to save our own people.

You know when we analyse that war, who are dying? We are all Ugandans. The Kony side has Ugandans and our side has Ugandans. When we crash, we say we have eliminated, but whom have we killed? Ugandans are the ones dying on each side. Therefore, if we really want to see Ugandans as a dignified society which lives well, we should not speak of death on either side; neither on that of Kony nor on ours. Others out there who give us money to continue with war know that they are not losing their people. What are they losing after all? Ugandans are the ones dying and for that matter, we must be very serious.  

Dissenting forces are there talking, in fact someone has talked about the media; instead of the media being encouraging, being supportive, somebody just writes some article, which when you look at you really get annoyed and say, “What are these people saying?” At times when they are talking they are just joking, laughing like children. Why do you laugh on matters, which are serious? You are laughing just because you are a comedian with no problem as if nothing is happening? So this matter is very serious, you must stand with us. 

We must stand with the people of Northern Uganda so that we liberate that good area, the grain basket of Uganda. It rains there daily and the grass has overgrown. Why don’t we settle down and till our soil in order to enrich Uganda? The economy of this country will improve immediately we get this peace. With those few words I encourage you, honourable members, to support the peace process wholeheartedly so that we are once again the dignified people who used to live in the heart of Africa. This is the Pearl of Africa. The Pearl of Africa must rise and shine again. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.09
CAPT. SARAH MPABWA (UPDF Representative): I stand here to support the motion. I am also a Member of the AMANI Forum, and I happened to be in Juba in the last few days. I actually came back on Sunday and my colleagues came back yesterday. What is happening today is what the world needs: talk peace and forge ahead for development. 

Uganda is ready to move on. We in the UPDF and those of us that are here in Parliament are here for matters of national importance. And if we did not stand to say anything on matters pertaining to peace, then we would be failing our constituents. We speak peace when the time comes. Our commander-in-Chief has spoken peace and that is what we are doing. For those that perhaps have their other interests, we are here to say that our interest is Uganda, its borders and people plus their property and their right to develop. 

I get surprised to hear somebody reporting negatively at this particular moment when everybody is talking peace. I appeal to the media fraternity to talk positively and report positively. It is too early – of course there is a peace-making process. There may be some reasons or some things that may not look right, right now, but it does not in any way pull down the whole structure. So I appeal to the media, as you want to report, it is your right, maybe it is your mandate to report, but also report the positive things that are happening. 

We are having encounters and I am sure that the ministers here and other Members from the North will testify, since the signing of the cessation of hostilities, we have had physical encounters with the LRA, but those are not the encounters in military science. But because it has been agreed to give safe passage, it is happening. I would appreciate if the media had recorded that instead of coming out and saying, “Now there was this, the LRA is making a U-turn.” It is not making a U-turn because both sides – we met the LRA delegation. We are saying “peace” and we are committed to what we are saying. So it is high time that people walked the talk. 

I also appeal to colleagues: our presence makes a difference because it builds confidence. It shows that we are actively involved. Let us put in some little time and go there to share and encourage our brethren who are in the actual talks. I am sure that is very welcome, and we appeal to other fraternities just to go to Juba, it is just one hour away. Let us be physically there in the peace building process. The Bible says, “Blessed are the peacemakers.” So if you want to tap on the blessings –(Applause)- at this moment the peace process needs all the confidence building that it can get from all the players. And I stand here to speak for my constituency that we are committed to effect what our leaders put on paper. Thank you very much.

12.14
MS CATHERINE AKUMU (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I stand here to fully support the motion moved by hon. Stephen Wasike, Member of Parliament, Samia-Bugwe North, and supported by hon. Simon Euku for Kalaki County.  

You will all agree that peace is a prerequisite for any meaningful development to take place. The war in the North has gone on for the last 20 years and the people have suffered so much. This war has not only affected the people of Northern Uganda, but the entire country because whenever ambushes are made, it is not only the people of Northern Uganda who travel by road, it is the entire country.  

I was once abducted by the Lord’s Resistance Army and I happened to see Joseph Kony, but by God’s grace I am alive and I am here amongst you; I am a living testimony. I know in the bush there it is not only the people of Northern Uganda all tribes of Uganda are there. It is not because they want to be there, but many of them were just abducted.  

I want to thank His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni, who is also the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF for all the trouble he has been taking to ensure that the war in the North comes to an end. I also want to thank our gallant sons and daughters, the UPDF for all that they have been putting in to ensure that there is peace in the North. I want to thank the people of Acholi, the people of the North, the people of Uganda, the Acholi religious leaders, and all the people who were involved to ensure that this war comes to an end.  

We have reached a God-given opportunity for all the people of Uganda, for the whole world to make sure that we fully support the peace process going on in Juba. We must all commit ourselves so that the people of Northern Uganda come back home and Northern Uganda will be developed like any other part of Uganda. Although the war affected the whole country, at lease the rest of Uganda is better developed than Northern Uganda and West Nile. So, I would like to appeal to all of us to fully support this noble cause and let the war come to an end so that we can all enjoy the peace of Uganda and we can once more be united as the people of Uganda. This requires total forgiveness; we must all forgive our brothers and sisters, unconditionally. I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues.

12.19
PROF. WASHINGTON ANAKBONGGO (UPC, kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I arise to support the motion wholeheartedly. Twenty years of war is a very long time and I am happy to hear people speaking for peace because without peace there is no development anywhere in the world. Peace is essential for development. Now I am happy that Ugandans in this House seem to be united in asking for peace. I think all of us should be aware that any anguish in any part of Uganda should be the concern of all Ugandans and this is the time for all Ugandans to show that concern. 

I rise to support this motion in its entirety but in particular clauses 4 and 5. Clause 4 implores all the people of Uganda wherever they are to give their unreserved support to this initiative and process of peace. I say 20 years is a very long time and that is when a baby born gets matured. I have been following this war from its inception up to this moment with great psychological pain and I am sure all Ugandans have been feeling the same pain. This is now an opportunity for the government of Uganda to really show that Uganda is one. The people of Uganda are one and all the people of Uganda need development and as I said, without peace there is no development.

It was the government of this country which requested the ICC to come in. I think I believe it is within the ambit of the government of Uganda to ask the ICC not to interfere with this peace process. I think it is very important that the ICC sees the light that there is hope that peace may be achieved if the ICC does not aggressively follow up the request of the government.  

Last but not least, for the last 20 years, certain governments close to our Government have been aloof. It is now that the time is approaching when there is hope for peace in Northern Uganda that those governments start making statements, which are detrimental to the peace process. I would like to request the government of Uganda to implore our President His Excellency the President of Uganda perhaps not to listen to those statements and follow the stated course His Excellency has taken for peace in this country. Thank you very much.

12.24
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the mover of the motion and the seconder for giving us this opportunity to express ourselves on this important resolution. I thank the government of Uganda and the President of Uganda for having accepted to talk peace. Most sincerely, I would like to thank the Vice-President of Southern Sudan, His Excellency Riek, I thank Salva Kiir the President of Southern Sudan, for having given us an opportunity to engage in peace talks. 

Some of us who have been here for quite long really remember hon. Chris Mudoola’s committee, the vice-chairperson was hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, rest in peace. On that committee we remember hon. Omara Atubo, Daniel you are a great man! We remember hon. Mao Nobert, hon. Nobert wherever you are; you are really a great man! 

I really have mentioned these honourable members because they did their best to investigate this conflict in Northern Uganda in 1996/1997. They came up with their report, which caused tension in this House. This House was divided; hon. Mao Norbert, hon. Daniel Atubo, they came up with the minority report. What was it that they came up with? It was that we had to talk peace as a country ten years ago, and that is why I sincerely salute you because what you saw ten years ago, the majority in this country could not see it. The carnage continued for the last ten years. Finally, we the majority have seen that we have got to talk peace if we are to save our country. 

I thank these honourable members and today you will draw a lesson that the majority is not always right. We have to see sense and I do not know why the majority cannot see sense at the time it is needed! Hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, hon. Nobert Mao, I sincerely thank you.  

I propose that as a country we come up with a national policy on these internal conflicts. A national policy should tell us how to conduct ourselves when we are faced with such problems. I know a lot of crimes have been committed for the last 20 years. But sincerely, for the love of our country, for the desire to save the children of Northern Uganda, for the desire to give peace to the people of Northern Uganda, for the desire to have a united country to reconcile the country, let us turn a blind eye to justice and support this resolution. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

12.25
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am humbled today in this House. Why?  Because we are talking about peace talks. As my colleague hon. Kibazanga said, so many years ago individuals tried to push for peace talks but it was not welcome at the time. So many others apart from those who have been named tried – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I seem to recollect that this House agreed that we pursue both channels: the military and the talks. This House did not reject the talks. That is what I recall.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, thank you. I am not talking about the House but Ugandans as a whole.  There were so many among Ugandans in and outside this House - of course the majority outside this House. You could hear them on talk shows, writing in the papers - they have already mentioned about statements, comments, publications in the media. But there were individuals who were saying, “No. I think we must talk peace”. That is what I am trying to say. So, it is good that today we are talking with one voice that we support the peace talks. It is a most welcome thing; it is never too late and that is why I stand here to support this motion. 

I must thank the team from the government side, especially the chairperson who he is a calm, cool man. He has not accepted to be derailed; hon. Rugunda must really be applauded. He has kept focused; the media has not diverted him; other politicians have not diverted him; he has kept on course and we must thank him and his team. Of course, I think that is why he deserves that name “Ndugu”. I think it was not for nothing; he is really “Ndugu”. Not forgetting the Vice-President of Southern Sudan, His Excellency Salva; he came all the way when they had just come out of this. I think he had learnt lessons that it is only through peace that we can be able to achieve development. We must thank him, together with the government of Southern Sudan. 

To boost confidence in the LRA team and those people who are in the bush, I want to ask the government - I remember last year before we went into elections we amended the Terrorist Act and named the people who were indicted. Would this not be the right time for us to amend and delete them since you are saying we are withdrawing from the ICC and we are asking the ICC not to pursue arresting these people?  As a matter of confidence building, would this not be the right time for us to revisit that portion and remove these names from that? If talks fail, which I do not think will fail, we would be able to bring these names if need be. I think that is one way of confidence building that we need. I ask the Minister of Defence because I remember that time it was hon. Amama Mbabazi who brought up that matter and he was supported by the Front Bench. I think this would be the right time for us to look at that as well urge the ICC to drop charges against the five top commanders of the LRA. That is my request.  

But also, we request the ICC; let this Parliament add its voice to the President to ask the ICC to withhold or to drop the charges such that we all move without impediments to the peace process. That is what I would ask of this Parliament possibly when we are adopting the resolution, maybe under 6, we would put that as one of the things, that this Parliament urges the ICC to drop the charges such that we build confidence in this group such that we are able to see peace this year, 2006. 

The motion talks about reconciliation; it is a welcome idea. I think it is time all Ugandans had a reconciliatory heart and learnt to forgive and forget. But of course as leaders, we should be able to address the root causes of all these civil wars such that we make this the last war in this country. We have a problem, which we have also suffered in Teso, of cattle rustling. I hope one day we shall talk peace with those aggressors and make it a thing of the past.

Finally, I urge the government and the people of Uganda to move towards forming a truth and reconciliation committee where we shall be able to sort and address these matters and heal. There is no sin greater than the other. In the book of Isaiah, Chapter 1, verse 18 it says, “… though your sins are red as crimson, they shall be like wool”. No matter how red the sin may be, it shall always be forgiven. So, there is no sin greater than the other. We should be able to forgive and reconcile. Thank you.

12.36
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion for a resolution by Parliament on the ongoing peace talks between the LRA and the government of Uganda. 

First of all, I want to say that this war has caused us a lot of suffering in terms of losses, in destruction of property and lives of the people of Uganda. And now that 20 years down the road we are owning up to the problem and we have accepted to talk peace, I want to thank very much His Excellency the President of Uganda for once accepting to demonstrate to the people of this country that peace is the only way that is going to move us forward. He has ably demonstrated this and I think we must support this move.

Madam Speaker, this has been a conscious and deliberate effort because we have been following –(Interruption) 

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry, I am forced to interrupt the Member holding the Floor because of the allegation that His Excellency has “for once” accepted to talk peace. It is on record that since the NRM came to power and since Kony started the insurgency in the North and others - it is not only Kony, this other Lakwena was there, the rest of these fighting forces - he talked to them peace, they agreed and put down their weapons. Some of them are in Government. Is he in order to say that “for once His Excellency has started talking peace”, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the peace process has been ongoing for a very long time with many actors at different stages. Some have ended well, some have not been concluded. This is not the first time that the President has opened up the peace process. 

MR EKEMU: I withdraw that statement, hon. Members of Parliament. You may not have got me properly, but let me make myself clear. I am saying that what we have right now going on in Juba has been a clear and deliberate effort by the President. It has been a change of heart. We are saying this change of heart could have happened ten years ago, but it is happening today. And if you have understood “for once” to have meant that stretch of period, I am saying that we must actually appreciate the move that we have owned the problem now and there has been a change of heart, which we have seen now that the peace process is going on.

I also want to thank the other stakeholders and of course very much our Parliamentary team because as you will agree with me that the joining of Members of Parliament in this process has actually given it a new impetus and given it a very renewed vigour and seriousness. I would like to thank those Members of Parliament who are participating in this process now and want to encourage them that we are behind you and that we hope that we are going to come to the logical conclusion of the whole peace process. 

Above all, we must not forget to thank His Excellency the Vice-President of the government of Southern Sudan, Dr Machar. We must see into his personal concern that we must now have peace in that whole part of the region because peace in Southern Sudan actually means peace in Northern Uganda and peace in the whole of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I am more concerned now - because I am as sure that we are actually going to attain this peace through the peace process that is ongoing in Juba - I am concerned that we may not have put in place a process to manage the post-peace period. I know we have in different forms responded to the resettlement of displaced persons in form of giving iron sheets, but I am saying that we must as the government of Uganda accord this post-war management process a very special status. We need to look into the up-scaling of resource allocation to this region. These people have been marginalised from the main economic stream and the only way we are going to fast track integrating them into the economy of this country is for all the main Government sectors to upscale resource allocation to this region, particularly in the education and health sectors. 

Finally, I do recognise that peace is a prerequisite for any social economic development process. Therefore, I appeal to all of us to support the “matoput” process and all those other local, peace initiatives including not only what is going on in Juba but also the conflict situation that is affecting us in the North eastern part of the country brought about by the Karimojong rustling in that side. After the LRA, we are saying that the Karamoja question should be brought to a complete stop so that we all enjoy peace and we all have the development that every person in Uganda is enjoying. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we can we should be brief because I see overall consensus. Let us just make it brief.

12.44
DR MOSES APILIGA (UPC, West Moyo County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, there are occasions in our nation when we have to be all united and this is one of those occasions. The issue of the war in the North has been a scourge upon the image of our country outside Uganda, but it has also been damaging to the good work, which the government has done in many parts of the country. The successful conclusion of these negotiations to establish peace in the North would further enhance the reputation and the image of our country. I, therefore, strongly urge all of us, regardless of which political party we represent, to join hands to support this motion. (Applause) 

I would like particularly to thank our Government, the President, the delegation negotiating on behalf of Government, the LRA leadership and their delegations, the religious leaders with their prayers and their representatives, the elders, and the chiefs of those areas. And indeed I thank the elected Members of Parliament in all the various parts, particularly in the North who are all pursuing the achievement of peace for our country, in that part of the country. 

Let us not be blinded by what appears to be a good start. It is important that those who are negotiating establish not only reconciliation amongst all those who are present, but also be seen to be accountable in their solutions and suggestions. We have had here Members who have been direct victims of what has happened and this is just a small sample. In the areas where we come from, there are many who lost their lives, who have been maimed, who have lost property, who have suffered lots of damages, and who have some grievances. This should also be looked at in the period of the negotiations. We can achieve reconciliation, accountability as well as justice.  

May I touch briefly on the question of the ICC, which seems to –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I am rising a procedural matter. I want to find out whether it is in order or procedurally correct for somebody to address this Parliament when he is pocketing? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules only require that we should conduct ourselves with decorum to respect one another. The issue of pocketing really is not part of our rules.

DR APILIGA: Madam Speaker, I was referring to the serious issue of the ICC. This is a matter, which seems to exercise many of the minds of Members as well as the main principles in these peace negotiations. The ICC was approached as part of the ways of finding a solution to the problem in the North. The ICC is doing a different job. I would appeal to all the participants to concentrate on finding a peaceful solution and enhance the hand of Government in trying to deal with the ICC. The Government went to the ICC for a particular purpose and the government’s hand would, I believe, be enhanced maybe by withdrawing the case or finding a solution. But the focus should be in finding a peaceful solution to the Northern war of over 20 years.  

It is of particular interest to me that some of the failures of Government, for example in our area, have been blamed on peace. A lot of projects, which were to take place in Moyo, for example road constructions, have not taken place because there was instability. We look forward to a period when we will have a successful conclusion to these peace negotiations and we start developing like other parts of Uganda. 

While talking of reconciliation, may I once more appeal to Government to look very seriously at what the UPC have suggested as a final answer to peace in our country; that is the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission? Once we finish with this Northern situation, let there not be another situation where wars begin. Let us have an establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission. I beg to support the motion.

12.51
MR PETER EMIGU (FDC, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I want to thank the mover and the seconder of the motion, hon. Wasike and hon. Euku respectively for their vigilance. I see them as freshers in the august House and they were able to see that this motion was long overdue. I thank them most sincerely. I also want to thank whoever has been standing in the way of peace for having given way and also as a reminder to all of us that all wars in the world, wherever you would want to go, will at least end at a round table and I want to thank such persons for having seen the light and I think they will continue seeing the light. 

Having said that, I want to say that this war that has been going on in the North, probably a battle field has been in the North and it has been given different names, although wrongly. Some have called it a war for the Northerners, others the Acholi war - something like that - but I want to put it right that this has been a Ugandan war with the battlefield in the Northern part of the country. Just like Luweero, it was not a Luweero war the way people want to call it but it was a Ugandan war with a battlefield in Luweero. 

Now that we have accepted this way of peace, I think that also at the back of our minds we are also acknowledging that surely Northern Uganda has been and is still a disaster zone. Although it was not supported - or it was put right in the last Parliament - I do not know, I am still a fresher here and I do not know what could have really taken place but the acceptance of this way of peace for Northern Uganda tells us that we have that at the back of our mind. Therefore, the problems that came along with the war should then be addressed to make at least Northern Uganda also catch up with other parts of the country because it has been delayed for the last 20 years and I do not know how we shall recover quickly from that retardation.  

Finally, I want to mention something about the press. Many people have been pointing at the press as the people who are trying to put things not in order, but I also want to say that a few of the stakeholders have also been making careless statements or using careless language. I would like to request that much as the press has been asked to tame the way they are going to document what they hear from here, I also pray that all the stakeholders also tame their tongues because it has gone on record that a number of stakeholders have been making careless statements that sometimes can derail peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion has really received overwhelming support. I have not heard any objections from anywhere so, let me ask the Leader of the Opposition to make a contribution and then ask the government to conclude.

12.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the two movers of the motion. I do not know how they came to be the movers and seconders of the motion but to me that the two were the people who moved and seconded the motion has become very significant. God has his own ways and sometimes things that are very significant demonstrate easy recognition of it by putting aside individuals who may be the focus. I am very sure that if I were the mover of this motion the focus would have been on the hon. Leader of the Opposition rather than the motion, and so I thank God very much that he chose the two gentlemen to move this motion.

Madam Speaker, you know that we have been in this struggle for a very long time. Even when I was at Makerere University I actually made a very strong presentation to the select committee on the war in the North, of the Sixth Parliament. I spoke immediately following the Rt hon. Otema Alimadi and what I said caused a bit of upheaval but I think reflecting on it, I made a contribution that was necessary at that time. 

In the last Parliament - and I remember the day was when you were actually in the Chair, Madam Speaker, and at some stage I stood up and said, “I am no longer keen to stand up and talk on this matter”. That was because we thought that the things that we needed to say about the war we had said and all that we waited for was for people, the House and the rest of the country, to appreciate that it was our deep and agonizing desire to see that the conflict in the North - that even in our greatest madness we could not for political expediency or for any other reason support Joseph Kony and the LRA to kill our people so that on the graves of our people we rise to political exaltation. We kept saying this so much, sometimes because we said it in charged environments and we were not appreciated but we would like to thank the Seventh Parliament, which really moved the initiative beyond political debates to the reality that this conflict was a national conflict that needed to be resolved; that it was a conflict that was bleeding the country and dividing the country unjustifiably. 

With the Seventh Parliament, I would like to register our appreciation to the President of this country, Yoweri Museveni. Sometimes people do not appreciate this, he is both a President and a political leader. We are also on our side both political leaders and nationalists and when you are operating in one circumstance or the other, sometimes it is not easily appreciated but even when we did some of the things we did, we knew that the President was one fellow and one person. I do not want to be accused of using reckless language - he was one person who, un-pushed, with logic, reflected on what you had said. 

Some of us knew that it was imperative and we considered it our responsibility to put pressure on him because whatever decision he made would have a very tremendous impact on the challenge that our people face. And he knows some of the meetings that we have had with him on these matters as members of our community. So, we thank him and we thank the government that even when difficulties had to be faced, we have reached a stage where I can stand here and confidently say that essentially the conflict is over. 

It is how we handle the process of restoring peace normally, which is a big challenge. I would also like to thank the government of Southern Sudan. I was in Garamba, Nabang which was the base camp for Gen. Dr Riek Machar, I had an intimate talk with him and I recognised their commitment. 

There is one thing that probably has not been said here that must be said and for which we must extend our appreciation to the people of Southern Sudan. When the LRA crossed the Nile and went to Mid Western Sudan, they actually caused real terror to the people there and one of the things that happened when we were in Nabang at the meeting where for the first time Joseph Kony, Vincent Otti and the LRA leaders came out and met the various community leaders from Southern Sudan whose people have been affected by the LRA marauding atrocities and each community stood up and poured their hearts out as to how they have suffered under the LRA. When they finished, it was the turn of Kony to speak for himself and on behalf of the LRA. He made explanations of how they allied with some of the groups in Southern Sudan and ultimately he said, “We take responsibility for what happened and we are sorry.”

Unfortunately, for that meeting and partly fortunately later, the interpreter who translated Joseph Kony’s statement from Acholi to English left out the apology the, “I am sorry.” What saved the situation is that – you know we have in fact a large Acholi community in Sudan than in Uganda, and one of the negotiating team members happens to be an Acholi. He is actually called Dr Onek just like Hillary Onek, the Minister of Agriculture. He is the one who intervened and said, “No, but Kony has just apologised” and this is what the other communities of Southern Sudan wanted to hear. When they heard that they said, “Then our conflict with you is over. We just pray that these negotiations lead to the end of the war so that our people both in the Sudan and in Uganda live in peace”. And I thought that was important to bring out.  

So, we have really to thank the people of Sudan who in spite of the atrocities caused by people who geographically and in terms of countries are foreigners, they still had the courage and the magnanimity to say, “We forgive you so that peace prevails both in our country and yours.” 

In that respect, I would like, with your permission, to ask that I be allowed to mention by name three people who made tremendous contribution to efforts towards resolving the LRA conflict peacefully but who sometimes got really badly misunderstood. The first person is the former head of the European Delegation to Uganda, Ambassador Sigurd Illing. He left office last year. When I first met Ambassador Illing on the grounds of Parliament where we had a reception, he had just been posted to Uganda and he told me, “I have come to Uganda and my focus shall be on finding ways to end the conflict in Northern Uganda. And if during my tenure in Uganda I do not contribute to the end of that conflict, I would have considered my mission in Uganda to have failed.”  

Ambassador Illing left his station last week. In fact, he even retired from public service on the same day. I am grateful that Government and Ministry of Finance had a reception for him to which I was invited and Government acknowledged the good things he has done beyond the North, in infrastructure development etcetera.

I would like to register our appreciation, we particularly who as a community were affected by this conflict, for the commitment that Ambassador Illing made. When he was head of the western donor countries, he mobilised his people when Parliament passed a resolution, they came before Parliament; it was totally out of the normal diplomatic practice but it reflected their commitment and support for what Parliament had said in that resolution. He received a really bashing sometimes from very lowly people in Government, which was to our embarrassment as a country but he took it in stride and considered it the necessary sacrifice that he had to make towards the resolution of this conflict.

The other person I would like to mention is Fr Carlos Rodriguez. He is a priest in Gulu and he writes in the Observer newspaper every week. These days, I think he has realised that the conflict is essentially over; he has sat back and he is not actively involved. But at the height of his participation, he was a great enemy for nothing to many people who misunderstood him. He suffered actually even in the hands of the military in the North and I can only say thank you very much, Fr Carlos, for the contribution! 

The greatest of all - and by the way, all these three do not come from Acholi - is the Archbishop of the Catholic Archdiocese of Gulu, Bishop John Baptist Odama. Since he took up that responsibility, he has gone to the bush to meet the LRA, he has risked everything, he has been accused of being a rebel collaborator and sometimes because the information that the President gets about him is distorted, he has even received the wrath of the President. All he always says is, “I forgive all those who do not appreciate that I am doing this not because of myself, but because God has willed that I be the Archbishop and that I be part of the resolution of the conflict.”  

So, I thought that as we conclude this debate, I take this opportunity to specifically thank these people and put it on record that we are very appreciative! I believe the country is very appreciative of their efforts and that their belief that the LRA can be talked to has been proven right and they have been vindicated. Our hope is that, this peace will now come very soon. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to make two appeals. My elder, hon. Tom Butime, made reference to an article in the papers written by Gen. David Tinyefuza last Sunday. That same Sunday, there was an interview given to the media by Gen. Aronda Nyakairima and also there was an article, which I referred to yesterday by Kintu Nyago on “Mato put”.  I do not want to focus on those articles except just to express our concern that even good things, if they are not properly timed, can become bad. You may want to ease yourself, which is good for your body, but if you do it in the wrong place even when you are actually relieving yourself, it becomes a bad thing. So, I did not understand why Gen. Tinyefuza David would want to write about the history of this conflict now because we have reached a stage where we should leave it to historians to do the analysis.  

When you draw a conclusion that Kony cannot be a winner, you actually cover the critical thing, which has been at the heart of this war that Kony cannot be a loser. If he were a loser, he would have already lost out on account of the thousands of his own people in Acholi who have died needlessly. If he were a loser, he would have already lost out on account of the fact that his own war has completely dismembered his own society, the Acholi society and made them paupers.  

Therefore, the important message that all of us must carry is that Kony cannot be a loser. It is only us who lose; it is only our country that loses not Kony. And, therefore, to suggest that he can be a winner is a total misrepresentation and I really ask and make an appeal that let us leave this issue of losing and winning. Let us focus on ending this conflict because the aftermath of this conflict even when the war ends is going to be incredible. We have people who have been stigmatised for so long; you saw in the papers today. 

There was a time in Makerere when there were four types of Acholi. Many people did not know, but we had to grapple with that as community leaders.  There was Acholi (a), Acholi (b) Acholi (c) and Acholi (d). Acholi (d) would never want to be identified as an Acholi on account of the innocent victims. But they could not bear even to be identified as Acholi; only a few courageous people who belonged to Acholi (a) would actually go for Acholi meetings and we had to fight with these quietly as community leaders. So, the aftermath of this conflict goes beyond that; there is a psychosocial trauma that our people have faced.  

The pressure of the LRA just went down slightly like this and in my constituency in the last one month alone, there were four violent murders; we never heard about this. But once they were free of the LRA conflict, so many secondary conflicts now emerge. In their state of mind, the answer to such conflict whether it is a land dispute, a quarrel over a woman is just to look for a gun, to look for an axe and destroy your opponent and so the country will have to grapple with this.

Again in that secondary conflict is where I would want to talk briefly about the ICC and “Mato put”.  The ICC is based on the conceptual framework of the west where even the Biblical justice, “An eye for an eye” is applied. We do not have that in our culture; we do not have an eye for an eye. Every time something happens, we believe that a sustainable solution is to accept and make that part of the communal sacrifice so that better things happen. 

When we met the ICC we told them, “Look, you will bring justice in your context in this process by getting Kony, Otti and the other three and put them in jail.” But when the war has ended, so many of the lower rank LRAs who probably actually did the killings have to go back to the communities. How will your justice of putting away Kony help to resolve the conflict that will arise when a mother or a brother sees the person who killed his or her loved ones come back to the community?”

But in our process of “Mato put”, the essential principle is that we accept that things have happened and that the things that have happened cannot be reversed and that the most important thing is to move forward and to leave the past behind us. And, therefore, if we really want sustainable peace out of this process, we must think about the relevance of the ICC to the process and the significance of “Mato put” to this process.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, my appeal is that, as we support this motion, I would like to buy the suggestion of my honourable sister who just came back from the Sudan. Yesterday, I was talking about hon. Mathias Kasamba and his concern for this with the Minister of Defence. I did not know Mathias had been to Sudan. I just met him to tell him that I was talking about him but he said, “I have just returned from Sudan”. I am so grateful! 

I would like to propose - because Kony wrote to the Speaker of Parliament - that to demonstrate our commitment as Parliament - because the other time the Speaker read the letter and was not sure where to deliver the letter - let the Speaker write in response to Kony, and that the Speaker constitutes a bi-partisan delegation to deliver this letter to the chief mediator of the Juba talks and those would then go to demonstrate our solidarity with everybody who has put his or her mind and soul to this peace process and to assure the LRA that we as Parliament accept the process of forgiveness, and will do all it takes to see that peace and reconciliation returns to Northern Uganda. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now I hope somebody will remember to thank a brave Acholi woman called Betty Bigombe for her continuous efforts. Thank you. 

1.18
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daniel Omara Atubo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this important motion, which I think is historic for this Parliament as it begins to operate. It is as historic as the motion of the Sixth Parliament some 10 years ago, and I am very proud and happy to be associated with this motion. One, because I come from Otuke in Lira District which has totally been devastated by this 20-year-old war; not only by this war, but also because of its geographical location and the problem of cattle rustling. I, therefore, have great hope that by this Parliament passing this motion and associating itself with the Juba peace process, we shall be able to realise permanent peace fast.

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that the government of Uganda and indeed the people of Lango have had great hope in the peace process. I do hope that my colleague the Minister of Defence will have a more opportunity to enumerate them. But, for my colleagues in here, I would like to say that this same way had engulfed your brothers and sisters in Lango as far back as 1986/87. But we used the peaceful process to ensure that within two years, the internal rebellion in Lango was totally ended by the year 1989, and those rebels were absorbed in Government in various capacities and some of them who were soldiers were absorbed in the army and others have even reached the rank of colonel and they are commanders in the present army. Therefore, the government has, at various stages in the 20-year war, used both peaceful and military methods to end this war. 

Madam Speaker, as I stand here, I want to appreciate the positive attitude of this Parliament, especially as it begins to handle national issues –(Applause)- which are of common good to the whole country and above partisan politics. This includes national security, peace, democracy and national development. I also want to say that, as we hope that this peace will come, let us after peace sit together and resolve, “War never again.” In order to succeed with this resolution, we must after the peace is realised, address the causes and take preventive measures. 

I have already appreciated the positive attitude of this Parliament, but in particular I want to say this Parliament by this motion is creating positive conditions for realising permanent peace.  Parliament must promote love and unity. Permanent peace will only come when we are able to have reconciliation for all. I want to emphasize this issue of reconciliation from every angle of Uganda. Ugandans are calling for reconciliation with Kony and are going to Garamba and to Juba saying, “Kony, you have massacred in my area, I forgive you, come back home, even the ICC should not touch you.” I want the same people who are saying this not to turn round and condemn their brothers inside Uganda. 

This is very important because I have heard conflicting messages. People who are going to forgive Kony, when they go and meet Kony and forgive him, they come to Uganda and condemn fellow Ugandans who are here, including President Museveni and the NRM Government. If we are to reconcile, let us not only reconcile with Kony, but also reconcile with everybody in Uganda. (Applause)

The 6th Parliament appointed a select committee to which I was a Member. Hon. Kibanzanga Christopher has made good remarks about me and hon. Mao. I thank you for that. There are very few Ugandans who recognise good things. I thank you for recognising my good role in that. I hope many more will do that. The important point is that, while we were writing that report, the issue was, do we pursue the military solution, the peaceful solution or both military and peaceful? Mao and I were insisting that the government must be pro-active in sending the message for peace and negotiations. The Government at that time on the other hand was saying, well, if Kony comes out or a third party says they want to talk, there is no problem. Mao and I were saying, no, it is the responsibility of the Uganda Government to extend the hand of peace to Kony and say, “come and negotiate.” This is where we disagreed.

We defined the method of the peaceful steps to be taken; we said let there be restoration of peace with Sudan. We even recommended restoration of multiparty democracy in that report. We said, possibly, if multiparty democracy is restored immediately, Kony will come and form his party because he is fighting for power. At that time he was accusing the Movement Government for being monolithic, for being dictatorial and so on. We recommended total amnesty, which the government later came and passed as law, but it had a problem with Kony. So, these are areas where we had problems with the government.

May I appreciate the two statements made by my distinguished brothers, Dr Moses Apiliga and the leader of the Opposition, Prof. Ogenga-Latigo.  Why am I saying this? I want to quote them as an example of the positive attitude and how we should conduct ourselves as national leaders. This is what Moses Apiliga, a very strong Congressman, said as he spoke; he used the word “our Government” throughout. That is very important. Others will say, “that NRM Government”, but a mature intelligent politician like Moses Apiliga was saying, “Our Government”; “let us support our Government.” 

My brother here, Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition, I heard him very carefully and he said, “Let us support President Museveni, the President of Uganda, our leader.”  When we start talking like that, we are laying the foundation for democracy in this country. 

Because of lack of time, when I said after war let us address the causes of the war, one of them is this problem of democracy. After independence, people were saying when you lead for five years, should there be election? What sort of election?  When you disagree, do you go to the bush or you come to Parliament? What do you do? All this is part of the cause of the war, lack of democracy. If we have the Leader of the Opposition speaking the way he did, and a mature member of the Congress party speaking the way Moses Apiliga spoke, then we have great hope for this country. I thank you all and I support this motion.

1.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable members and the mover of the motion. The Minister of Defence will be winding up, but I request to give some information, which is very vital, to the Members of Parliament.  

I listened to them as they were debating and I realised that this information is lacking. First of all, it is important for us to note that there have been various peace initiatives made by this Government right from 1986. The outcome was: 

•	In 1986 Moses Ali and his group.
•	In 1988, some of us know what happened with Charles Alai and Angelo Akello.
•	In 1991, Otema Alimadi and Akena Odoko’s wing. 
•	In 1994, Col William Omaria and Max Omeda.
•	Gen. Ali Bamuze in 2002 and then our brother Taban Amin in 2003.  

To be specific on the LRA itself, from 1993 to-date there have been peace initiatives, for example:  

•	Between 1993 and 1994, the then Minister of Northern Region, hon. Betty Bigombe, brokered peace talks at Pagik in Gulu with the LRA rebels. 

•	In 1997, the LRA officials met members of the Rome-based St Egidio on ending the war peacefully and handing over the Aboke girls that had been abducted by LRA.  

•	In 1997, the State Minister of Northern Uganda, hon. Owiny Dolo, met with LRA representatives led by James Obita. This took place in London.

•	In 1997, on the 6th of November, the LRA foreign affairs secretary, James Obita, wrote to President Museveni on the need to give peace a chance. The President replied acknowledging receipt of the letter and giving commitment towards peace talks.  

•	In December the same year, St Egidio community held a meeting in Rome with the key LRA officials and Uganda Government had representatives, hon. Amama Mbabazi was among them. By then he was the Minister of State in charge of Foreign Affairs. David Pulkol, who was the Director General of ESO, was also among that team.

•	Activities towards peace talks intensified in 1999. In January 1999, the Gulu LCV Chairman, Lt Col Walter Ochora, wrote to Kony requesting for dialogue. Kony replied, agreeing in principle to the talks but subsequently reneged on this.  

•	In April the same year, 1999, Government sent two emissaries namely; Nyeko Ibrahim Ocaya and Capt. Okech Kuru who met LRA commander, Adyebo. The two emissaries were killed in cold blood by LRA, leading to the collapse of the peace talks. 

•	On the 13th –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. I would like to help the honourable Minister of State for Defence by giving information, which is valuable for getting the peace we are looking for. This is about the peace talks between Gen. Moses Ali, the leader of UNRF I, and the government of the day led by President Museveni, and also the peace talks by Maj. Gen. Ali Bamuze and the government.  

Maj. Gen. Ali Bamuze was part of UNRF I led by Gen. Moses Ali. Therefore, he was part of the peace talks signed by Gen. Moses Ali. The fact that he had to sign other peace talks meant that the peace talks you are praising as being signed by Gen. Moses Ali were temporary arrangements because he had to break out of this to go to the bush. That is why in 2002 another rebel group, UNRF II, emerged out of UNRF I.  

The information I am giving the minister here is that, the peace talks you are praising contain temporary arrangements, not durable arrangements of peace. Secondly, I said this to hon. Kiyonga here, honestly –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the microphone is working; you do not have to shout.

MR FUNGAROO: I am sorry for the tone. I told hon. Kiyonga, the Minister of Defence, that we should ask ourselves this time what we are looking for. What type of solutions do we want to provide? Do we want to give temporary solutions or we want to give durable solutions? If we want durable solutions, we cannot be praising these peace talks you have enumerated here. Kony is not the one who started the war in Northern Uganda. Let us look for durable solutions. I can give them to you.

Finally, Gen. Bamuze came out as a result of the failure of the peace talks with President Museveni and Moses Ali. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, I think the minister was just explaining that there have been many efforts. You should thank the government that after failing UNRF I, they came back to UNRF II with Mr Bamuze and settled the issue.  

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that clarification. The problem is actually bigger. We have to solve the issue of peace talks so that we can discuss what next. We will need to discuss what I call the post-peace talks’ arrangement. You can really see that we still have problems.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on the 13 of May 1999, President Museveni declared general amnesty for LRA. I am just being brief. I cannot go into the details of who did what, like my brother was giving information -(Interruption) 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. You recall the level and depth of involvement of this Parliament in the process of a search for peace for Northern Uganda and eventually the whole of Uganda.  At various levels we have been required by Government either to appropriate money or to amend laws. One of the laws that we amended as a Parliament was the Amnesty Act, to exempt some leaders of the Lord’s Resistance Army from amnesty.  Now the process of peace is on, does the minister intend or does Government intend to bring the Amnesty Act to amend it so that it stays exactly in conformity with what we are doing? I want to seek that as a clarification from the minister.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, can I be allowed to give this House the peace initiatives my Government has engaged in for the past years. Other issues, we shall handle. My senior colleague is also going to wind up and I am sure he will be in a position to answer some issues that have been raised by my colleagues.  

•	In May 1999, Madam Speaker, President Yoweri Museveni personally wrote to Joseph Kony accepting a proposal for a peaceful resolution of the conflict as fronted by Washington-based Mr Jongomoi Okidi-Olal. President Museveni also agreed that President Jimmy Carter should act as mediator, and that the government of Sudan must be involved in the peace talks. This initiative collapsed after the Sudan Government failed to link the negotiating team with Kony in Southern Sudan. Kony also failed to live up to his earlier promise to release the 22 schoolgirls he had abducted from Aboke Secondary School in Northern Uganda.

•	Mid-February 2000, Dr Joyce Neu, Head of the Carter Centre Conflict Resolution Programme, and her colleague together with us met Kony at Nisitu, south of Juba, as part of the government of Uganda’s efforts to use mediators to end the LRA rebellion in Northern Uganda.  

•	In 2001, the LC V Chairman Gulu, Lt Col Walter Ochora, and two UPDF coordinators, one Capt. Oyet Weliki - this was a former LRA rebel - and Maj. Okot held three rounds of talks with LRA Commander Onen Kamdulu (Onen Kamdulu recently came out and joined Government) in a place called Awoonyim village in Aswa County, Northern Uganda.  

•	Madam Speaker, in February 2003, President Yoweri Museveni named a Government team to negotiate with LRA. The First Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Eriya Kategaya, was the chairperson.  

•	In February 2003, under the Acholi Religious Leaders Peace Initiative, the Acholi paramount chief, Chief Oywakamoi, held a meeting with LRA commanders. This initiative is still continuing.  The cultural leaders and religious leaders are continuing to play a major role especially towards the Mato put because this is an issue which we have to handle as the LRA combatants come out to join their communities.  

•	In April 2004, President Museveni released a statement renewing Government readiness to talk with the LRA either directly or through intermediaries in order to expeditiously resolve the rebellion. 

•	On the 14th of November in the same year, Government declared a one-week ceasefire. 

•	On the 16th of November, Government appointed a peace team headed by hon. Ruhakana Rugunda to respond to the offer of peace talks by the LRA through Madam Betty Bigombe. 

•	In the same month, on the 17th, Betty Bigombe and three observers (whites), met with Kolo, who was LRA’s spokesperson, at Koch Amaa, 15 kilometres west of Gulu. Betty Bigombe delivered Government’s message including a map of gazetted areas. However, the LRA were using the gazetted areas as a safe corridor to Sudan and for reorganisation. This also did not yield substantive results.  

Madam Speaker, what am I saying? It is very important to know where we are coming from and where we are now, so that we can forge a way forward on where we are going.

I want to conclude by paying tribute to the gallant sons and daughters of UPDF who have toiled for 20 years in combat. We have lost many of them - senior officers, captains, and majors. They have been to Gulu, they went to Congo; they have been everywhere. It may appear as if it is business as usual, after all they applied to join UPDF and the Constitution mandates them to do so, but to be in the bush working in an environment full of inadequacies and continuing to be disciplined and obedient is something that deserves applauding. (Applause)

Another issue is the ICC. When you are fighting and you are engaged in something, you should know who your allies are. The ICC is an ally to Uganda. Uganda approached them when we had a problem. The LRA were outside our jurisdiction so we could not handle them. We approached the ICC. They responded and indicted these leaders. These four leaders know what it means to be indicted and that is why they are continuing to ask the government of Uganda to go back to the ICC to make sure that when these four indicted members of LRA come out, the ICC will not follow them here. The Government of Uganda will now take the judicial process because they will now be within the jurisdiction of the state.  

My Government has given assurances that it is not impossible for us to go back to the ICC to talk to them. The reason that the government will use is the outcome of the negotiations. Otherwise, we remain with no convincing reason to present to the ICC, which was established to fight impunity. 

I am happy for my brother Apiliga when he mentioned the issue of accountability and justice. This is very paramount, dear colleagues. The LRA are going to be resettled in the community. The community is full of victims, so we must show processes that we will follow that will handle our accountability and justice. This is the package, which I am sure Government will present to the ICC, to convince them that we now have this process, the Mato put, and the legal base we will put on top of that. Maybe then the prosecutor will use the statute to say that on the issue of impunity, Uganda is going to handle and therefore the case falls by the way side.  

I want to assure you that the government has been on record assuring Kony and the other three that the issue of the ICC is not impossible to handle, and I want this message to go right there. What appeared in the papers, as mentioned by Capt. Sarah Mpabwa, that Vincent Otti makes a U-turn, was really unfortunate. Otti did not make a U-turn. The LRA has not made a U-turn, they have been consistent on the issue of the ICC and they are continuing to mention it.  When they mention it, it does not mean that they have made a U-turn and that they are not moving forward assembling in the designated areas. 

As I speak now, there is movement of LRA. Pader District is almost free from LRA. Okuti has moved away; Dominic is moving with his group of about 60 to 80 LRA; Oboro and others are also moving. There are about six groups of LRA in motion. When you write that LRA fails to turn up, it is as if there was a deadline, which we have passed. This exercise was given three weeks and we have just gone through one week. You cannot write that LRA has failed to turn up when we have two more weeks. I am optimistic. I want Ugandans to pray that these LRA move towards the designated areas and then we see how to help them resettle home. For those who will want to go to UPDF and qualify to do so, Government is on record committing itself to take them on. They will even help pay school fees for those who will want to join schools, those who will qualify.  

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity. Thank you very much, honourable members, for listening to me.

1.47
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues.  First, I would like to thank the movers, our two colleagues, hon. Mugyenyi and hon. Euku, for moving this motion. This is a formal way of Parliament speaking. Everybody will hear today that the Parliament of Uganda in addition to the Executive, the President, have also spoken in the right direction.  

Secondly, I think it was not by accident, I think this was designed by our two colleagues that one mover is from the ruling party and the supporter is from the Opposition. I think this was a good innovation because it conveys to our country and to the international community that this issue of security and peace is a bi-partisan issue. Although we have gone multiparty, we are not divided on fundamentals. So, I want to thank these two colleagues for this initiative. 

Having said so, Madam Speaker, I would like to make three or four points as we close the debate. First, where are we in the journey of re-establishing peace and security in the North and therefore in the whole country? The steps being undertaken in carrying out the peace talks in Juba are very crucial, very significant, and that is why we are carrying out this debate. I want to add, firmly, that we are at the beginning. The journey will have other milestones, for which we must prepare both in physical terms and political terms. Even if today we sign the peace agreement in Juba, it would be irresponsible for us to go and sleep and stretch our legs. It will be a start of hard work on the part of all leaders. 

How I wish, Madam Speaker, that as we carry out this very important debate, many more of our colleagues were in this House. As you sit here and listen to each of the colleagues who have spoken, you really see hope ahead. This 8th Parliament has a historical role to pursue this and make our contribution to the stabilisation of this country. 

Fortunately, as part of the procedures of this Parliament, we have a Hansard that comes out reasonably frequently. I would like to appeal not only to us who are in the House but also to our colleagues who could not be here, to go back to this particular debate and read what we said. We should go back, each one of us, and read what hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Apiliga, the Leader of the Opposition said and synthesize in our minds what that means. We also must be willing to be taken on by our own words. 

The illustration that hon. Omara Atubo has just made here is not just symbolic, it is very deep in terms of what we need to do to care for the deep national interests. For avoidance of doubt, let me also repeat what hon. Atubo said about hon. Apiliga and the Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Latigo. He said, although hon. Apiliga is UPC 3.1.1 he stands here on the Floor of the House and says, “Our Government.” (Applause) This is historic, this is fundamental, this is very important! The Leader of the Opposition also comes here not to say, because I am in the Opposition I want to oppose what he says but he says, “We must thank the President. We must give the President tribute for the process he is taking.” This is demonstrative and I know these two brothers were not just speaking to the gallery. We always discuss with hon. Latigo and I read quite a bit about my colleague, hon. Apiliga, when he was Minister responsible for Scarcities. I respect him although he is in the other side. 

I want to show you the parallel on the defence side. The cessation of hostilities was signed on 26th of August, as you recall. This was to be effective on the 28th at 6.00 a.m. It was a period of anxiety between 26th and 28th. Everyday we who are in Defence got messages at least once about what was happening in the field - we shot three rebels, we shot one, we have arrested one, one has given himself up. Everyday we were getting those reports from all over the North. So, we were waiting to see what would happen on 28th. Very early on 28th, the Commander-In-Chief issued instructions in writing, and they were wired to all the people in the field, to direct cessation of hostilities. Colleagues, if I showed you the book after 6.00 a.m. on 28th, not a single message came in the same terms. No message saying, “We are seeing people, we are chasing them, we are shooting at them”, came through. The command was taken immediately and the guns fell silent. (Applause) 

Subsequent to that, what do you see in the book? You see, “20, 30 LRA fighters have passed, they have taken a rest in place X, they asked us for some food or some help.” The Army is a 100 percent complying and cooperating with their colleagues. (Applause) 

In protocol terms, the Army are our juniors. They are our children. We are the political leaders and they take command from us, but I think there is no harm also to learn from your child if he does something positive and we are moving forward. So, the commitment we are making today to reconciliation in our country, to stability in our country, to issues of national interest, let us find a way in which this can happen like it does in the Army. Once we say this, what we shall do subsequent to that command we have given ourselves, in everything we say and do; we are consistent. 

I must thank you again, hon. Latigo, Leader of the Opposition, for standing here yesterday as a real leader and taking fault with the Monitor newspaper, which normally is very generous to the FDC. This was a sign of leadership. Where a mistake has been made, we must point it out in the interest of our country.

Hon. Omara Atubo has spelt out elements of what should be common good, elements of what should be deemed national interest. There is no standard list, but I think this Parliament in this country must at one stage debate and say, “These issues are common good and on these issues, we are going to speak the same language.” (Applause) If we do that, we will be taking the process of Juba, even when it ends, a step further.

Madam Speaker, I said we are just at the beginning in bringing peace to Northern Uganda even after the peace agreement has been signed. In the villages of Acholi, Lango, Teso and wherever war has been, we got injured. We get injured nationally when there is war, but there are individual people and families that take the cost and get injured directly and lose their relatives. Those need an extra mile to come along with reconciliation. As you know, Kasese has been in and out of war for a long time. When rebels have come out of the bush, giving them a package, a panga, a jerrican to go back and start new live always raises hostility among the LC leaders, and for good reason. They say these are the people who were killing us, you are not paying us, they have come and they are the ones you are giving some benefit. 

This means leaders in this Parliament, under the leadership of our colleagues from the North, as Juba goes on we must go to the villages and start talking the language we are talking here. We must go to every home, and if it is possible, for us to identify that this is the home of hon. Latigo, which lost so many people, so many children were captured, so that we start having discourse with these people to prepare them for the reconciliation that we are talking about. 

There must be families in Acholi, in Lango where children were taken captive and who are hoping that with this cessation of hostilities, with the signing of the agreement, these children will re-appear. The truth is, some will appear and some will not because some must have perished. You can imagine those people directly affected; it will take us engagement on a constant basis politically, and down personally to the individuals who have been affected. 

As for the physical rehabilitation, we are always here. Yesterday, you saw we could not do our budget because of some inefficiency here and there. Sometimes we are not happy with what our permanent secretaries are doing. This is not going to stop immediately. The document the Prime Minister brought here, once approved will need pushing for what we approve here to happen on the ground. This, therefore, will need leadership. It will need supervision from us on the ground. People will be happy to hear the signing, but they will be even happier to see what is happening on the ground itself.

Madam Speaker, I am really very happy that we have had this historical discussion. I suggest that we take it forward so that we can reach actual national reconciliation and define our national interest, which should all be heard in clear supporting words.

Let me make a comment or two on the situation in Southern Sudan. It is appropriate, and we have done very well to thank President Salva Kiir, his deputy and the government in Southern Sudan. Some of you may be aware that as we speak now, many Ugandans from Kayunga, Soroti, Kasese are busy trading in Juba. They are taking goods and services there because a good situation has happened. This situation, however, as we all know has a history.  

Our colleagues under the leadership of departed comrade, the leader of SPLM, Dr Garanga, struggled for many years. Let me repeat on the Floor of this House that our leader, President Museveni, with the support of NRM, quietly were on the side of SPLM in Southern Sudan. We are happy that our people in Sudan can now walk with their heads up. 

This political relationship between us and the people of Southern Sudan is now beginning to pay multiple benefits to Uganda and to the region. In our case, we are first beneficiaries because it is mainly because of that that we got confidence. The people of Uganda tried so many times to discuss peace and failed and the LRA must have had their own disappointments, but because this comrade (SPLM) came between us, we developed confidence and we are now at the table. This means, honourable colleagues, that this thing we call Pan-Africanism is not an empty shell.  It is something we should work for. There are benefits to us once Pan-Africanism becomes a reality. Of course, it has a price; the government of Sudan was shooting our people in Moyo and that is part of the reason they were supporting Kony. I think the price was worth paying, given the benefits that we are beginning to see.  

I would like to conclude, Madam Speaker, on behalf of Government, once again underscoring our support for this motion and our thanks go to the movers who have reflected a bi-partisan spirit. Our support and call is to this 8th Parliament, which has a historic role to play in reconciliation, to show that multiparty can work. In the words of my professional colleague, hon. Apiliga, even when I am in the opposition, because I believe in a country, in a system that supports their leaders, I stand up and say, “Our Government.” 

This Parliament has a historic role as given by the Leader of the Opposition; at every point there is a leader in the country and if he does something positive, we should say so. Even those who are singing praises for you, if they are wrong, come out and tell them. In that way, I believe, Madam Speaker and colleagues, we will move forward. I support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable members. I think we need now to go to the stage of resolution. I only got an indication of an amendment but it was not actually mentioned. Which part of the resolution did you want to amend?

MR HUSSEIN KYANJO:  Clause 3 on page 2.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Read out and mention the part you want to amend.

MR HUSSEIN KYANJO: Clause 3 on page 2 says: “Pays glowing tribute to the government of Southern Sudan in general and to His Excellency, President Salva Kiir and His Excellency, the Vice-President….” up to the end of the clause. I want it to read as follows: “Pays glowing tribute to the government and the people of Sudan in general and to His Excellency, President Salva Kiir and His Excellency, the Vice President, Dr Rieck Machar, of Southern Sudan.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you want to add, “the people?”  

MR KYANJO:  Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have any objection?

MR STEPHEN WASIKE: Madam Speaker, I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it will be amended as proposed by hon. Kyanjo.

PROF OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I forgot to notify you that I wanted to propose two amendments. The first amendment was to resolution No.4 on the last page. The resolution implores, “All the people of Uganda wherever they are.” I want to insert, “and the media”. We talked about asking the media to be considerate and to give their unreserved support to this initiative and process. That is the first amendment.  

In the second amendment, I propose that we add resolution no. 6, which also calls upon and implores Joseph Kony, Vincent Otti and the entire leadership of the LRA to maintain the path of peace and to do all in their power to ensure successful conclusion to the peace negotiations in Juba. I think this Parliament is responding to the letter that Joseph Kony wrote to the Speaker. As we said before, we need to give them tangible encouragement to continue on this path. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WASIKE: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with the amendments. They are quite okay. The motion should be amended accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be amended as proposed by hon. Kyanjo in Clause 3, by the Leader of the Opposition in Clause 4, and by creation of a new Clause 6 as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do pass the resolution on the on-going peace talks between the government of Uganda and the Lords Resistance Army in Juba in the terms proposed by hon. Wasike and seconded by hon. Euku.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will appreciate that we have stayed a bit long, but this was a very important motion. I am glad that the House has finally spoken. Let us suspend the House for one hour. We resume at 3.00p.m.

(The House was suspended at 2.06 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.28 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the strangers gallery we have students from Kitale Development Foundation Senior Secondary School, Biso sub-county in the new Buliisa District. You are very welcome!

Secondly, I do not know whether we should make this announcement now because there are a few Members. It concerns a meeting to be held on Wednesday 13th September in the Parliamentary Conference Hall between 9.00am and 12.00noon. It concerns international investment opportunities in Uganda.  The Prime Minister will address it, and also the Minister of Finance, the Chair of the Uganda Investment Authority and other prominent persons. You are informed about it well in advance so that you get ready for this important meeting.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER
QUESTION 02/1/08

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nakabirwa): Madam Speaker, I am really sorry but hon. Kiyonga is on the way coming with copies of the response from my ministry. I am not in a position to begin presenting, he is coming and I beg that I am given that opportunity.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

3.31
Question number 09/1/08 to the Minister of Education and Sports
 
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira District): “Uncertainty in primary education staffing: 

(a) Will the Minister of Education and Sports explain the circumstances which brought about the reduction of primary teachers staff ceiling from the current 132,500 down to 129,000 in the financial year 2006/07?

(b) Under this policy, will the minister show cause as to why a commission cannot be set up to investigate the matter in Lira District, which will lose up to 821 primary teachers as a result of this punitive action." Thank you.

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, we have just done some research and found out that it is only the teachers who did not open accounts whose names have been deleted. The moment they submit the accounts to Public Service, which requested them to do so through the CAO, all the teachers will be paid. We request that those districts, which have not submitted up-to-date details of the teachers, should do so and submit them to the Ministry of Public Service so that these people are paid. The budget is even there, so there is no problem, it is only the accounts. I am sorry for Lira! I think the letters did not reach on time. If they reached, then the CAO is to blame.

MR JOHN ODIT: Madam Speaker, arising from the minister’s response, I have with me a copy of a circular written by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education, F.X.K Lubanga. It is dated 6 July 2006 and it is to all chief administrative officers and town clerks. The reference is: “Revised district staff establishments quota for the financial year 2006/07.” It is a short message and I will read it:
 
“Please find attached the schedule of revised harmonized national staff ceiling quotas for your information. You will note that the national staff ceiling has been revised from 132,500 to 129,000 teachers. The staff ceiling for each local Government has been accordingly scaled down proportionately.” 

There is no mention of opening bank accounts. We would want to know if what the minister is telling us is a satisfactory policy decision, which was arrived at. Thank you.

3.36
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to bring to the House here is that, it is not only Lira but also Mbale District, especially my constituency, Bungokho North. Over 50 percent of the teachers were deleted although they had their bank accounts. These included head teachers, experienced teachers. This happened during the month of July and up to now they are not even sure whether they are going to get the money or not. 

When you read in the papers, they say we have recovered so many billions of shillings from the ghost teachers and other workers. These ones who were deleted from the pay roll are a very crucial point. Honourable Minister, you clarify, do not say because they had not opened up bank accounts.

3.37
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is about this issue of deleting names of teachers. Who does the deleting? Is it the computer or somebody else? When you go down there, you hear loose talk that the head teacher directed that teacher X be deleted and so on and so forth.  Where does he get permission to delete the names of a teacher? If the ministry is doing research, how many teachers’ names so far have been deleted from this list and why? It is a common phenomenon? Probably that is why this list for Lira is showing 821 whose names are not there. 

On and on, you find that names of teachers are not appearing and you just hear a statement that a computer has deleted the teacher’s name. So, let it be clear to us; is it the teacher not submitting his name in time or the head teacher, or is it the district education officer, the ministry or the computer and the computer wizards who are doing this?

3.38
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to the presentations we have had, the question of deleting names from the payroll or registers goes beyond just the Ministry of Education. I am aware that there are some public servants, particularly soldiers, whose names have been deleted from the payroll. When they have been apprehended for whatever it is, when they go home they find that their names are not on the payroll. So, on the question of deleting, we need to know whether it is a general Government thing. I can provide more information later to the Minister of Defence. I know that there are some soldiers who have not got their salaries at least for the past three months. Thank you.  

3.39
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, is deleting the only, or perhaps the most appropriate mechanism for dealing with a person who has not submitted a bank account? Is that the most appropriate mechanism in the Ministry of Education?

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At a later stage, we had wanted to request for about two more weeks to give you more detailed information about that. However, it is true there are some adjustments of the staff ceiling from 132,500 to 129,000, but that does not mean that as we talk now we have got an excess of 129. In fact, we have not even reached that figure.  

Secondly, you talked about this deletion and whether it is the machine. Let me remind you that on 4 April 2006, there was a circular from the Ministry of Finance complaining about cash payments to all Government workers and talking about each individual opening a bank account. It ended by saying, “By copy of this letter, the Commissioner Data Processing Uganda Computer Service is directed to effect the deletion with effect from 1 June 2006.” Similarly, there was another circular from the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Public Service on 21 August 2006 emphasizing the same point that any teacher who has not come up with a personal account number should not be there until somebody opens an account.

What this figure of 3,000 is entailing is not that the Ministry of Education has sacked, it is only those people who have not opened their bank accounts that have missed. Now they are calling that figure of people who have been sacked.

Madam Speaker, my senior minister has written to most of the people concerned in the district. That is why we are seeking for two weeks. We are now getting all the information about these teachers so that we can come back to this House and give you the details about opening of the accounts - who has done so, who has not done so and why is it that the exercise has taken that long - so that all these issues which the Members have raised, and which are pertinent, can easily be answered. I thank you and I beg that you give us two weeks to come with a comprehensive answer.  

3.42
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I get surprised that a whole minister can come here and tell us they are deleting because of lack of bank accounts. If I have not put in my bank account, you do not pay me my salary until I submit a bank account. So, there is no reason for you –(Interjection)– the ghost will not have an account so it should be put on the list of the ghost until it opens an account.

Madam Speaker, this is why I was reluctant to rise up. We know the Ministry of Finance came during the budget and said they have saved Shs 15 billion from ghost workers. I asked them a question, “Have you arrested the one who was paying the ghost workers?” They said no. That means he must have known the reason; they were paying the right people.

Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter, it is not a simple matter. These teachers are the poorest people; they get Shs 150,000. They have gone to the micro-finance to borrow money to take kids to school and now the micro finance is on their heads.  They are going to sell their properties. They are going to make them poorer. I suggest to Government that you first leave these teachers to get money as you clean up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It would appear to me, from what the ministry has said, that this debate is premature. They are seeking for time to examine all the issues surrounding deletion, bank accounts and so on and so forth. So, why don’t we defer it until the ministry comes back?

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, there are two issues here: the deletion because you have failed to submit your bank account and then there is this circular on the ceiling. Maybe we have to read this so that when the ministers come back, they do not go and give us another reply just on submitting bank accounts. It is bigger than submitting bank accounts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, I hope you will be able to explain to us whether you are effecting downsizing of the teaching force according to the ceiling or there are faults in the way they are doing their work.

MS ALASO: Maybe also on salaries. It is common to see teachers spend the whole week in a bank lining up for salary. Now we are telling them, whether they have a bank or not in their respective districts, to make sure they have a bank account. Will the ministry also come out and tell us what arrangements are in place to ensure that teachers do not spend two weeks lining up for salaries. Sometimes upcountry banks close after a whole day and not all the teachers have been served, the students are in class waiting. If you go to a district like Kaberamaido, there is no bank there and they have to come to Soroti. They line up the whole day and the following morning and not all of them have been served. So, maybe the ministry will also tell us, when they come back here, how they plan to handle that.  Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REQUEST FOR A PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION TO CAPITALISE THE CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY

3.48
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, on 22 of August 2006, a request was made to this Parliament and the Speaker committed it to the Committee on National Economy –[Members, “We don’t have copies”]- some Members are complaining that they don’t have copies of the report but they have been on the table. If they are not enough the clerk should provide more.

Madam Speaker, the committee considered this request and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations.  Before I do that, I would like to lay on the Table some of the documents the committee considered: 

I would like to lay on the Table a brief to the parliamentary Committee on National Economy on Kasese Airport Development project. I would also like to lay the annual report 2005 of Civil Aviation Authority, the Civil Aviation Authority cash flow review, the investment development programme for Entebbe International Airport, the Civil Aviation Authority five year business plan for 2006-2011, the Civil Aviation Authority financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2004, a review of CAA loan liability and capital structure and lastly the minutes of the Committee on National Economy as a requirement of our Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, Civil Aviation Authority was established in 1991 by an Act of Parliament with Government of Uganda equity valued at Shs 14 billion in infrastructure. The infrastructure however was dilapidated and needed urgent rehabilitation. Government of Uganda, therefore, borrowed a loan from Spain of $24,134,282 together with Government counterpart funding of Shs 1,701,508,938 and a grant from Denmark through DANIDA of $27,703,000. 

All this was on-lent to CAA to do major rehabilitation. The loan and grant were given at an interest rate of five percent and Government counterpart funding was given at commercial interest rates. CAA has been able to partly service the counterpart funding. However, it has now been established that they cannot service the principle loan totalling to $51,861,382, the accrued interest of $29,821,962 and the balance on the counterpart funding totalling Shs 2,707,259,360. This is reportedly because all the income generated is re-invested in the airport and airfields to keep them to acceptable international standards.  

The request to capitalise CAA is to strengthen its balance sheet position to enable it access alternative funding in order to do the major rehabilitation that is required.

As regards the methodology the committee used, we met the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Minister of Works and Communication and the board and management of CAA. The committee analysed the documents that I have laid on Table. The committee also visited Entebbe International Airport but could not visit Kasese due to poor weather conditions that were prevailing at the time.

Paragraph four is the loan outlook as at 30 June 2006. The loan from Denmark through DANIDA includes: 

•	Principal  $ 27,730,000 
•	Accumulated interest $ 15,944,750  
•	Total outstanding $ 43,674,750 

The loan from Spain includes: 

•	Principal $ 24,131,382 
•	Accumulated interest $ 13,877.212 
•	Total outstanding $ 38,008,594

The Government counterpart funding includes: 

•	Principal Shs 1,701,508,938 
•	Accumulated interest Shs 4,721,915,346  
•	CAA payments Shs 3,716,164,924 
•	Outstanding balance Shs 2,707,259,360.

With the loans that were lent to CAA, they managed to do the following:

•	Passenger flow areas 
•	Passenger facilities, like the duty free shops 
•	Security systems 
•	Terminal building roofing 
•	Kitchen repairs and supply of equipment 
•	Supply of furniture for transit passengers and other places in the terminals 
•	New conveyor belts 
•	New check in counters.  
•	Resurfacing of the main run-way code-named 17/35 
•	Expansion of the taxi-ways 
•	Construction of the new fire station 
•	Expansion and strengthening of the apron 
•	Refurbishing of the navigation aids and landing systems 
•	Replacement of communication equipment 
•	Rehabilitation of power house 
•	Re-equipment of the machine section 
•	Improvement on the sewage and water treatment plant.

With the monies that were re-invested, CAA was able to do the following: 

•	Construction of their corporate building, which is now the Civil Aviation Authority headquarters.  
•	Procurement of fire trucks and fire building extension 
•	Acquisition and maintenance of navigation aids 
•	Procurement of security and fire fighting equipment 
•	Construction of a police station.

The activities to be carried out by CAA in their short-term development programme, which include the preparations for CHOGM include the following:

•	Modification and enlargement of the arrival halls 
•	Enlargement of departure terminals 
•	Extension of the baggage conveyor belt and procurement of a baggage reconciliation system 
•	Construction of a new airport parking apron 
•	Construction of a new domestic/general aviation terminal and power supply improvements 
•	Supply and installation of a new joint radar System for Defence and Civil Aviation Authority Air Traffic Control.
•	Upgrading Kasese Aerodrome to international standards to be used as an alternative to Entebbe International Airport 
•	Construction of a presidential/VVIP terminal 
•	Construction of security watch towers at Entebbe International Airport.

Madam Speaker, the committee made some observations:  

CAA is a semi-autonomous body established by an Act of Parliament under the Ministry of Works and Communication to take responsibility for the regulation of civil aviation, provision of air navigation and air traffic services as well as operation and development of aerodromes within Uganda.  

At its inception in 1991, no funds were injected in Civil Aviation Authority by the government of Uganda to kick-start it. Despite this, it has maintained the aviation industry to commendable levels.

The authority should have used the loans acquired by the government and on-lent to CAA as a contribution from Government like it was done in Kenya and South Africa. This is because the infrastructure that CAA inherited was in a sorry state. 

Government borrowed funds from Government of Spain at an interest rate of 2.5 percent but decided to on-lend it to CAA at five percent, which to us was rather high given that CAA was to invest this money in infrastructure, which was a long-term investment. Members wondered at this point why Government had to double the interest rate.

Government got a grant from Denmark through DANIDA but decided to on-lend to CAA at an interest rate of five percent.  

It was further noted that CAA was made to pay interest on Government counterpart funding at a commercial rate, which will not be sustainable by the CAA operational demands. We were told that at one time the interest rate went up to 47 percent.  

Government and its agencies have continued to use the facilities of CAA without due payment and the total arrears amount to Shs 53 billion. If this were cleared CAA would not need to look for where to borrow the money to handle the programmes in their short-term development programme. However, this situation was compounded by CAA’s robust credit management policy.

The committee noted disparities in the request and the supporting documents, which were however cleared when CAA submitted more documents.

Government entered an agreement with MONUC to use the airport without paying any fees. Since this is an obligation of Government as per the agreement signed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Government should therefore take on all the money MONUC owes to CAA, which stands at $ 7.0 million and above. 

CAA has developed a 20-year investment plan that is divided into three phases covering the period 2002-2022. It was noted that the short-term development programme should have been finalised in 2005, but due to capitalisation problems, CAA was not able to do so. They believe that when this Parliament addresses this problem, they will be in place to fast track some of the CHOGM projects and be ready by September 2007. 

The domestic/general aviation terminal will also be used by some other small planes from the region.  This is going to be at the original old terminal.  They are going to construct the domestic or general aviation terminal and they think that this will increase the number of aeroplanes and improve their services at the airport.

The new radar to be acquired jointly with the Ministry of Defence costs Shs 60 billion. CAA is to make a contribution of Shs 15 billion and Shs 45 billion will come from Ministry of Defence. However, the committee noted that in the draft estimates for 2006/07 this figure is not reflected in Ministry of Defence development budget. The Minister of Finance assured us that the money would be availed.
  
The committee noted that Government had ignored capitalising this authority, which was mandated to regulate the aviation industry in the country. Although capitalisation in CAA is long overdue, it was only after the coming of CHOGM that Government decided to do it.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the committee noted that Government has pledged to provide Shs 4.0 billion for the construction of the VVIP terminal. This will greatly enhance the security of VVIPs and will also improve inconveniences currently faced by the travelling public and commercial flights whenever there is a VVIP travelling. This will be next to the general or domestic terminal and will connect to the road that goes up to Kitoro.

The recommendations of the committee include the following:

Government and its agencies should pay, in a reasonable time, for the services provided to them by all parastatals to enable them run efficiently. In this endeavour, Government should therefore pay CAA all the outstanding amounts, which totals to Shs 53 billion.

Civil Aviation Authority should strengthen its credit management systems to avoid accumulation of credit to such huge amounts of money. Furthermore, they should stop providing some of these services if these Government bodies are not complying.

Government should also pay all the outstanding dues of MONUC to CAA. The committee further recommends that the agreement signed by Government of Uganda and MONUC be revisited to address the issue of the waiver.

The rehabilitation and expansion of both Entebbe and Kasese airports to international standards should be fast tracked to avoid further delays and be ready for CHOGM as promised by Civil Aviation Authority.

The resolution submitted to Parliament should be amended appropriately to reflect the urgent works, which are going to be carried on Entebbe International Airport and Kasese airfield only.

Government should take on its responsibilities like search and rescue, maintenance of the radar at Nsamizi and VIP lounge operations, which are currently a burden to CAA. We were informed that CAA used up to Shs 3.0 billion to maintain the radar at Nsamizi.

Government should stop planning and acting only when there are important functions but should make it an ongoing process.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the resolution should be further amended to reflect the request for capitalisation of Civil Aviation Authority as $81,683,344 and Shs 2,707,259,360 being both the principal and accumulated interest as shown earlier.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee therefore recommends that this House grants the authority to Government to capitalise Civil Aviation Authority by taking over the lenders principal and the accumulated interest as shown below. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and Members of the Committee on National Economy for the first report by your committee. I have examined the report and it has the required minimum signatures so we are free to debate it. Is there a spokesperson for the opposition?

4.12
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the chairman, although I am at a loss on some of the issues he has raised in his report. First of all, Civil Aviation Authority is 100 percent owned by Government and the infrastructure that was done was by Government. Furthermore, from all the loans that we borrowed nothing has been paid. I want to ask the chairman, has he crosschecked if the lenders have been paid any money as far as this loan is concerned?  

Another issue is that, we qualify as a Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC), so we are not supposed to take on commercial loans. The only body that can take on a commercial loan in Uganda is maybe a parastatal. If Government takes on this loan then it will become a commercial one. Are we not going to be eliminated from HIPC and I know that the minister must be aware of that. What arrangements do you have? Are you going to clear this debt or are you going to take it over and we pay over time as it was supposed to be paid and miss being members of HIPC?  

I do not understand this issue of saying that they will not develop if we don’t capitalise. Where have they taken the money they have been collecting?  First of all, they have not paid the loan so the money they collected should have been used for development. What do they mean by saying that they are unable to develop if they are not capitalized yet they have not even paid the loan?  

I think the best way out is for Government to pay Shs 53 billion and for Civil Aviation Authority to meet its obligations. I suggest that Government swaps the debt with Civil Aviation Authority so that Civil Aviation Authority can lessen its indebtedness. After that, they may come and ask Parliament for the balance to be paid by Government.  

I want to know from the chairman and the minister; you said that five percent is too high but when Civil Aviation wants to go on it’s own where is it going to borrow cheap money that is less than five percent?  You should also explain to us where it is going to get the money. Is Government going to guarantee it and if so then they have to come to Parliament again for us to guarantee. 

The procedure is that we should not guarantee a loan that has more than one percent as interest. So, where are they going to get the money? I also want to know whether Civil Aviation is the one responsible for the routes of Ugandan Airlines and if so, where is the money that is being collected on the use of these routes? 

Madam Speaker, I am not suggesting that we capitalise Civil Aviation. The best way to handle this is for Government of Uganda to trap the debt and for Civil Aviation to be held responsible for all the moneys they have borrowed. If we accept to capitalise them then all parastatals are going to come here and say they need to be capitalised. If Civil Aviation wants more money then Government should be able to come here and ask Parliament to lend them. This will ensure that parastatals or institutions become accountable for all the resources that are given to them by Government. I thank you. 

4.16
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek one clarification and to make a general observation. I thank the committee, but I would like to know the criteria used for selecting the alternative airport for renovation. How was Kasese chosen? It is not that I have any problems with Kasese but I would like to know this because Soroti Flying School, the second largest in this country lies in ruins. It trains pilots from all over East Africa and it is so spacious yet it was not considered. 

Over the years we have been trying to urge Government to do something. The dormitories are in ruins and the airfield itself is in a very bad state. Now we have CHOGM and we are going to rent packing space in Mwanza and in Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. What was the criteria that facilitated the exclusion of the second largest airport in this country, the Soroti Flying School Airport?  That is one thing that I would like to know. 

The general observation I would like to make –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Alaso for giving way. The information I want to give especially on Kasese is that under our security assessment we take that side very seriously because our neighbours in the DRC are still grappling with the problem of insecurity. Much as we have the problem of cattle rustling on the Eastern side of Uganda, that problem cannot be compared with the problem in DRC. Therefore, we the people in charge of security requested for Kasese to be brought on board so that we could cater for whatever eventualities. Thank you.

MS ALASO: I think it is not befitting for a minister to stand up and say they take Kasese seriously and they do not take Soroti that seriously because even in security terms we have had very serious concerns in that sub-region –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, with due respect is it in order for hon. Alaso to impute improper motives in what I have said? She said that we did not take Soroti seriously when we were considering an area to choose yet in my explanation I wanted the House to know that we have priorities. That does not mean that you do not take priority number two seriously. They are all priorities but with limited funds what should priority number one be? We take both Kasese and Soroti seriously but with the limited funds we had to begin from somewhere putting in consideration the security assessment we did. Is she therefore in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Members, what hon. Alaso is asking is when will the plan for all the airports be brought to this House? I think that is what she wants to know.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The second and very general inquiry I would like to make has to do with the National Flag carrier. We are all aware that this country does not have a flag carrier. Uganda Airlines I think was operational in the days of the so-called bad regimes. We have had a good regime for the last 20 years yet there is no national carrier. It is very costly because we are relying more on Kenya Airways, which sometimes cuts down their flights to three flights, two or even some days you can actually end up with no flight to Entebbe. 

Every small and big country around us has a national carrier. Apart from this situation being so inconvenient, it is very expensive. It is also sometimes embarrassing that there is nothing we can show in terms of our identity when you get to international airports. I would like to ask Government to tell this country what they plan to do. Can they get into an arrangement or partnership and give this country a national carrier and flag bearer again? 

Madam Speaker, is it planned, is it even imagined or has the idea totally been forgotten? If it is forgotten then I would like to remind Government that this is a very serious need and it should be reviewed. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I seem to recollect that the Minister for Investments mentioned something here about an arrangement for a national airline. Maybe the ministry will be able to talk about it.   

MR KADDUNABBI: Maybe, I can provide some information, Madam Speaker concerning this. We were informed that there is Equator Airline, which is going to start soon and Government of Uganda has 20 percent shareholding. It will use the routes that were formerly owned by Uganda Airlines.

MR ODIT: Mr Chairman, let me inform you that this issue of our national airline is a very serious and embarrassing one. I remember two years ago some passengers from Uganda got delayed in Nairobi and they were blaming Kenya Airways for the delay. The Kenyans who overheard the complaint rebuked the Ugandans and asked, “Where is your airline? If you think you are very efficient, where is yours?” They all kept quiet thereafter. This is the shame we bear because of carelessly losing our resource.

4.25
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. My question also concerns Soroti Flying School. I was listening very keenly and attentively for any mention of that place, all in vain. Now that my colleague has brought it forward, the request I would like to make is that since Kasese was chosen out of security considerations, we urge Government at this point to think also of Soroti Flying School as it is long overdue. If we are talking about promoting sciences in schools then I think this would be one of the areas to explore. 

Most of the dilapidated areas in this country are getting special attention because of CHOGM. Now that Soroti is going to miss out, will Government have it at the back of their minds that Soroti Flying School also needs attention?

My other issue will come in a form of a question. All parastatals are complaining about Government owing them huge sums of money. There is the Electricity Distribution Company, National Water and Sewerage Corporation and now Civil Aviation Authority. What is Government saying at this time? Don’t you think it would be good if we had this cleared by Government? Thank you very much.

4.26
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have really been bothered by this report. I want to find out from the committee whether they are satisfied with the financial management in this Government. You have a parastatal organisation here which is 100 percent Government controlled yet it is a professional body. Civil Aviation has to be handled by professionals like other civil aviation authorities all over the world. 

We have a report informing us that Government borrowed money and then lent it to a parastatal after doubling the interest. I want to find out whether Parliament was informed about this loan in the first place and whether anybody in Parliament ever got to know about lending it to this organisation. If they have not been able to pay for all these years then who is responsible for this because it appears nobody knew about it until the presentation of this report. Therefore this parastatal has been in debt without anybody knowing of that terrible situation. What was the reason for doubling the interest rate for this parastatal?

On top of that we are being told that Government owes this parastatal a lot of money yet it wants to borrow money to lend to it. Did you get a satisfactory explanation for this? Why is this happening? The committee has not told us why this is happening or whether they were satisfied with the explanation that was given in that regard. 

I also want to find out how independent this organisation is. If it is in charge of civil aviation affairs, how come Government negotiated an arrangement with MONUC and it started operating at the expense of this parastatal? Now this parastatal has to go and beg Government to pay. Was the body ever involved in this agreement, which now appears to raise questions? 

There is this question of the radar, which I think has been asked in this country for so long. It is both for security and civil aviation matters. I want to find out, do you want to continue operating that way? Isn’t it high time we split these two and had a separate radar for our security affairs and another for civilian affairs? Is it going to go on like this? And if it has to continue then I want to be told about this Ugshs 60 billion which is supposed to be used to buy it. 

Why is it not included in the financial year budget? What explanation were you given for this? This is a very large amount of money. Has somebody just woken up and said we need Ugshs 60 billion? It is not anywhere in our finances yet it is going to be spent. Who has taken these decisions and who has been consulted? Who has handled the bidding functions for purchasing this utility? Doesn’t this nation have to know about this Ugshs 60 billion? There is something terribly wrong and it appears we are going to just let it go on like that. That is why I think the last comment is very important. Government should stop planning and acting only when there are important functions but should make it an ongoing process. This is a terrible indictment of Government. 

The committee is telling us that Government has no plans but that it acts only when there are very important functions. Now this is being spoken from the side of Government. We are in a terrible situation. Then of course as the conclusion they say that we should provide the money and give the loan. 

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the current speaker to say that this report was made by the side of Government yet these committees are committees of Parliament which were actually constituted –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think he said the government did it.
 
MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, I was just controlling myself but hon. Kawanga said that this is a statement from the government side, which means that because I belong to the ruling NRM and I read the report from this side, this is a report for NRM, which is not the case. This is a report for Parliament and we are making observations. It is up to Parliament to decide, which way you want us to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I was privileged to be the Chairman of the Committee of National Economy in the Seventh Parliament. I recall we got money for a joint radar for East Africa. All of you came here and approved that money. What happened to that money that was approved?

MR KAWANGA: I thank the chairman of the committee very much for the clarification. I did not say that it was the government position. What I wanted to say is that it is embarrassing for this kind of report to be presented by somebody sitting on the government bench.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But is he being objective? Because I think he is serving Parliament here.

MR KAWANGA: Yes and I want to say that it is high time Parliament took a position on this matter. This is because the temptation may be not to analyse this report thoroughly. This is now a Parliament issue and the issues raised are so fundamental that it would be a shame if we just passed this kind of report the way it is.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.34
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the report to allow Government capitalize the Civil Aviation Authority and this is in light of upcoming events like CHOGM and the level of national preparedness needed to handle this meeting among other activities. I think all members of good will should stand and support this report.

However, Madam Speaker, there are other matters that are worth noting particularly since we know that Government set up Civil Aviation Authority in 1991 with capitalisation and equity. Through the process, Government has committed itself to the various loans aimed at improving Civil Aviation Authority. However from first sight, the situation is terribly wrong, as loans have been accumulating. It seems that Government formed this parastatal to be financially viable and to stand the test of time. At the same time Government is crippling it and as a result we are failing to see where we are heading.

Madam Speaker, it is astonishing for instance that the loan from DANIDA of $ 27.2 million has now accumulated to $ 43.6 million. The one from Spain was initially $ 24.1 million but it has almost doubled to $ 38 million not mentioning the counterpart funding from Uganda. This shows that we need to have proper and sound economic and financial prudence when it comes to matters of running the affairs of this country. It is not enough for us as Parliament to allow Government to capitalize in a bottomless pit, because at the end of the day this pattern is going to follow.  

Therefore whereas I am strongly committed to us having a successful CHOGM, I wonder what Government is planning. This is because this trend is going to continue. Government is going to allow MONUC and other bodies to use the CAA facilities without payment. Government should be the one to lead by the example by ensuring that it fulfils its commitment to these obligations because at the end of the day, the burden falls back on Government. At the end of the day, when we make it possible for Civil Aviation Authority to perform the burden will still fall back to Government.  

We have to decide, which way we want to go. We either want it to be run prudently or we want clog it with our own inefficiencies. From the beginning we meant to go against this and have sound economic policies and prudent financial management of these bodies. I do not know whether the committee has looked at CAA commitments vis-à-vis Government’s?  

How about the relationship between CAA and other companies like ENHAS, what is happening there?  Did Government get a bad deal for instance from the agreement it has with ENHAS?  Why is it that according to the activities being carried out by CAA, a big part of it should be incurred by ENHAS like conveyor belts and other activities at the airport? What did Government get out of that? Is Government double paying somebody to just reap off the profits while poor Ugandans bear the burden?  Why is CAA performing decimally?  I do not think that it is only because Government has not fulfilled its obligations to CAA that we are having this problem. There must be a bigger cause.  

You should have interfaced with CAA to know what operational and financial problems they are having and how the situation can be saved.  Short of that, Madam Speaker, I am convinced that even if we pass this report and motion to capitalize, the same will continue to happen. Could it be that CAA has a limited source of revenue? Last of all, can you assure us that such a scenario of Government borrowing at 2.5 percent and lending to CAA at 5 percent is not going to happen again?

Madam Speaker, I kindly request that if we come out to manage state affairs, let us also be committed.  If we are serious about these parastatals, let us be honest to them.  There is this issue of chopping them off or taking the juicy activities of CAA and leaving the skeletons there. Private companies take over CAA and we do not know how and now you are talking about Government recapitalising a national flag carrier, when we gave away the routes. Are we going to reclaim those very routes that we sold out?  I do not know how we are going to go about that. 

Furthermore, do we just have an equity of 25 percent in that airline the chairman was talking about? Madam Speaker, we need to be honest when it comes to economic matters of this country. We need to assist CAA in overcoming its malaise because even if we recapitalise it when they have the same problems they will remain in the same quagmire. Let us think beyond CHOGM and remember we are here to stay and that CAA is still relevant to this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.42
MRS RUTH TUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done. During the Seventh Parliament we failed to get a report of this nature from Civil Aviation Authority and I can testify because I was on the Commission’s Committee. 

Madam Speaker, I have read and listened to the report. When I look at the activities to be carried out by CAA in the short term they include preparations for CHOGM on page 3. There is also a list on page 4, but I am very surprised to note that Jinja-Kimaki Airstrip is not on this list. Everybody knows Jinja is a tourist attraction and business centre. If we are looking at development and targeting CHOGM in the short term then Jinja Airstrip is available. 

The Government even tried to persuade the people of Jinja that it was going to be developed. We have made visits on several occasions and we were made to understand that we were going to get that airstrip developed. I am very surprised that the committee overlooked Jinja. 

I would also like to look at -(Interruption)

MR NABETA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I just want to give information to my honourable colleague from Jinja that actually CAA has always said that they are going to up grade Jinja Airstrip to gravel. You may be aware that this airstrip is situated in the town so when planes land or take off they raise dirt that affects our hotels and town.  Therefore we cannot accept CAA’s offer to up grade this airstrip to gravel. We want tarmac. The minister said that they are up grading Kasese Airstrip because of security. Jinja-Kimaka Airstrip is also next to a barracks so which security does Kimaka lack that Kasese has?  

Actually if you are up grading Kasese and Gulu as alternatives for CHOGM then Jinja seems to be the logical alternative since it is only 50 miles from Kampala where the main conference is going to be held. So, how can you tell us that you are going to ferry people from Kasese to Kampala for the conference? That is illogical. The only solution is to up grade Jinja as an alternative airstrip for CHOGM and for future use. I want to know from the minister whether they have considered that or whether it is just CAA’s opinion that Kasese is the only place that warrants the up grade.

MS TUMA: Thank you my colleague for that intervention, I do not have to add to that. There is one thing I wanted to find out and that concerns No.9 on page 5. How can MONUC continue operating in our airport without paying any fees, sincerely are we serious? We have asked this question before and I think we need an answer. Thank you very much.

4.46
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma Islands, Mukono):  I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the work well done. However, I have one concern. Madam Speaker, when you look at observation No. 12, I am also at a loss like other colleagues. The committee was actually assured that Government would mobilise Ugshs 60 billion this financial year. Now we are in the process of budgeting yet when you review most of the policy statements this money is not reflected anywhere. 

I would have loved to hear from the committee chairperson whether the minister advised him that this money would come under a supplementary budget. Furthermore may we know the definition of supplementary allocations because if this money is not to come from there then there is no way you can mobilise Ugshs 60 billion. 

As a member of this committee I would have loved to see a strong recommendation regarding how Government plans to mobilise Ugshs 60 billion, which is planned for this financial year. I do not know whether recommendation No.7 was in regard to this. 

I want to urge the Minister of Finance to guide this country because if you can tell the whole Parliament that you can mobilise Ugshs 60 billion overnight then I think it does not auger well with people especially tax payers. I thank you.

4.49
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 2. The committee states that they visited Entebbe International Airport but could not visit Kasese due to poor weather conditions prevailing at that time. Then they went ahead to recommend the rehabilitation and expansion of Kasese Airstrip. This is a very serious matter unless of course there is something behind it and then this request-

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Members have talked about Kasese for long and yet the minister told them that the strategic objective is the security. 

On top of that Kasese receives so many tourists because they have two national parks. In fact, I would be very surprised if Kasese was left out of this exercise. I request members to be patient, and for the first time let Kasese be No.1 in Government priorities, the others will get next financial year. Thank you.

MR ANGIRO: Madam Speaker, I think that should not cause alarm to my brother because my intention is not to say that Kasese should not be rehabilitated, but I am wondering how the committee arrived at that decision. 

When you look at the loan schedules from Denmark on page 2 and that from Spain, and then the counterpart funding, it seems that in five years time - because I do know whether Government is going to take action to pay these loans immediately. If it is not done at the rate at which the interest rates is increasing then we may not get money to rehabilitate and expand these two airports.  

I feel that we do not know what we are talking about to say that we are to bring Kasese and Entebbe to international standards. We are not going to achieve these objectives because to bring Kasese to international standards, to look like Mombasa or Dar-Es-Salaam, not to mention Nairobi airport, this really confuses me a bit. Because if you call Entebbe an International Airport at the state at which it is, then we should have derived a new meaning for an international airport. 

I think that investigations should be put in place to find out why these loans have been standing at this rate and why they have not been paid and yet the airport has been in operation for some time. We should find out what the management has been doing and not let them go away with this kind of arrangement and let them request such things.

Finally, let me say that this is a child of the government. If the government comes tomorrow and requests to capitalize Uganda Revenue Authority, what are we going to do? Because that is Government property yet Government is again requesting from us; I do not understand the whole saga. 

But I think that with regard to the Uganda Airlines, which was abused and the abusers were just left to go should come to answer for this. The current administration should explain this in detail, otherwise this request is causing a crisis and I think we enjoy working in crises. 

4.53
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE, (DP, Kyadondo County, South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I would like to seek clarification. I listened to the chairperson of the committee some time back when the Executive came to Parliament to seek permission or to legalize the process of Government getting out of business. So this led to the sale of Uganda Airlines. I have heard the chairperson say that there is Equator Airlines, which is about to start operations and that Government has got 20 percent shares. 

Would it not be proper for the Executive to come back here and seek permission to invest in Equator? If they already took shares, who took this decision? Honourable chairman, I would like to know that.

It is not long ago since Entebbe International Airport was rehabilitated. If we are going to do the same thing, when we look at Ugshs 5.2 billion, which CAA is supposed to use, then this tantamounts to putting up a new airport, because almost every other thing is going to be redone. Did those contractors who rehabilitated Entebbe do a shoddy job?

Honourable chairperson, did you try to look at that area and was it convincing in any way? It looks they have already awarded tenders because if they say that we are going to work on Kasese, and Entebbe airports, yet the time remaining for CHOGM is not really long, then it seems that the tenders for contractors have already been awarded. But did you look at the process or did you offer tenders at random to do these jobs? If so, will they do a good job for this Country?

I have heard the Minister of Defence say that because of security reasons, they had to choose on Kasese. But we have radar owned by two departments of Government. So where security is concerned, why not let defence take over the radar in Entebbe this time and watch the situation? Because CAA is supposed to be a professional parastatal, so why should there be a conflict between the two departments?  

Finally, about these loans that were got, I wonder whether the committee was satisfied that these loans were put to right use, because it could be that Government borrowed and then lent this money to CAA, and then after pulled it out in some other form and it is now indicated as domestic arrears somehow else? We would like to know whether it is not the Executive trying to get the money from CAA. Thank you.

4.58
MR HARRY KASIGWA (FDC, Jinja Municipality West): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kaddunabbi for the report. However, I would want to seek some few clarifications. The first has been raised by hon. Charles Gutomoi. It becomes extremely sad when a committee of Parliament depends on speculation to make a recommendation having failed to go to visit Kasese. I am not saying that Kasese should not be developed but having failed to visit Kasese, why should they come with a recommendation saying: “The resolution submitted to Parliament should be amended appropriately to reflect the fact that the urgent works would be carried out on Entebbe International Airport and Kasese Airfield only”. 

I think it becomes a sad affair if Parliament ever passes such a resolution, whereby you tie down your hands to say that this is all we can do. How about in an event where there is a problem, what would happen? Do you come back to Parliament and say, “Please Parliament, let us go and develop Jinja?” No.

Secondly, the committee says on page 3 that “Civil Aviation Authority did re-invest the revenues generated.” How much money has Civil Aviation Authority generated since its inception, we want to know, and what is the value of these investments that have been done?  

Thirdly, on page 6, recommendation No.3: “Government should also pay all outstanding dues of MONUC to Civil Aviation Authority (CAA).” Come out clearly - was there a blanket waiver that MONUC should never pay? Is there a certain amount of money that MONUC is supposed to pay to Government? Are there some individuals that negotiated a deal with the United Nations? When you say that, “The committee further recommends that the agreement with MONUC should be revisited to address the issue of a waiver.” The moment you waive, that is all and you cannot say other wise. 

So what I am asking is that, is the Ugshs 53 billion inclusive of monies that MONUC is supposed to pay Government or not?

Finally, hon. Ssekikuubo did raise an important issue, and I think as Parliament we should wake up because this is a matter of the economy. They were talking about our air industry. Yes, we have not had an airline for quite some time, but what happened to our routes? Nobody talks about them. It is a serious matter. How much money is supposed to be generated from our routes, and who is benefiting from our routes today that we sold out? Is it the same people that took over ENHAS? Because it is very clear ENHAS was taken over by selfish individuals who are even in Government today? 

It is on record that it is out of selfishness that the ground handling services were removed from Uganda Airlines hence its collapse. And not Parliament, that the President insists that it is Parliament that led to the collapse of the Uganda Airlines, which I do not think is true.

Finally, I would want to pray to Parliament, this is not about politics, if need be, I think the committee should go back and do some more work. This report, as far as I am concerned, is shallow. We are not against CHOGM activities, but we can achieve them in a more professional manner. Thank you very much.

5.02
MR CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns, on the report. The first one is on page 6. It starts from observation No. 12; about what the Minister of Finance says with regard to the Ugshs 60 billion, they say that they will avail. 

I have a very serious worry whether Government, and specifically the Ministry of Finance, takes the budgeting process seriously. We are moving towards the end of the budgeting process and we are told that at this stage, even though the figures that we have now are not in the Budget, money will all the same be found.  That is a big problem for me because it shows that what I would call a back pocket syndrome. There is a behind pocket somewhere where other things that are not brought through this House could be done.  

This is a national Parliament that appropriates all monies from the taxpayers’ sources. So for us to accept, a statement that the Ministry of Finance told us that he is going to avail money elsewhere from the behind pocket. I think that should not be entertained in this House.  It shows me that people are taking budgeting as a formality, not as an oversight function or authoritative function for allocating money.  

So my concern is that the integrity of the budgeting process is at stake. It is up to this House to put its foot down and say we cannot continue to do this; it must stop and stay over this matter.  

The second matter is about CHOGM. It is raised in observation No. 13 of the committee that the request to capitalize arises from the sudden realization that CHOGM is very important.  

One day, we woke up and found that there was no water in Lake Victoria, and therefore there was no electricity. So all of a sudden we are waking up to find that CHOGM is very important because the perceived benefits are very high. But up to now, we do not know what the benefits are. 

It is possible that Government is even guaranteeing loans to develop hotels in anticipation of a huge inflow of capital. CHOGM is going to be here for only one week. We are sinking monies and Government is guaranteeing developers for an activity that is going to take one week. We are building a lot of capacity for rooms; who is going to use those rooms after CHOGM?  

What Government has sank in this thing- whatever guarantees it has made is going to result into Government again capitalizing those contributions to those developments.  We will be back to 1993 where we started from when we said, “let us privatise national enterprises”. We will be back to the state of co-ownership of state enterprises. I think it is not what we intend to do and I foresee that a lot of those companies, which are developing in preparation for CHOGM, if they are not capitalized by Government, are going to collapse.

Now, the clarification I seek from the chairperson of the committee is whether as a Committee on National Economy – because the in-story now is CHOGM; the song is about CHOGM – whether the Committee of National Economy has addressed itself on the cost-benefits of CHOGM to this country? Can we have a one-page balance sheet of CHOGM, which we can refer to each time we talk about CHOGM?  

I have a lot of worries about our reference to CHOGM all the time. Therefore, I would not accept this as a basis for us to move ahead and capitalize this state enterprises, which is already 100 percent owned. I thank you.

5.05
MR JOHN KAWANGA, (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): My concern is that we are dealing with a report, which directly concerns the Ministry of Works, which actually supervises the Civil Aviation Authority. 

So many issues have been raised with regard to the functioning of CAA, and matters, which concern the Ministry of Works. We do not appear to have had any input from the Ministry of Works. For example, on the questions of the Ugshs 15 billion, which is supposed to be lent to CAA to buy radar, which is again a responsibility of the Ministry of Works. 

I feel uncomfortable to take a position in this matter without having had a hearing from the Ministry of Works, which supervises its organization to answer so many queries, which have been raised in this matter. I do not know at what stage we would do this. I would rather suggest that we do not take a final decision in this matter until we have heard from them or at least the Chairman of the Committee of Works, if Parliament is to take an informed decision with regard to this parastatal, which is lending money.  

So at what stage can we get some answers from Works before we take a position in this matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think during the induction when we had just come back, we did inform you that there are some committees that did not really give us any reports in five years. One of them was the Committee on State Enterprises, Parastatals and others; because these are matters they ought to have been handled already.  

So, I would like to ask the new committee to pick up this matter. This is shabby, I would like to ask the new committee to pick up the matter and start handling it, not only this one but also all the parastatals. 

Standing Committees, please wake up. This is part of your work. You should not be just running adhoc. So if you do not mind, can we assign that task to that committee, because that is their responsibility?

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, I would find that most appropriate. We would really want to hear from them; to give us some guidance on how they think the parastatal is performing if we are to give it more money.  At least we would want to have some information.  

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to thank the Committee for their reports on the re-capitalisation of the Civil Aviation Authority.  

As clearly indicated in the report, the Minister responsible for Works and Transport came to the Committee and gave his inputs as far as this report is concerned, and I have his permission, to talk on his behalf as far as this matter is concerned.

On the issue, which was raised by the Shadow Minister of Finance, I would like to respond as follows:

About the loan repayments, the period is 25 years and the government of Uganda will continue to pay this loan until it is fully determined.  

The commercial loans vis-à-vis HIPIC, there is some remission that the government of Spain has given to the government of Uganda to the tune of 82 percent, and the government of Uganda will continues to pay back the balance.

On the issue of money that has been collected by the Civil Aviation Authority, the report has been very clear that Civil Aviation Authority has been plying back this money in development and it is contained in this report.

On the issue raised by the shadow minister about the debt stop, we do acknowledge that the government of the Republic of Uganda indeed owes in excess of Ugshs 50 billion to the Civil Aviation Authority and this is owed by different sectors of ministries and other bodies. As a Government, we undertake to verify this and ensure that they are determined within a reasonable time.  

On the issue that was raised by hon. Alice Alaso, on how Kasese was chosen, I am happy that the Shadow Minister of Defence from Kasese has given some input on this.  –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Owing to the restructuring of FDC, I am no longer in Defence; I am an alternative Minister in charge of Presidency and Corruption. I thank you.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to find out if the Member was alert. The issue of Kasese, apart from what has already been pointed out about the security issues, also involves the aspects of Tourism and this is very important as far as our visitors who are coming for the CHOGM and other tourism attraction are concerned.  

Uganda is definitely going to benefit a lot from CHOGM because Uganda will become a tourist destination with all the hotels that are being put around and people who are coming to discover the interesting values of this country. So the Pearl of Africa will definitely be recognized and more people will come.

Now on the issue of Soroti, Soroti is one of the airfields that will be rehabilitated and in the East African Community, the Uganda Government has chosen that under the Defence and Civil Aviation, we put right the Soroti Flying School and this will be done to internationally accepted standards and there will be other airfields like Arua, that will also be put right within time.

Now, the hon. Akwero also did mention something about the Soroti Flying School and as I have already mentioned, the East African Community Memorandum of Understanding on Defence Co-operation will handle this very important issue. -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you. Honourable minister, I am aware of the efforts to make Soroti a centre of excellence for the East African Community. But I am also aware of the fact that the government of Uganda did not honour its obligation to that effect. I understand there was some form of either contribution or re-capitalization to a certain level that Government of Uganda should have done. That commitment was not met; I have never even seen it brought to this House in any budgetary provision in any financial year.  

Are you now telling us that you have honoured that commitment, so that we sit back and know that Soroti Flying School is going to be the centre of excellence? Can you allay the fear that the centre of excellence in Uganda was actually proposed after failing to bring Soroti Flying School on board; the proposal to get a school here in Mukono and I think Government went for that option. Will you help me understand the latest developments?

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Alaso for this issue, which she has raised. 

All of us need to be on board. Under the Memorandum of Understanding on Defence Co-operation, this is under the East African Community. The defence fraternity agreed on many issues, but in particular we agreed to share training, intelligence and other issues. 

So the three countries volunteered which facilities to use. Uganda volunteered the Senior Staff and Command College, Kimaka and Soroti Flying School. As far as I recollect, and I have been the one attending these meetings in Arusha, we are going to use Soroti Flying School. I am not aware of any other institution that has been floated; we are focusing there.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker and honourable members, the issues raised by hon. Kawanga, about the double interest - it was our understanding that the Civil Aviation Authority is a money-maker and would be in a position to handle this very modest interest on the loan of five percent. 

So we did this following the Civil Aviation Authority Act, Chapter 65, which I would like to read verbatim: “Government shall provide at the outset grants or loan funds to meet the working capital needs of the Authority and may if necessary, set the appropriate interest rate on these funds.”  So, at that time it was deemed appropriate to pass on this amount of 5 percent on the loan that was given to them.  

On the issue of the radar, splitting it into Ministry of Defence and Civil Aviation Authority –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance. Does that mean Government was supposed to collect 2.5 percent and it was taking it to the coffers? Did you ever budget for this money in your Budget as income?  

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable members, all I know is that we have not collected this money from the Civil Aviation Authority.

On the issue of the radar, and this has been raised by a number of Members of Parliament, including my friend, Mr Okello from the new district, we have categorically stated that this money will come from the Ministry of Defence, and as you know that Ministry of Defence also has what we called the classified information or Budget, it will come from the Budget of the Ministry of Defence. The balance of Ugshs 15 billion will come from the Civil Aviation Authority.  

On the issue raised by hon. Ssekikuubo about prudent operations and management, a Memorandum of Understanding –(Interruption)

MR ODUMAN: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has told us that the money will come from the classified Budget of the Ministry of Defence. My understanding is that even classified expenditure is appropriated here. The clarification I am seeking is that is this in the Budget of the Ministry of Defence? Because what is in the report is that money will be found from somewhere. I am seeking clarification from the minister.

MS NANKABIRWA: I just want to give information to this House that under our classified Budget of the Ministry of Defence the radar is part of the items that we are going to handle.

MR MAFABI: If we are now saying that it is the radar, then it has stopped to be called classified. I think this is very dangerous. But there was also money we gave during the Seventh Parliament - a loan. I do not know what happened to that money for the radar.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, let me inform hon. Nandala Mafabi that he is aware that we bought AK-47s. When you mention it, that the AK-47s are under classified, then I do not expect you to stand up and say, “that the fact that you have mentioned it, then it ceases to be classified. 

On the issue of the radar, you cannot buy it from the shelves. You have to book for it and give specifications. Even if you know that you are buying a radar, you may not know how to operate it.  So the operationalisation is what is under classified; you get it?  

So, the fact that I have told you that the radar is under classified does not in any way threaten my security arrangements.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now this is becoming a dialogue between hon. Nandala Mafabi and the Minister of State for Defence; the rules do not allow such dialogue.

MR OMACH: Actually, we were wondering whether he wanted to cross over, and we are very happy to receive him on this side, particularly since today he is dressed very nicely.

Finally on the issue that was raised by hon. Ssekikuubo about prudent operations and management, we shall have a Memorandum of Understanding with CAA and the government of Uganda, and that will take care of the issues that were raised by hon. Ssekikuubo.

I urge this Parliament to approve the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are you saying about Kimaka? You have not said anything about Kimaka Airport and your resolution.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, there are some issues that are going to be answered by the chairman of the committee.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are the financer of the government –(Interruption)

MR OMACH: Yes, but some were directed to him and we have agreed on, which one I would answer and, which one he would answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then there is one thing more I want you to clarify in the regional resolution that you brought to this House.  I want you to confirm, which airports you are going to work on - for clarity in the Hansard. 

MR OMACH: Initially, we shall deal with Entebbe International Airport and Kasese Air Field –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, this resolution deals with that?

MR OMACH: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is for the Hansard.

5.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start with Jinja/Kimaka Air Field. The information the committee got is that renovation of the buildings at Jinja/Kimaka is in progress. The repairs of the run-way has been completed and fencing of the airport –(Interruption)

MR NABETA: Madam Speaker, I want clarification from the chairman on whether they verified that information. The building you are talking about is a small room, not a building; in fact it is a store where they have a small desk and the communication equipment. The runway we are talking about is a murram runway and it is not complete. But what we are asking for is something that is of international standards not something that they have not even started working on.  So, there is no work so far on the ground as far as Jinja is concerned. 

In addition to that, we need to make sure that we are very honest. The issue of tourism is not an issue because everywhere we have tourism; in Jinja we have tourism attractions as much as in Kasese. So, the issue of saying that Kasese has many tourism sites does not come up here. The issue is that in Jinja we are now building many hotels and the hotels that are going up are all in Kampala not in Kasese. So, tourism should not be an issue that the minister brings up here. They should give us better reasons why they have chosen only Kasese and left out Jinja.

MR KADDUNABBI: I think hon. Members should appreciate that we have a committee on Infrastructure, which is supposed to handle the other airports and the rest. My committee was tasked to look at the loan and report. We got some information and I want to give it to this House. I think it is important, it will it help us. 

I was continuing to tell you that the up grading of Jinja is in the CAA’s mid-term strategy and this is 2008/2012. 

I had earlier on told you that they had a 20-year development plan, which runs from 2002 to 2022. I have also told you that - and hon. Nandala Mafabi asked whether there is any money, which has been paid; the committee put it clearly on page 2, the principle amounts and the money, which has been paid by CAA on Government Counter-Funding to the tune of Ugshs 3.7 billion. That is the only amount, which CAA paid back.  

Secondly, CAA makes annual reports and the Auditor-General audits them. I laid on Table the report for 2005 and the committee was also informed that the report for 2006 is underway and the Auditor-General has up to December to produce it. It is the Auditor- General who can go into the details of value for money of whether the money, which was on rent to CAA, was put to good use. 

I would like to read a statement from the Auditor-General; on page 31 it says: “Under the terms of section 27 of the Civil Aviation Authority Act CAP 354, I am required to audit the accounts of the Authority and report to the Speaker of Parliament in accordance to Article 163(4) of the Constitution.” Since hon. Mafabi is the Chairperson of Public Accounts Committee, he should be having it in his office -(Interruption)

MR KASIGWA: Thank you Madam Speaker and the chairman for giving way. The clarification I want to seek is that as a chairman of a committee, would you not take interest in knowing how much money – to be precise, you are the chairman of the committee, how much money has CAA made? We shall read those reports, but since it is exceptional tell us, you as the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy, how much money has CAA made since 1991 besides the Ugshs 53 billion that Government owes them?

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, CAA has made a lot of money –(Laughter)- but everything is in their financial report, which we laid on Table. I think Members should get time to read it and if there is any pertinent issue you want to raise, then Infrastructure Committee can handle it.  

One of the other reason, why CAA decided to work on Kasese is that big dignitaries, including the Queen will be visiting Kasese and one of the reasons why we could not go to Kasese as a committee is because it currently has a grass runway and the small plans could not land there. Actually, we are told that the weather in Kasese is bad up to now. CCA wants to tarmac the runway so that the gulf streams, which will be used by the Queen, can land there. The specifications according to the report laid on Table is that this airport will again be able to accommodate a 737 booing. That is the information we got. 

Hon. Kawanga asked whether we were satisfied with the financial management. The answer is yes, and this is again as per the Auditor-General’s Report. Hon. Kawanga again asked whether Parliament knew that Government got this money. I think it is only Parliament, which authorizes Government to borrow money. 

I am aware that Government and Parliament were aware because in the Auditor-General’s report, towards the end he states: “The presence of these loans on the balance sheet makes the authority highly indebted. Government has not confirmed the status of this indebtedness. In the events that the amounts are recalled for repayment, the authority may not have sufficient resources to meet the payment.” So, Government and Parliament –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, when was that loan contracted? You know before 1995 there was no requirement to come here for borrowing. So was it contracted before or after 1995? This requirement came in with the new constitution, so Parliament may not have been party at that time.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, it was 1994. But as I earlier read, this report is prepared and sent to the Speaker, and this is 2005. So, in any case, Parliament should be having this information. If Government wants to borrow money to finance CAA –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: A procedural problem. Madam Speaker, I recall – I think the chairman is referring to the infrastructure committee. I recall it was agreed that if there is an issue concerning a certain Sessional committee that Sessional committee should be involved in the process by any committee handling it. 

When you read here, the committee of economy does not say that it met the Committee on Infrastructure and this is a big problem. So, are we going to take only the National Economy Committee’s report without taking the points of the Sessional committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe they were satisfied with the representations from the CAA and the ministry of finance. Anyway you tell us.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, we had invited the members of the Sessional Committee on Infrastructure and hon. Nathan Byanyima informed me that they had a workshop in Entebbe. But he said that we should go ahead because much of the information was already with us and that they would be in Parliament. It is unfortunate that he is not here, but I had expected him to be here - (Interjection)- [Member: His vice is here] 

MR KADDUNABBI: Is he? Ok the vice is here. 

Hon. Kawanga wanted to know whether Government wants to borrow money to give to CAA to do the projects including the CHOGM projects. The answer is no. Government wants to write off the loans it had earlier on only to CAA so that the books of Civil Aviation Authority look attractive to other sources. And Civil Aviation Authority is going to negotiate a loan different because their books of accounts - their balance sheet will be attractive. 

That is why one colleague also asked whether the tenders have already been given. The answer is yes, because tendering is a different arrangement. It is about who qualifies or does not qualify. I think that was handled by another committee and CAA board. And in any case, the infrastructure committee, if it is not convinced of whatever is going on, can come in and let this Parliament know.

Hon. Kikungwe asked whether the contractors who did the job earlier on did a shoddy job that is why Civil Aviation Authority wants to get more money. To the best of my understanding and that of the committee, the contractors did a good job. But what is going to be done now is almost completely different from what was done.

1.	They are going to make the floor with ceramics; they are changing it from the rubber, which has been at the airport for a long time.
2.	They are making an expansion of the arrival and departure holes to take over what is currently used – where the heads of State have their parades and the like, because the VIP is going to be transferred to the old terminal.
3.	They are going to construct a parking apron for the increased inflow of planes almost adjacent to the old terminal. 
4.	They are also going to construct a new general aviation terminal, which is going to be used as a domestic terminal as well - and also the VIP, all these are completely new. 
5.	They are also going to construct two bridges from the departure terminal to the parking apron. 
MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much Madam Speaker and the chairperson. You have created a new class of VIP yet originally we knew who are the VIPs in this country. May I get clarification on what this new class of VIP is and who will use it anyway after CHOGM? I thank you.
MR KADDUNABBI: I think Government will give the classification of the VIP, but according to CAA, the VIP terminal is going to be used by Heads of States and maybe prime ministers if they are the Head of State back at home. Madam Speaker, I have covered what I can. I also propose once again and request this House –(interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Madam Speaker, the point I raised seems to have been left out. When we talk about Government capitalizing Civil Aviation Authority - I hinted on a haemorrhage where all the profitable ventures of CAA were striped off; it was decapitated to the extent that even if we capitalize it, still it would lose out. Actually some other time we were called here to do the same. 

So, I asked that what is the relationship between CAA and ENHAS? I am apparently seeing here the work you are undertaking to be the work of ENHAS; the passenger facilities and all that.  Why is Government putting in money yet some other private company is benefiting out of this? We are not told about the source and what that other organisation or company is going to contribute to this.  Why are we giving a leeway to some other private company to reap off from Government efforts at the expense of public funds?

MR KADDUNABBI:  I have partly answered the concern for hon. Ssekikubo, because to us the relationship of ENHANS and Civil Aviation Authority was reported as cordial. ENHAS does not owe any money to Civil Aviation Authority. But the Infrastructure Committee can give the details of it. 

Once again, request the hon. Member –(Interruption) 

MR NUWAGABA: To the best of my recollection, hon. Ssekikubo was asking about the nature of the relationship between CAA and ENHAS, not how the relationship is. Can the honourable chairperson tell us the nature of that relationship?

MR KADDUNABBI: I think ENHAS is a service provider and actually at Entebbe Airport there are two service providers.  The second one is DIRO and these find the facilities there. The facilities have to be put in place by Civil Aviation Authority.  That is why Civil Aviation Authority wants its books to look attractive so that it can get money to put up the facilities. After that ENHAS or DIRO or any other company will use these services at a fee. I therefore want to request hon. Members to support the motion to capitalize Civil Aviation Authority. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson and the Members. As we had indicated earlier, there are matters that maybe not be concluded on the Floor of this House. I do not think that even the chairman has all the answers. But we did say that the Committee on Parastatals should take up this matter. If in the past we have not given them instructions, this is a good basis for them to begin, and assist the House to understand what is really going on, and what we should do for future? So, they can take it up very quickly.  So, hon. Members, the question is that this House do authorize Government to capitalize the Civil Aviation Authority. I now put the question.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now hon. Members, we had some other business, but I have not seen the Minister of Defence –(Interruption)

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mrs Ruth Nankabirwa):  Madam Speaker, I have been monitoring my minister and up to now he has not appeared. But we have talked on phone and he requested that if there is a session tomorrow, we handle this issue then because he was supposed to come with the copies. 

He was on his way to Bombo and he realized that we did not have much time. He came back to use one of our small offices here in town to make sure that we get the copies of our responses. I was not feeling comfortable to give a response without members having copies. So, I have been monitoring and I am requesting the indulgence of the House to be given the opportunity to answer tomorrow if there is a sitting and if there is not, then in the next session of Parliament. I am requesting, Madam Speaker.  Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, you know that this question is not appearing on the Order Paper for the first time. It was on the Order Paper last week; it was also a product of similar attempts to enlist a general response from the Ministry of Defence. 

I am only hoping that given the plight of the affected persons that we can take the minister very seriously and hold her at her word and assume that in the next sitting of this House, if you so authorize, Madam Speaker, that they will be able to give us an answer. And now that we have passed money to improve on Kasese Airport, even if the minister is in Kasese, perhaps we will have to pick him up for the sake of the Auxiliary Forces that are suffering.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, as you know, you have the Finance Bill, the Revenue Authority Amendment Bill, the Appropriation Bill, Supplementary Appropriations Bill, the VAT Bill and the Income Tax Bill, all of which relate to the budget process. So I would like to give an opportunity to the Committee to complete that work.  I will adjourn the House to Wednesday afternoon. I hope by then all these Bills will be ready so that we can conclude the budgeting process.  The House is adjourned to Wednesday afternoon. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday 13th September 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)



