
Thursday, 10 September 2009

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. I would like you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kitole Primary School and Rukunga Primary School in Hoima. They are represented by hon. Beatrice Nyakaisiki. You are welcome children! (Applause)

Yesterday I told you that hon. Okello Oryem lost his sister, Jennifer Oyella. These are the arrangements for burial: Friday 11th September, which is tomorrow, the body will arrive at Entebbe Airport at 2.45 p.m. aboard Emirates Airlines and will stay overnight at the residence of hon. Okello Oryem in Bugolobi at plot No. 14 Mbuya Road. 

On Saturday, 12th December, there will be a requiem service at the Church of the Resurrection, Bugolobi, Church of Uganda at 9.45 a.m. and thereafter the body will leave for Kitgum. The burial will take place on Sunday, 13 September 2009 at Lapana village Namukora sub-county Kitgum District starting at 10.00 a.m. I hope Members will be able to go and console hon. Okello and his relatives. 

I would like to make a small adjustment to the Order Paper to allow hon. Kubeketerya move a motion on noxious substances. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2009 be read for the first time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, in compliance with Section 10 of the Budget Act 2001, I would also like to Table the certificate of financial implications accordingly. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is submitted to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 78/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item. I do not see hon. Obua here. (Mr Katuntu rose_) Are you standing in for Commissioner Obua? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a matter of national interest and if the minister is ready with the answer, we can stand in for hon. Obua.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have received the written answer but I do not see the minister. So, let us deal with the other motion first. Oh, there he comes. 

2.47
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): “(i) Is the minister aware that Police and Prison personnel reside in dilapidated structures? 
(ii) If so, what plans are in place to ensure that decent accommodation is provided to the Police and Prisons personnel?” 

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, hon. Obua Denis Hamson, MP Youth Northern Uganda, asked the Minister of Internal Affairs this question. 

Government is certainly aware that Police and Prisons personnel accommodation facilities need attention and something is being done. These are the plans of action:

    1. A number of structures have been put up; others are ongoing while some are planned using funds from the Government of Uganda, the Justice, Law and Order Sector and donors.
 
    2. An intensive programme under the public/private partnership is in high gear to avail Police an initial 11,000 units within Kampala Metropolitan and later spread to the rest of the country. Through this, we believe Police will go a long way to solve the accommodation problem together with the chronic problem of maintenance which is inbuilt within the public/private partnership arrangement. 

Under the emergency action plan to consolidate Police presence in Northern Uganda, the following police facilities are at various stages of construction: 

Uniports: 60 police posts in Acholi sub-region; each post has seven uniports. All these will be completed by the end of October this year. 

In the Lango sub-region, 20 police posts are to be completed by the end of this month; and 20 police posts in Teso sub-region. The last three posts will be ready by the end of this month. Five police posts in Adjumani but only one police post is not completed. It will be ready within the first quarter of the next calendar year. 

Stations, barracks and anti-stock zonal officers: seven anti-stock theft units, zonal offices in Angariam, Kapelebyong, Kolir, Bukwo, Lapono, Orom, are already under construction. The anti-stock theft unit headquarters in Katakwi is under construction. I visited it recently. 

Offices, barracks in Oyam, Dokolo, Amuru, Katakwi, Amuria, Kaberamaido and Amolatar are under construction. 

Other than Ngariam where we experienced land problems, all the anti-stock theft zonal offices and barracks are at various stages of completion and we want to take this opportunity to thank the local governments in those areas who gracefully gave us land free of charge. 

Under the Justice, Law and Order Sector Support Programme, government has constructed barracks as follows: 
    • Four blocks in Ntinda are completed;
    • Four blocks in Ntungamo, completed;
    • Four blocks in Bundibugyo are in final stages of completion; 
    • Three blocks in Kisoro completed;
    • Two blocks in Kigo are near completion. 

Construction of Nakapiripirit police station is at roofing level while the barracks is having final touches. Colleagues, I want to assure you that two months ago I visited that place and I saw wonderful structures coming up. Any police officer would like working in Nakapiripirit. 

Administrative blocks have been constructed in Hoima, Kiira Division, Masindi, Kapchorwa, Kabalya Police Training School. 

Twenty five dormitory blocks at Kabalya Police Training School are under construction. In addition, we have procured a number of uniports. 

The Uganda Police headquarters is being constructed at Naguru and I would invite anyone of you to go and take a look.

Mbarara police station was constructed and completed. Bushenyi police station is under construction and I saw it with my own eyes last Saturday. 

In addition, regional headquarters will be constructed in Soroti and Arua. 

Karamoja region; construction of police stations and barracks has commenced in Abim, Kaabong, Moroto and Kotido. 

ASTU zone offices at Chepsikunya, Amudat, Morulem, have also started. The site at Lorengachora, in Kotido, is to start soon. 

The PRDP and Karamoja Programmes

Under these programmes, Nebbi, Kitgum, Lira, Moyo, Yumbe, Apac, Sironko, Bukedea, Koboko, Bududa, Buliisa, Manafwa, Nyadri, Budaka and Butaleja will get barracks; a pair of blocks have police headquarters constructed as well. That is as far as police is concerned.

Uganda Prisons

During the last Financial Year 2006/07 and 2007/08, government was able to construct low cost houses to accommodate 64 members of staff at Luzira. I went to commission those buildings. The houses were also constructed at Apac, Nakasongola - in Nakasongola we have an ultra modern facility - Mbarara, Rukungiri, Arua, Namalu, Kigo, and Ibuga.          

Renovation of staff houses was also done in Soroti - two blocks - and Luzira barracks, eight housing units. 

In some cases the construction was done on self-help basis. Members of staff made the bricks while the government provided cement, iron sheets, et cetera with the actual construction being done by technically qualified personnel following approved plans. This was done in Lira, Bushenyi, Masindi, Kambuga and Jinja prisons. 

With regard to prisoners’ accommodation, the following has been done over the last two financial years:
 
    • Construction of new prisons at Nakasongola, Ibuga and Gulu.
    • Renovation of selected prisoners wards in Soroti and Tororo. 
    • Renovation of Namalu prison. 
    • Renovation of six wards at Masaka prison.
    • Construction of prisoners’ wards at Rukungiri and Apac.
    • Renovation of Kitgum prison.
    • Improvement of water and sanitary system in Fort Portal and Soroti prisons; lagoons were also constructed.

Ongoing construction works:
    • Reconstruction of Moroto prison and staff quarters is almost completed;
    • Reconstruct Kitalia prison; 
    • Install power in Arua prison;
    • Construct staff quarters at Apac prison, 30 housing units are already completed;
    • Renovate the condemned women’s ward at Luzira prison; it is almost complete.

Plans for the future:
    • Continuous construction of staff houses by Government of Uganda within available resources;
    • Continuous renovation of the existing structures; 
    • Using self-help measures where prison units make bricks and government provides roofing and other building materials.

Madam Speaker, this is what government is doing in regard to police and prison personnel accommodation. 

It is, however, true that this is a drop in the ocean. More needs to be done. I have stood on this Floor a number of times and I have thanked you, Members of Parliament, for being very keen and pushing government to make sure that things are done. I wish to thank those members of the committee who went to Naguru and you got the amazing reports and stories there. We are aware of these concerns but the problem is well known, I do not have to restate it. 

Government will continue improving the facilities within the financial resources that are available. If I had all the money today, I would be the first one to make sure that every police and prison officer is accommodated well, like it is in those facilities I have mentioned especially in the northern part of our country. I thank you.   

2.57
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): I would like to further know from the honourable minister whether the ministry has a master plan for renovating the existing barracks for police and prison personnel throughout the country because he has laid much emphasis on new developments, with special focus on offices. 

Secondly, I would like to know from the minister if he is aware that even now as we talk about the issue of dilapidated structures for police and prisons personnel; there are some staff in some parts of the country who are still residing in houses that are leaking. Those are my two supplementary questions. Thank you.   

2.58
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can the minister inform the House as to whether he is aware of the fact that half of the office block of Katakwi central police station was recently blown away by a storm? What immediate plan does he have to rectify this; if it is left in that form, we can lose much more in terms of further degradation of the office building.

2.59
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to page 2 of the minister’s answer where he talks about uniports. Could the minister clarify why in this era police are still building uniports instead of other low cost housing, decent accommodation?

2.59
MR SAMMY LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Apart from constructing these buildings, what is the ministry doing about sanitation in the barracks? The policemen and women have constructed ordinary buildings to improve their sanitation. If you went to any of those barracks, the sanitation standards are really appalling. I wonder if there is any programme in place to improve the sanitation. 

Secondly, I want to thank you for renovating Namaru Prison. Namaru Prison farm used to be one of the greatest farms that produce cash crops in this country. The renovation there is extremely slow although the prisoners are doing a lot in agriculture. And most of those structures are very strong buildings –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us have your supplementary question, please! Hon. Wadri.

3.02
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three questions for the minister. Mr Minister, you have clearly elaborated the steps that government has taken to put up new structures and renovate others. Are you aware that globally, Asbestos sheets, which have been used for your police barracks – yes, Naguru still has Asbestos sheets and Jinja Police Station, and there are people living there! So do you have any plans to save the people living in these houses from that material that has been globally condemned?

Secondly, when you move around in Naguru, you notice that police officers are putting up houses using their own resources for their accommodation. What arrangements do you have in place for such police officers when they are transferred? Do you refund their expenses on that building that they have to leave behind? How do you compensate such an officer –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, this Minister for Information and National guidance is over zealous! That is the reason I drew the attention of the Speaker to you because I am the authority to talk to you on this. Why should a person come in and be over zealous when it is not even her sector?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, stop the exchange, the rules do not allow that kind of exchange.

MR WADRI: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. Question 3: every time I go to Jinja I notice that government attempted to construct police headquarters in Mukono, but the structure has been standing in its present state for more than five years. Are you aware of that? Why has the construction stalled? Thank you.

3.04
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation and the plans for renovating the old and building new police stations. I wonder whether the minister is aware that in certain police stations, the buildings and actually even the officers are condemned. I am talking in particular reference to the police station in Masindi. All the buildings are cracked. I do not know whether the minister is aware that people continue to live in these very dangerous structures! Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.05
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three questions for the minister. First, I am on the select committee of Parliament probing Police; are you aware that the report is about to be tabled on the Floor of this House? 

Secondly, can you tell his House how much is needed –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I disallow the first question; it is not in his power to know when it is to be tabled. The report is our business; so please do not ask him about the report which has not yet come. Deal with what he has talked about today.

MR ANGIRO: Okay, the first question then is: can you tell this House if you have ever done the bill of quantities for the police officers’ houses we are talking about or the renovation of the dilapidated building, which we are talking about?

And two, have you ever visited some of these police barracks, especially those ones constructed during the colonial administration? And the other question is: which ones have you started during your administration and how much money is needed to complete the project?

3.07
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the minister whether he is aware that in some places there are no rooms to keep the women suspects. For example, in Odek sub-county where I found women being mixed with men; I told them never to do that again.

My second concern is about constructing of new prisons in Gulu. Hon. Minister, I know about the expansion of Gulu Central Prison, but I am not aware of a new prison being constructed in Gulu. Can you elaborate on this? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.08
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the hon. Minister aware that the Malaba Police Post is in a very embarrassing situation; the sewage system is non-existent; it has no water, no lighting system, and yet it is the model of Uganda when you enter this country from that side? Are you aware that it has no holding facilities for foreign nationals who are arrested?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I did not understand. You mean foreign nationals should have separate facilities?

MR EKANYA: No, because of the issue of N1H1 Flu, it is very dangerous to hold these people together with Ugandans especially since some foreigners may be having different criminal records.

3.09
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the minister aware that despite his statement on page 3, the police station in Oyam is still being housed in rented premises and the landlord is threading to evict them because of delayed payment in rent?

3.10
MRS LOI KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka): Madam Speaker, is the minister aware that there are quite a number of police officers, especially those from urban areas, who are transferred from urban areas to rural areas and they leave their families behind, but then those who come to replace them do not have accommodation? What plan do you have for them if you are aware of that?

3.10
MR HERBERT SABILA (NRM, Tingey County Kapchorwa): Madam Speaker, I have two questions. Is the minister aware that the prison officers in Kapchorwa currently have a leaking roof? 

Two, what plan does the minister have for the construction of Chepsikunya–Seretyo Prisons? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.11
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to find out from the honourable minister how far he has gone with the recommendation of this Parliament to have the three fire-fighting vehicles distributed to Jinja, Fort Portal and Lira Municipality?

Secondly, are you aware that the only police vehicle in Fort Portal has been out of action for the last four months? The issue has already been raised, but the vehicle has been in bad mechanical condition. In fact, it has not been moving for the last four months. Hon. Minister, what plans do you have to make that vehicle move?

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIR (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for these good questions because it shows your concern and also opens our eyes as government. 

Let me make one general comment before I go to the specifics; but many of them will be catered for in the general comment. We are fully aware that the accommodation facilities for our police and prisons officers are not the best throughout the country, there is no question about that. I hate repeating myself; you all know the story. It is not because of unwillingness on the part of the ministry to do what is required, but you know the constraint. I have been on this Floor a number of times, we made submissions, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs was scrutinizing the policy statement - the issue has always been lack of money! 

But we are not just folding our hands, something is being done. I have told you what is being done and what we have in plan. I want to assure this House that there is a master plan. In fact we commissioned officers within the police, Ministry of Housing and Ministry of Works to traverse the whole of this country; they looked at each and every police station except the LAPS because those ones had not yet come. A full plan has been worked out in order to put these facilities to the standard we want them. Someone talked about the bill of quantity; we have it. We need Shs 1.3 trillion to be able to put these facilities in conditions that would make all of us very proud. 

About the leaking houses and the roof at Katakwi being blown off, I am very much aware of that. That is covered under my first general statement. 

There was an interesting question: “Why do you use uniports?” They are used because of two reasons. First of all, the ones we currently have were a donation from the Netherlands Government. They decided to give us that and the beggars often do not have much choice. 

Two, the problem is so huge, we need to do what I would call some kind of emergency. I want to assure you that it is not the wish of government to keep our police officers in uniports – those of you who have slept in them know what it means. For example, during a hot day, it is almost hard to stay in it, but even during the night it becomes excessively cold. Anyway, what I can say is that this is a kind of holding ground. As finances improve, we shall definitely look at uniports as history.

There was a question on sanitation in Naguru barracks – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. A uniport is a one-roomed structure; it is like a tent. Some of these police and prisons officers have families. So really how do you expect a married officer to share a room and it is a government policy – it is not even about poverty; it is about planning. You cannot expect a family man to share a bedroom with his children or even with the visitors. It is not something you can explain to me and I appreciate. 

What I know is that we can have decent low-cost houses. Maybe a bedroom separate from a sitting room and so on. Otherwise, to have a government policy where only one-roomed structures are built is wastage of resources. The mama Ingia pole, we are talking about, was for colonial times. We cannot really have it now.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Katuntu that in Uganda we have a lot of people who sleep in huts no bigger than my uniports. So, how they do their business, do not ask me. (Laughter) Anyway, on a serious note, hon. Katuntu, as I told you, it is not the wish of government to keep police officers in this kind of structure; it is simply because of the stage at which our economy stands.

On Asbestos, yes, we are aware that that is condemned material; we should have got rid of it yesterday, if it were possible. 

And whether we refund our officers who may have helped themselves to put up structures after they have been transferred, I would like to say that I do not think we do that. As far as I am aware, that is self help.

There was something on construction at Mukono, which is said to have been in that state for the last five years. But I would like to say that I am ware of that. Actually that construction is part of the big plan that I talked about.

On whether there are any new barracks and police stations that have been built by this government, I would like to say that if anybody wants those statistics, I can avail them; I do not have them offhand now. 

Madam Speaker, I remember in this House I was challenged by the Woman MP for Pader, if I recall very well, that women prisoners were sleeping in the same jail cells with men prisoners. To be very clear to this House, I had to dispatch no other than the Commissioner-General of Prisons to go and investigate whether that was true or not. What happens is that the local administration prisons is doing that, but still they tried to construct a wall between the female and male cells; these people were not or are not sleeping in the same room. If someone said they are sharing the same building, I would agree with that; I have seen it in Sembabule; I have seen it in Pader and one other place in Lira. But that should –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I think the minister is talking about me, the Woman Representative of Pader District in Parliament. I remember the point I made was very clear; it had appeared in a committee meeting. I said it in my capacity as an MP because I had seen a very terrible situation with female prisoners sharing the same house with male ones. I never said they were sharing a room.

You know, sometimes, with due respect, the hon. Minister gets taken over by events; he gets very excited. I would like to think that sometimes he does not listen with both ears. So, I would like to make a correction to the effect that my statement was only about sharing one house, and which was true, because after that you sent your team there and I can report that there is an improvement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, but the minister is responding to the supplementary question by hon. Aol who asked whether this was still existing or not. Do you have any other information?

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really need a clarification on the difference between central and local – in my mind I thought all these are now grouped as one. But when I went to Odek, a police officer raised a big concern to me – if it is not your responsibility you have to clarify on the issues raised from there. Odek is that sub-county where Kony comes from. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I know where Odek is; it is just near Opit. Anyway, that is precisely why we are all here. Actually I would like to thank you for bringing out issues of this type, but do not forget that as ministers or government, we are not angels; we also need to be guided. That is why we welcome constructive ideas from the Opposition. 

Let me say something about the central and former local administration police. These two have been integrated and are under one command and administration. However, that does not mean that we have completely done away with the structure we took over because of the reasons you understand. We are still having local administration prisons vis-à-vis the central prisons. So, until we get sufficient resources to rebuild all those structures, these will continue to operate. It is out of necessity and not because we want it to be like that.

There was something about Malaba Police - we are aware of that, hon. Ekanya. I have visited the facility but that is also part of the big plan that I talked about earlier.

On Oyam rent not being paid, I want to thank the honourable member for the information. I will definitely convey this message to the police authorities to organise money to pay the landlord.

A member asked something to do with officers who are transferred leaving their families behind. Yes, I know that this is a real problem, but there is no easy solution because whenever we transfer police officers, I get numerous pleas from them over children going to school and requesting that their transfers to upcountry places like Kisoro, Arua and so on be cancelled, and normally we listen to them; we are also human beings. 

The instructions given to Police administration are that when transferring a police officer; bear in mind the officer’s social responsibility. If an officer has got a big family with school-going children, that officer should not be taken very far away from his family, to help him not to experience social problems.

Madam Speaker, I need your guidance on whether I should answer this question or not. The question is about the fire engines and I thought today we are only talking about accommodation. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO IMPOSE A TOTAL BAN ON THE PRODUCTION AND SALE OF ALCOHOLIC DRINKS IN SMALL SACHETS

3.26
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This motion is moved under rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Section 19(3) of the Liquor Act, Cap 93, outlaws the selling of intoxicating liquor to a person under the apparent age of 18 years;

AND WHEREAS Section 2(2) of the Enguli (Manufacture and Licensing) Act, Cap 86 prohibits the consumption of enguli and Section (1) of the same Act provides for the penalty thereto;

NOTING THAT there is a common tendency of packaging alcohol in small sachets commonly known as tot packs among the producers of alcohol, which are cheap and easily accessible to young people;

AWARE THAT documented evidence from the World Health Organisation’s Global Status Report shows that Uganda is known for its high consumption of alcohol and in the past has been ranked as the leading consumer of alcohol in the world;

ALSO AWARE THAT according to the reports from Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital, 20 percent of the admissions to the hospital are a result of alcohol and drug abuse and majority of those cases are young people of between 13 and 21 years;

ALSO AWARE that different anti-alcohol activists such as civil society organisations, academicians and church leaders have strongly come out to campaign against alcohol drinking among the youth, and have called for a total ban of alcohol sold in sachets;

CONSIDERING that Uganda currently has no regulating body or policy over alcohol and the law in place is outdated, inadequate and there is extremely limited enforcement, and therefore, rendering it ineffective;

ALSO CONSIDERING that alcohol has a wide range of physical, mental and social harms and it is estimated that it causes the suffering of various kinds of at least 70 percent of the population of Uganda, either directly or indirectly;

COGNISANT of the fact that in adolescents, regular heavy alcohol and bad smoking behaviours are associated with a whole range of problems including antisocial behaviour, violence, accidents and physical and mental health problems and poor school performance;

NOW, THEREFORE, be resolved that Parliament:
    1. Urges Government to impose a total ban on the production, sale  and consumption of alcohol in sachets, commonly known as tot packs, which are cheap and easily accessible by children;
    2. Acknowledges the harm associated with alcohol consumption among the youth;
    3. Urges Government to revise laws on alcohol and put in place, clear policies and regulations on alcohol;
    4. Urges Government to sensitise and create awareness programmes in schools on the dangers of alcohol.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it has been seconded.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, as a way of substantiating our motion, it is clear that in the previous two weeks we have had several deaths in places like Mpigi and other pats of this country where most of the people lost their lives due to drinking non-purified  alcohol. Of course this was not the first time. We have had several of such cases right from 1979 – there were some Ugandans who lost their sight because of drinking concentrated alcohol. 

Given that background, we believe that if Parliament made this resolution to urge government to ban the production of small sachets – what is clear is that nowadays, the drivers, boda boda riders and students, carry sachets of about 20 to 100 milliliters.  I am told others hide them in exercise books purportedly going to do revision, while the drivers hide the sachets in their trouser pockets. They keep drinking while driving and we have eventually ended up having several accidents on the roads.

The other issue is that when the youth who are out of school go to dig, they actually do it in a way that one has about ten sachets which he puts under his neck and in his pocket. So, as he finishes one it is like someone having an RPG and trying to fire a gun.

Most accidents on the roads have been because of these small sachet liquors. And so, our argument is that if the producers of such alcohol package it in bottles of 500 milliliters or 300 milliliters it is going to be clear that when one is carrying the alcohol, he is carrying something that is acceptable. But these small ones have tended to derail our society. 

The other point is that it seems alcohol is sold in most places, in shops and elsewhere, whereas in other countries beer is supposed to be sold in gazetted areas and there are even restricted drinking hours. So I think it is the laissez faire attitude, and I hope that if this motion is supported by honourable members, perhaps we shall provide a remedy to our society, which is decaying and many lives are being lost because of people drinking unpurified alcohol. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

3.33
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second this motion and I want to ask that Parliament embraces it. We move this motion in good faith to protect, not only the young people of Uganda, but also the population of Uganda that is currently dying due to this thing called alcohol. In recent weeks, the media has been flooded with stories of death due to alcohol, and it is in this spirit that we are moving this motion.

I thank UNBS and Ministry of Health so much - we recognise their very quick move to ban all methanol-containing alcohol. We thank them so much. 

However, Parliament has to take this up as an institution that is part of government. The reason I want to strongly ask members to support this motion is because we are impoverishing the young people of Uganda who are resorting to drinking because it has become affordable. Even Shs 100 is enough for a young Ugandan to walk into a shop and buy a sachet of alcohol.  

I was in the US a few days ago and a colleague there told me that he was very surprised that in Uganda we are not responsible for our people. This was one of the Ugandans telling me. He said that he walked into a bar and restaurant and asked for a glass of wine but he was asked to produce his identity card. This was an LC V chairperson from Uganda; he was asked to produce his identity card. When he went on to ask why, he was told that it was not allowed to sell alcohol to people below the age of 21. But this is not done in Uganda. I really felt so bad, but I later felt better because I knew this Motion was already on course since it was being processed by the time I left for the US. 

I ask Parliament to protect not only the young people of Uganda, but also the population of Uganda. We need to engage Ugandans in productive work and not in drinking. By cheapening the price of alcohol and making it affordable for even a young child of P.1 to buy, we are trying to introduce to them the fact that drinking is part of production.

Let me tell this House about a scenario. One day, in my district, I got up very early in the morning and I was brushing from the front of my house when I saw little children crossing the road to go to a shop across the road. When I saw them crossing back they had these small sachets of Rider that cost Shs 100. These were two little children who were not yet going to school. When I called them and asked, “Who sent you to buy this?” They told me they were given money to go and buy sweets, but to them this Shs 100 Rider is much more valued than sweets. This is very bad and I felt very bad. I felt that something must be done by this Parliament to make sure that Ugandans, especially the young ones, are protected.

As alluded to by my colleague, hon. James Kubeketerya, young boys and girls today are packing these sachets in their boxes. So many schools have reported and so many school administrators have sent back our children because of alcohol. So, we really need to protect these young Ugandans. It is actually in good faith that I ask Parliament to support this Motion and I thank the Ministry of Health and UNBS so much -(Interruption) 

MS AOL: I thank the honourable member for accepting this information. I would like to inform you that on Monday, I was with some youth in Gulu and they were bitter and asking what we were doing because other than these young children dying, HIV/AIDS is also still with us. The youth take this - even the women - but the concern was raised by especially youth that something has to be done and that something has to come from Parliament to make it more effective. That is the information I want to give you; that HIV/AIDS is also still here and for us in the North, there is trauma, poverty, and drought.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, I just want to add my voice to what the movers have said. In May we went for the parliamentary outreach with the Speaker and the commissioners and a number of colleagues from Parliament. One of the requests that was made to us by a youth councillor from Gulu Municipality – unfortunately, I do not remember her name - she complained about many of these noxious drinks. As I informed you, the other day when I came back I wrote to the Bureau of Standards to explain to me whether they know about those things. They were nine of them: Rider, Champion, you know Obama, -(Interjections)- and all kinds of names. It was a matter of grave concern to the leaders in Northern Uganda and they were appealing to Parliament for help. So, this is timely. 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In principle, I have no problem with this motion, but I have a problem with resolution number two on page 2. It is urging the government to further impose a total ban on all types of alcohol, which contain methanol. Methanol is a poisonous alcohol and should not be a drink. But it has other uses and when you talk of a total ban, we cannot implement it. But we can ban drinking of methanol. Certainly, it is not manufactured to be drunk because it is a poison, which affects the optic nerves. That is why the victims go blind. So, the movers of this motion would be better advised to amend this resolution to reflect what they actually wanted to say.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, they are talking about banning alcohol, which contains methanol.

DR NDUHUURA: Yes, but I am saying that scientifically, methanol is an alcohol. Thank you.

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I think this was a typing error. We had intended to say that Parliament urges the government to further impose a total ban on consumption of all types of alcohol that contain methanol. So, the ban should be on consumption of alcohol that contains methanol. Methanol, as the minister also knows, is very dangerous to human life. So, I do not see where else his argument is coming from.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Nelson Gagawala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Obviously, we would like to do our best about the health of the people and I certainly agree with hon. Nduhuura about not banning all types of alcohol that contain methanol. This alcohol is an industrial raw material for production of so many types of drugs, and cosmetics, and it is used for processing. It is actually used for shaving, for those people who shave. At times in hospital theatres, alcohol is used to sterilise some of the surgical instruments. So, we cannot be so radical to cause the whole industry to close. Indeed in Lugazi, the man who produces methanol or alcohol does not produce it for drinking, but he produces it for specific uses. Those who have had small babies, it is important for alcohol to be around the house to sterilise the umbilical cord. 

Therefore, as we move to curtail the consumption of alcohol, we should not move in the direction of killing the industry because you know very well, there is power in alcohol, which is going to become very important for use in vehicles. Let us make a resolution which does not again harm other sectors of the economy. As a Minister of Trade, I was whispering to the Minister of Finance that the volume of business generated by the people who consume this type of alcohol is more than the volume of business of the proper beer. I was telling him that we have to be careful as we make this move. We need a proper substitute in such a way that the beer price is reduced to such an extent that to drink the other type of dangerous alcohol is so stupid because there is an alternative –(Interruption) 

MS AOL: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. The minister is talking about beers and he is also blaming people who go in for this other stuff in the sachets. As long as those sachets are there - people are very poor - I talked about poverty. Do you think that everybody in Uganda, especially those who are poor, can afford the beer even if you reduce the price to even Shs 1,000 per bottle? Do you think people can afford? While you explain this, you should know that poverty is biting, people are traumatised and they want to console themselves. So, as long as it is on the market, know that it is still going to be a problem to the communities in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just want to inform the minister that what the mover wanted banned are the tot packs which are portable. He has no problem with the huge bottle because he cannot hide it in a book. He is worried about the tot packs, which are put in the pocket. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, on that point, I think it was just the omission because it could have read that, “Urges government to further impose a total ban on consumption of all types of alcohol that contain methanol, which is harmful.” It is a total ban on consumption and not production.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from one doctor then we shall go to the other doctor.

DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu) Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the movers of the motion and I want to start with a clarification on methanol. I think the way it is phrased will give an impression that there is alcohol, which has methanol. That is wrong. This is because methanol is a chemical, which is part of the process of fermentation. But alcohol should have ethanol, which is at another step. So, we need to change the wording because if you leave it the way it is, it is as if there is alcohol with methanol, which is recognised. The movers have a point but we have to change the way it is worded -(Interjections)- I will help you to draft when I finish my - but now I am submitting. 

I agree with the movers of the motion that we have a problem of substance abuse in this country, and these substances include alcohol. There is a law before one of the committees in this House - I think the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee, on narcotics and substance abuse, which has also taken a long time. We would like to remind the committee to expedite the process and have this law come here. 

I think the effects of alcohol are well known and like a colleague said, HIV/AIDS is strongly linked to alcohol consumption in this country. There is also a report by WHO, which is cited by the movers, which put Uganda as having the highest level of per capita consumption of alcohol in the whole world, followed by Luxembourg and other countries. 

It was a shame that Uganda could be the leading country in terms of consuming alcohol. There are some laws in this country like the Enguli Act, the Portable Spirits’ Act and others and there are good provisions in some of these laws although the laws are archaic. However, the first problem is that they are not being enforced. I will want to amend later on the prayers that we should urge government to enforce the existing laws because there are some good provisions like the drinking hours and what to do if you find a drunkard becoming a nuisance. These are provisions that can be applied even as we review our laws. We want these laws to be enforced by government and then afterwards, they need to be reviewed so that they are made up to date.

I am also aware that the Ministry of Health has been preparing a policy on alcohol, but I have talked with civil society organisations, which are concerned and have a stake and they have mainly three complaints. One; the process has taken too long; it has been on for several years. Two, consultations with various stakeholders is poor and the process is being managed by a small team, which is not going out to consult other people. Three; the manufacturers of alcohol in this country have an upper hand in terms of influencing what is going into the policy. 

I am happy that the Minister of Health is here. One of the prayers, and I think this has been cited, should be that the Ministry of Health and government expedite the process so that we complete the formulation of that law.

As we look at this issue, the other aspect we must reflect on is that this Parliament has been passing taxation measures, particularly on beer and alcoholic products manufactured from local materials, to promote our own people. As we do that, I think we should also reflect on the effect because it will mean alcohol will become cheaper and more people will be consuming it. We need to balance the need to get taxes and help our people, but also the implication in terms of the effects of alcohol.

In the health world, we say little alcohol protects the heart, but too much of it destroys the liver. Therefore, as Parliament, we need to come out strongly and give a message to Ugandans because in my constituency, I move around and by 8.00 a.m. and I find many young and even old people drinking. It is a serious problem; we have had deaths in Mpigi and other areas and if we do not take action, there will be more deaths elsewhere. I, therefore, want to support the Motion and call upon all Members of Parliament to support it. 

I also move that we amend the fourth resolution to include urging government to enforce the existing laws and later on revise them. I can help with drafting it and later on see how we can take it up. I thank you very much.

3.53
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information on the mixing of alcohol and methanol. Methanol is an alcohol. The only alcohol suitable for human consumption is ethanol. Methanol is not suitable for human consumption. I wonder if the movers are willing to amend the second resolution to read as follows, “Urges government to further impose a total ban on the consumption of all types of beverages containing methanol.” This is because methanol is not suitable for human consumption. 

I would like to give a small warning on alcohol consumption. Alcohol consumption has caused a lot of destruction, not only in Uganda but all over the world. It starts to cause destruction to a child in the womb. That is why in what they call developed countries, consumption of alcohol by pregnant women is not allowed. This is not because of discrimination but to protect the unborn child. Any consumption, no matter how small the amount, will affect the feotus or child in the womb, particularly the brain. That is why we have what we call Child Alcohol Syndrome - children born with very low IQ. That is a problem in society and our society should be sensitised to take care. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.56
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the movers of this motion. The dangers of alcohol are a threat. I have had a chance of taking some old men to hospital for treatment, but the first question is always: do you take strong alcohol? You find that as the diagnosis unfolds, their lungs are damaged. 

Imagine a young boy or girl beginning to drink that heavily at the age of 13 or 14 years. By the time they reach the late 70s, how much intoxication of the blood will have been realised? I feel that it is of great help that this Parliament reaches out to the young who can still be saved.

I will comment on the single distillers. There is a motto they have and I will say it in vernacular, “mat kong polo puod pe”, meaning, “You can first drink; heaven can wait”. For some time, the distillers were closed because their distilling places were seen to be very dirty. So, it is not only a threat to life because of the intoxication that the people get exposed to, but also the place where this stuff is made is not safe at all - they are not clean. 

I urge the Ministry of Health and especially the Community Health Department, to take keen interest and find out where most of this stuff is made. You will get the shock of your life because some time ago, it happened to single distillers – that was about two years ago. I have a feeling it is still happening today among these other factories that are making this stuff. 

I was in the village over the weekend and I am telling you there are almost no nights in the villages. The excitement with which these voters of ours take this stuff – by 2.00 a.m. they are still so excited and you get them taking a sachet which costs Shs 200 or Shs 300. You find that almost everyone works hard during day time to afford a sachet or 10. 

3.59
DR MOSES APILINGA (UPC, West Moyo County, Moyo): I rise to support this motion. I am aware that alcohol has been drunk from time immemorial – even Jesus gave wine to his Apostles. But the important thing for us to note is not the drinking but the type of alcohol, the amount and how it is drank.

MR KIGYAGI: A stranger is contributing in the House and I do not understand what is happening – the one holding the Floor is not known to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Although I know you, please tell members who you are and which constituency you represent.

DR APILINGA: I was in this House from 1980 to 1985 and at that time was Minister of Supplies. Since 2006, after my election as Member of Parliament for West Moyo, I have been in this House at various stages. Regrettably, I have not been around recently due to ill health and reasons beyond my control. But I know the House and I am no stranger to this sitting –(Interjections)- I am going to inform some of those who were in school, whose tests included the question, “Who is the Minister of Supplies amongst these ministers?” So, I will for their sake, say that my name is – I repeat, Dr Moses Tako Apilinga representing West Moyo constituency. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, alcohol is good and bad and I know time is limited and I will, therefore, very quickly go through the points I would like to make. 

Our colleague, Prof. Anokbonggo, has already talked of alcohol brain syndrome but alcohol affects more than the brain. It affects behaviour, performance, driving, how you conduct yourself – it is a dangerous thing and especially today we are talking about alcohol in sachets. The sachets are so potent and dangerous especially among young people – that is why it is very important that we ban it. 

I would further request the Uganda Bureau of Standards to count the units of alcohol in a glass so that people know how much they are drinking - it is important. 

In some countries, for example, they limit the number of units you can take in a week. It is 21 units, for instance, in the United Kingdom. You do not drink more than 21 units if you are male and 18 units for females. You avoid alcohol in pregnancy, you avoid alcohol especially when you are driving, involved with machinery and in a lot of other activities. The question of alcohol affects the whole country -(Interruption)

4.02
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I beg to move a motion under rule 46 of our Rules of Procedure that this House adjourns the debate and discusses a matter of urgent public importance. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR EKANYA: Yes, seconded by hon. Angiro. (Laughter) As we are here in this House, there is a lot of gunfire downtown. There is teargas and some schools are being closed. We have received reliable information that some people may have lost life and if you go down in the streets, the 999 Police Patrol and sirens are sounding high. 

Some of us have children in schools and it is based on that that I move this motion that government explains the state of affairs in Kampala City so that the country is informed and we know the security condition of our families, so that we do not sit here and yet some of our properties, businesses and our families’ lives may be threatened. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Minister for Internal Affairs? You are the Shadow Minister - is there any information from that side?

MR ANGIRO: Thank you. The matter that has been moved on the Floor is very important. You can never tell what can happen in the next ten minutes. You may find that the building is besieged and we are being surrounded by what is happening downtown. This will be very unfortunate, and that is the reason we request that government takes it up and informs the nation as to what is happening.

You remember yesterday when members of the Buganda caucus marched out; we still do not know if they have met His Excellency the President. There is also this impending visit of his Highness the Kabaka. As far as I have been informed, the Katikkiro has been arrested and we do not know how many arrests have been made so far or how many might have been injured, and the capacity to calm the situation.

It worries us because we have our children in schools around the city and we have to go back home in the evening or much earlier than that. How secure are we? We do not understand. Therefore, I second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether you were able to listen to the motion.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, a few minutes ago you saw me walking out of the Chamber. I was trying to get an update. Before we came here I was in touch with the Police on two things, and one of them is what hon. Gutomoi is saying on the Katikkiro of Buganda. The Katikkiro decided to travel to Kayunga today against our advice. We advised that he should not; that he is a very big man and when the situation is still fluid we did not think it was worthwhile. The information I had at that time was that he was stopped at Sezibwa and very politely –(Interjections)– yes, he was stopped at Sezibwa and asked to come back; but I am not fully updated I must say.

Also, when this House resumed, there were a few wrong elements within our society, especially around Kisekka Market, who had mobilised people and were asking the shopkeepers to close their shops. The information I had at that time is that the Police had moved in to stop that nonsense.

I would beg this House to allow me to go to the office and get fully updated. Depending on when the House is adjourning this afternoon, I will come back here because I do not want to give half truths. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we continue or you want to go away? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I want to assure colleagues that the situation is totally under control. You debate; nobody will come to bother you here. I can assure you that nobody will even prevent you from leaving the precincts of this Parliament. Nobody will stop you on your way home except maybe a police officer to ask you to identify yourself. So, I do not want it to be recorded that Parliament is panicking. There is no need to panic. We are in full control of the situation and nobody is going to bother you. You conduct your business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please go and get the information. I think this is an important debate we are handling. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: But would you allow me make a contribution on the motion?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, first I would like to thank the movers of this motion. My contribution will be on the security side.

A couple of months ago I was in Karamoja and I did not only receive information but I saw with my own eyes a lot of waragi being imported into the Karamoja sub-region in those little sachets. The warriors, especially the young ones, would go and buy quite a bit of those sachets every time they planned a raid. Before they carried on their mission, they would consume quite a lot of it -(Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking for guidance. There was a motion moved by hon. Ekanya. The minister has not told us whether he supports it or he is against it so that we can vote on it and continue with our business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he said that he does not support the motion.

MR KIGYAGI: So, can we now resolve that he is not supporting as we move to the other business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He said that he does not support the motion.

MR KIGYAGI: Then why don’t we vote on it and say “no”, and then continue with our business?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us just continue with our business.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I thought we were discussing the motion on sachets of alcoholic drinks. 

As I was saying before I was interrupted, I visited scenes of crime in Karamoja and we could see these empty sachets. The story behind them is that these wrong elements within our society normally take that stuff because they can disguise by putting them in pockets or even under the armpits because of their small size. They consume it to get what we call “false courage” in order for them to do what they are doing.

Within the law, there is a provision that a minister can use to ban alcohol under the Penal Code, even on the hours. So, I took advantage and not only did we ban the importation of crude waragi into the sub-region, but we specifically banned that crude waragi contained in the sachets -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the honourable minister is that it is true thousands of Lorries carry these jerry cans and sachets. However, although the local governments of Karamoja region have been trying to bar them from the importation of this crude waragi, we also have a source in Lira. There is crude waragi that they manufacture particularly for export to Karamoja, and they do not consume it. (Laughter) 

Also, all the women in Karamoja have complained of non-functionality of the men because of the consumption of this alcohol. That is the information. I wish you could utilise that law so that this alcohol is banned. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much. That only strengthens my point since there is another reason. I was speaking from the security point of view, but somebody has spoken from the domestic point of view. 

This is a serious matter especially for the Karamoja sub-region, and I pray that this House and the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry to look at this matter very closely. Maybe we can even look at our law so that we come out with something that is very tight. As usual, we the Police officers are ready to implement whatever this House has decided upon. I support the motion. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry will speak last. Let hon. Egunyu speak first. 

4.17 
MS AGNES AKIROR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. The rate of alcohol consumption especially in the rural areas is so high and it has affected many families, like my honourable uncle has said. I expect the relevant ministries to come up with a schedule so that we withdraw most of those sachets that are in most supermarkets across the country. This is because most of that alcohol is quite poisonous and yet a lot of it is out there in the shops. So, when will we withdraw that and dispose of it?

Secondly, there is some illicit drug, and I would like to draw the attention of this House to its existence in the supermarkets. It is called Kuber. It is sold at Shs 200 and it is very toxic. They say that one sachet of Shs 200 is equivalent to taking six bottles of beer. I wonder how it gets its way into the country. It is mostly sold in Indian supermarkets and it is said that for the people who smoke it, they start shivering when they stop. Most of these accidents by boda boda men are as a result of that Kuber. (Laughter) So, I think as we debate -(Mr Kubeketerya rose_)- Madam Speaker, it is not hon. Kubeketerya; it is Kuber. It is just a small thing like this. 

I would like to draw the attention of the relevant ministers to this very dangerous substance in all supermarkets in the country, and it is mostly sold by the Asian businessmen. You can send anyone now and ask for Kuber and you will get it; it is just Shs 200. (Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Madam Speaker and honourable members, the far reaching negative implications of this sachet business were recently seen in the Oyam by-election. People were given five sachets each of this alcohol and as a result, they were unable to go for voting. Those who went were too drunk to tick properly and some of them were unable to walk and reach the polling stations. So, I think it is in order that the motion is adopted. Thank you. 

MS AKIROR: Thank you, hon. Gutomoi, for that information. Bearing in mind that we are about to reach election time, I think all of us need our voters to be able to vote. 

Hon. Ibi talked about escorting many people to health centres. I have also had the opportunity to escort many and when you go there, they always ask them whether they have ever taken alcohol, which affects the liver. The liver can re-grow - I know Dr Chris Baryomunsi can support me on that - but it is quite costly. So when you attend burials of most of these people that die after taking a lot of alcohol and you ask about the cause of death, they say, “He just collapsed and died –(Member timed out_)

4.21 
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the movers of the motion because I think the thought put behind the motion is very noble and I support it. However, I stand here today to oppose the motion in the wording that it is and in the form that it is. For us to say that we impose a total ban on production, sale and consumption of alcohol in sachets –(Interjection)- in the justification on the previous page of the motion, they have gone ahead to raise why a particular caliber of sachets must be banned. I entirely agree with my colleagues. 

First of all, the majority of the sachets that I have knowledge of that are on the Ugandan market today are of extremely poor quality, and are extremely harmful to human content. The icing on the cake is that they are packed in degradable polythene. The alcohol is not packed in food grade polythene. The only alcohol in sachets that is packed in food grade polythene today and is on the Ugandan market is Uganda waragi. The rest actually react with the polythene and by the time the alcohol reaches somebody’s stomach, it is already a slow poison. So, before we ban all sachets, I do not think it will be right. Uganda waragi has been a heritage for the last several decades for Uganda; for us to totally go and ban it would be wrong. 

This is a failure of the regulatory authorities to manage the packing of this alcohol. It is not methanol. They import what is known as rectified spirit or 99.9 percent ethanol and it is then diluted. Pharmaceutically, this must be diluted by water that has no ions. So, you should de-ionise the water before you reduce the alcohol content from 99.9 percent to four percent before you put it on the market. However, these people go and mix the National Water to reduce the alcohol content and in effect the chlorine reacts with the ethanol and those of us who have done chemistry know what it produces. I think the problem is in the regulatory authorities.

4.24
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman representative Kabarole): I want to support the motion, but only if we can amend a few issues that are not clarified. Most of the alcohol in these sachets is also bottled. If you are banning sachets, what about the same alcohol in a bottle? I was invited by one of my constituents to open a factory in Nansana around April this year. They are bottling this waragi and it is called Rwenzori Gin. So, he makes both the bottled and the one in sachets, and he has a Uganda National Bureau of Standards logo on his factory. We toured the factory, and I think it is still on the market. 

The other alcohol that you, honourable members, are talking about is something called Kabusuti. In my constituency, whenever I go for meetings, they tell me about alcohol that children are buying at Shs 100 and they enter class and shout at the teacher. No one listens to the other because I think the teacher has come with some as well since it is very cheap. 

What we need to do is to get to the bottom of the issue, and that is Uganda National Bureau of Standards. Before anything is put on the market, where is Uganda National Bureau of Standards? I even see on bottles of beer wording saying, “Excessive alcohol drinking is dangerous to your health.” This warning is even on cigarettes. So, where are these sachets that are everywhere and very affordable coming from? 

The other week I was in my constituency and someone called me to say that a person had died because of waragi. I said that I would go and see them after the burial, so I went to see these people. Actually, the guy was packing waragi; he was not one of the consumers. They had a factory here in Kampala; so he had imported these chemicals with his colleague with whom they were packing waragi. His colleague actually drank this waragi as they were testing it to pack and started getting stomach pain and vomiting. This very guy helped to take him to hospital and he died. 

This guy who died does not even take alcohol and that is what shocked me. When I went to visit the family after the burial, they said he also wanted to test and get the taste, so he never even took much; he must have taken very little. The aunt who looked after him told us that he had started this factory and that he does not drink alcohol, but he just tasted to know what they were packing for others. He developed the same symptoms as his colleague and they were both taken to hospital and both of them died.

4.27
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): I stand to support the motion that sachet alcohol be banned. My contribution will centre on two issues - one, the raw materials that are being used in making this alcohol. We remember before these mushrooming alcohol factories, those that used to brew alcohol used to use cassava or banana. However, of recent there is another dimension that has come up, and that is using molasses. Molasses is a residue got out of sugarcane, and what I know about it is that it is used in concretising tarmac roads. I remember at one time Egypt wanted to come and import molasses from Kinyara Sugar Works. 

These molasses which are being used to make alcohol, especially in my district, Masindi, have an environmental effect on the food crops. When they are distilling and making alcohol, they do it near running rivers. After distilling alcohol out of the molasses, the residue is poured in the running water and the water cannot be consumed, and crops along the river get burnt. That is how far it has gone. It is so acidic that I tend to be believe that most of these factories which are making alcohol buy this crude alcohol from these crude distillers who are in our areas.

I think this motion needs to go beyond resolving the banning of the sachets, which are an end result to the raw materials that are being used. I know it is common in my district and it has become a problem. In one of the sub-counties where Kinyara is located -(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, hon. Jalia Bintu, for giving way. The information I am giving you is that as you enter the border between Jinja and Iganga, a stench chokes you that you can hardly breathe. So, I feel that what you are expressing is really very true and correct.

MS BINTU: I was making a point that one of the sub-counties called Wijanga sub-county discussed this issue in a recent meeting and the council resolved that they should ban all those distillers who are using molasses in this sub-county. This is because people are no longer growing crops. Even when you grow crops, they will dry because of the side effects of molasses being poured anywhere.

4.31  
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): I rise to support the motion in a simple way. All the Members have contributed on the negative effects, especially on human beings. We have a government in place. All the three arms of government are in place. I wonder why we come here and lament. Actually, when our voters look at us, I think they laugh. We have all the capacity to guide this country but now when people say, “We want to drink” we say, “Drink as you want.” 

Hon. Chris Baryomunsi has alluded to the fact that in his constituency, like in my constituency, people drink from morning to evening. There is a government in place but people are producing alcohol the way they want and people are dying and we are here lamenting.

This is not something that has come within a day. It has been growing and we are here lamenting. Really, where are we leading this country? We must be serious and there must be enforcement. People are selling alcohol in shops and yet shops are not licensed to sell alcohol in most cases. The age at which people can start drinking alcohol is known and drinking hours are also known. These things are in the law. You are a lawyer, Madam Speaker, and you know it. You get people staggering on the way and nothing is being done. 

My colleague, Dr Baryomunsi, also talked about the issue of taxation. We are the people reducing the taxes. Actually, when we had just heard the Budget Speech, people were saying, “You people, what are you doing? You are reducing taxes to help people continue drinking.” 

The issue is broader than these sachets that people are talking about. Let us look at alcohol critically. Let us look at how we can impose heavy taxes on the production and importation, and put stringent measures in place to see that people drink at an appropriate time and that they do not drink in excess. We are in control as a government, but when we come here and lament, the enforcement is not there and we are going to say all these things and they will end here. 

Please allow me to go off topic a bit. We have talked about the kaveera but nothing is being done. What are we doing as a government? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Butime and then the Minister for Environment and then we shall hear from the minister in charge of all those who manufacture and -(Laughter)

4.34
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the 1870s up to around 1910, a lot of people died in Britain because of cheap gin which was being distilled from Irish potatoes. They were drinking that cheap gin because it was cheap and beer was expensive. If beer is expensive and you want a drink, you go for the cheap gin. In the case of Uganda, despite the fact that beer is not very expensive, still a huge number of Ugandans cannot afford to buy it.

The price of a beer called Senator has recently come down a little bit and many people can now begin to access or to drink beer. My worry is that Rwenzori Gin, which hon. Muhanga has talked about, and Uganda Waragi, are alcoholic drinks which have been certified by the National Bureau of Standards. You can actually buy Uganda Waragi in a sachet in Denmark. This waragi is being exported. Should you now say that we are going to ban all alcohol in sachets, you will be saying that even Uganda Waragi, which is known all over the world and is in sachets, is going to be banned from export -(Interjections)– Yes, that is what you are saying here – “a ban on the production and sale of alcoholic drinks in small sachets”. That is my problem. 

In Kenya, it is Changaa; you know that very well. The problem is licensing small scale distilleries. The problem is the regulatory authority. The problem is “free for all”. People have distilleries in garages and nobody, not even the LC I chairman, is ready to inform the authorities that there is somebody distilling waragi or this cheap drink in a garage. That is the problem - regulation, vigilance and beer being expensive. Therefore, I do not support this motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kubeketerya and the seconders of this motion. These sachets have brought a big problem to this country. In my constituency, people have given them different names. They do not cut the chain so some of the youth put the sachets around their necks and they call that “magazine”. There is “silu wayi wayi”, which means “pick one by one”, “air time”, “akarafi” or “peke”. You know, when you go on a journey there are eats that you carry with you, and that is why they call it “akarafi”, “entanda” and those kinds of things.

This alcohol is really bringing a big problem. The suicide rates are very high in the area now. Cases of liver sclerosis are very high. There is dehydration leading to comatose. The rate at which people go into coma is very high. You find that people are being carried to hospital almost in coma and they have to be re-hydrated otherwise they die. It also brings about social conflict because if someone has not eaten food and has drunk this and danced the whole night and dies, then they say, “So and so has been poisoned.” It breeds a lot of conflict.

Besides that, these sachets are also littered around and cause degradation to the environment. There is always buveera everywhere. They also cause pollution in the water channels, the soils and the air, and all this affects the crops in the gardens as well. The rate of rape and defilement has gone high -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. The issues being raised by the minister are really very serious. The clarification I want to get from her is: having observed that, as a minister, have you liaised with the technical people within your ministry or other ministries concerned to see what you could do as a minister to bring a solution to such a matter other than what you are telling us today; now? 

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Yes, precisely, and with a number of districts including Lira, Kasese and Soroti. We have made specific interventions, particularly where they are making Lira-Lira, Kasese and littering around and pouring the residue as elaborated by my colleague, the Member of Parliament for Masindi. All these things go into the water channels and pollute the water. We have reached understandings with some of them who are manufacturing on a bigger scale. However, the problem is much bigger, particularly with these ones in sachets because they are distributed and used anywhere. It is really a big problem. 

In Adjumani, we already have a draft district ordinance, which also seeks to ban this alcohol in sachets. In Kumi, we have worked with them and produced a district ordinance, which also contains the banning of this alcohol plus the containers. Honourable colleague, you also know very well that we are in the process of banning the buveera for carriers or conveyance, which includes those packaging materials. I do hope that you, colleagues, will support us in this process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I appreciate your efforts in Adjumani and Kumi, but people are drinking everyday all over the country. Wouldn’t it have been better for you to come here and say, “I am the Minister for Environment; I am banning drinking in all the districts?” Make by-laws. But now those two out of 80 districts, I do not know.  

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Eriyo for giving way. The emphasis is not on the banning. The emphasis should be on the battle to implement the laws that we have – enforcement! We have the liquor law and licensing law but we are not implementing. We have the Enguuli Act in place, but we are not implementing it. We have the Age of Drinking Act; we are not implementing it. You can ban anything you want, but it will remain on the Floor of this House and make us look fools. (Applause) Implement what we already have and everything will fall into place. (Applause)

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank colleagues, but precisely the challenge of implementing starts with us. Even here, you have members or citizens of Uganda who still make it very difficult for us to implement some of these laws. So, we should start by ourselves and we should start with our own constituencies so that we are able to solve this problem. 

Besides that, there is also the challenge of employment. A number of people have found employment in producing and selling or dealing in this liquor. Maybe sometimes some of us even feel guilty because we used to produce the local brew. Actually, the women in my constituency are complaining because the sachets have taken over their market. The local gin, which is Lojuru or even Enguuli, is not as strong as Lira-Lira or Kasese. 

Those days when our men used to take those ones, there were fewer problems, including the ones that my colleague mentioned here. There were fewer problems in families also. Now these sachets have killed the local market for the local booze. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I support this motion. I thank you.

5.00
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity and I would like to thank those who brought this motion. 

We in the ministry take cognisance of the problems the sachets have brought and the environmental degradation. We also take cognisance of the social effects of consumption of alcohol. My colleagues and I in the ministry are not the inventors of alcohol. It has been there since eternity. It has had its own social effects and ills, but if alcohol had been entirely bad, society would have exorcised it from among the pleasures they have been enjoying. So, it is not alcohol alone; as you know, anything in excess is bad. 

I do not want to condemn the producers and the consumers of alcohol because they are some of my greatest tax-payers. I would like to support Hon. Ben Wacha who, in his wisdom, has brought it succinctly to my attention that it is control. I beg this House to allow the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry - and of course without alcohol, tourism becomes a problem - under which production and regulation of alcohol falls, to study this issue. It is not as simple as it sounds. We also have children. I would like to beg the august House to give me some indulgence to go and study this issue and come back with a well thought-out, comprehensive, regulatory law. We shall ask this House to support the law in our endeavour to control production, quality and regulate consumption of alcohol. I beg you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you give us a timeframe?

MR GAGAWALA: One month.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One month.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, let us not downplay this issue. I think the Minister of Trade is looking at revenue but we are looking at the lives of Ugandans. We are saying that some of these small sachets are not even taxed. We are saying that let the small sachets be banned and the ones sold in bottles continue as they are the ones that pay taxes. By virtue of the reaction of the Minister of Trade, I think they are taking us for a ride because hon. Wacha has said, the laws are there –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable mover, there was a submission by hon. Butime that there is a drink, which the Uganda National Bureau of Standards has approved called Uganda Waragi, which is also sold in sachets. He says if we ban it the way we have proposed, it means even that which has been approved must –

4.50
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, human behaviour is not just controlled by laws but by social norms and not all social norms are laws. The fact that this motion has been brought to this House and is listened to by Ugandans knowing the importance of Parliament- I think a message is going throughout the country now and must be encouraged to go out frequently that the public must watch out for these sachets and their consumption so that people know that there is something dangerous about them. 

While the laws are being worked on and while the chemistry is being looked into so that people in their own wisdom take precautions - if we were to say that people are going to obey laws and the presence of laws is what guides us, then we would be walking with policemen all over the place. That is not the way society runs. Society needs guidance and this motion is part of the guidance that is being given by the leadership of this country -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I do not want us to have the situation rushed and I beg your indulgence. I do not want to have a situation like the United States, which banned alcohol and instead of having the desired effect, they suffered bootlegging and all sorts of things and actually more people died as a result of prohibition. That is why I want this thing properly studied and well researched so that we look at all the –(Prof. Kabwegyere rose_)- Professor please, I beg your indulgence -(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When there is a problem, there is a cause and when the problem gets worse, you need to look at the aggravating factors and not the cause. You have to move beyond the cause to what makes it worse. Many speakers in this House have said that alcohol has been there since time immemorial but what is of concern is: why is it that it is now a problem? 

Therefore, we need to look at the aggravating factors here like the aspect of packaging in sachets. Sachets make it easy to carry by making it more portable and accessible and therefore the spreading effect becomes worse than the one of the bottle. To solve this problem, you need to look at the factor that makes it worse. I would like to refer to the point raised by hon. Sanjay and senior citizen Butime. Hon. Butime’s is better than hon. Sanjay’s. If we need to export Uganda Waragi, is it only exportable in the sachets? Why don’t we devise bottles? The point of contention is the smallness, which makes it hidden so I conclude by saying that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, what the senior citizen said is that in the European market and other places, Uganda Waragi in a sachet is already an item on their shelves. They are used to it and they expect it and it has been cleared by the Bureau of Standards.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, from a security point of view, our security people here are aware. If there is a curfew that people should not move at night, it does not mean that all those who move at night are evil doers but for the sake of security, you compromise. There is what is called opportunity cost. What do you lose in order to gain on the other side? So the significance here is that the sachet should go -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: I seek information and I would like this from the medical professor and the honourable doctor here as well as the medical people in this House. Are the majority of people who are admitted at Mulago suffering from alcoholic coma? Are they sachet drinkers or those who have got the money to drink in big quantities, get enough in their bloodstream and then they end up in the - is it the poor people who drink from sachets or the Otafiire’s, Katuntu’s and the Anokbonggo’s of this world who drink their livers to problems?

4.55
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Otafiire has given us a very plausible way forward. The real issue is not the sachet. If we concentrate very much on that sachet, we shall be treating the symptom and not the disease yet we have a chronic disease within us here. I think we should –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: Thank you, hon. Karooro Okurut for taking the information. Madam Speaker, if we take the example of Congo or Rwanda that actually went ahead, took a similar decision and banned alcohol packaging in sachets, they gave three reasons: one, like the honourable minister for the environment said; two, the deaths of the people; and three, was abuse by minors. 

The information I want to give this House is that none of those three issues were actually addressed by banning. The manufacturers went and started producing small bottles of the same content 100 ml up to 150 ml. They are called miniatures and they packed that poisonous alcohol that I referred to in these small bottles and the thing continued selling. In my opinion, the content that is being packed - in my submission I informed honourable colleagues that the particular sachets that are common on the market are bad for consumption. But there are some that are good like Uganda Waragi and have been certified by UNBS. So, I think what is important is that three things should be controlled or attention be paid to the same things. 

First, is the quality of the alcohol being produced; secondly, it is the packaging material. Is it that soft polythene that I think is called polypropine? Is it food grade polythene being used? The third thing is the dispensing of the alcohol and like hon. Wacha said, we have a law to the effect that minors are not supposed to access that alcohol - the selling of that alcohol to the consumer also needs to be paid attention to. 

I would like to support the proposal of the honourable minister. I also beg that the time be reduced in recognition of the urgency of the matter and we give them two weeks so that they come up with a comprehensive report on the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to encourage the mover and the seconder that the matter has been raised. It has been heard but we must find a real solution because we can ban and then tomorrow who will impound, where will they be taken? So we need the mechanisms for really dealing with the end product. So, I want to encourage you to accept the two weeks – one month is too long.

MR KUBEKETERYA: The matter has been raised. The issue of one month is too long and they can make us forget. So, three weeks is fair for them -(Interjections)– yes three weeks –(Interjections)- and we come back -(Interjections)- three weeks is okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members want three weeks. (Interjections) Please, three weeks and I want to really thank hon. Kubeketerya and Akello for bringing up this matter because it is really serious. So, come back to us in three weeks and tell us what you are proposing to do.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Hon. Members, we have to consider that we have to talk to the Ministry of Finance and the manufacturers. We have got to give the manufacturers an option. 

We also have to categorise the different brands that are being produced, what should be banned as bad alcohol, what should be allowed and what should be improved because it also involves employment. Like these people who are burning the city, if they were busy brewing waragi, would they be here burning the city? –(Interjections)– Hon. Gutomoi, please sit down – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, three weeks. The Minister of Trade and Industry will come back to this House in three weeks and update us on what they are doing about this matter. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $4.5 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA AND GUARANTEE ANOTHER LOAN OF US $3 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (ISDB) TO THE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED (UDBL)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the minister? Minister of Finance, are you moving the motion or not? Are you not ready? 

5.01
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): I had earlier consulted you, Madam Speaker. The report for this loan is pending one meeting between the Committee on Finance and the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance delayed to bring on board the Committee on Finance. We have agreed with the committee chairperson that a meeting will be held and a report will be ready on Tuesday. 

I would also like to encourage the line ministries implementing loans to really do their best and bring on board sessional committees so that they do not turn it as a responsibility of the Committee on National Economy to bring the committees, which are supposed to follow up the performance of these loans and even to appreciate what the challenges are in the sector. So, it is my prayer that we look at this loan on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is Tuesday the day you are meeting or when you will be ready?

MR MUKITALE: They are meeting on Monday and from Tuesday we shall be ready for this loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter is deferred.

MR MUKITALE: And if you could allow, Madam Speaker, equally for item six, we directed the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Health to cause a meeting with the Committee on Social Services and make them understand because there is the Office of the Prime Minister – we succeeded in meeting with the agriculture component and the Agriculture Committee on the Avain aspect but the OPM and Health had never brought on board the Social Services Committee. I only received a letter this morning from the Ministry of Health inviting us to visit the sites where this money is going to be put, that is, Mulago, Entebbe Grade B Hospital and the Virus Research Institute. And for that reason, we are also going to be ready after that visit on Monday. I thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE PETITIONS ON THE FOREST RESERVES OF TE-ILWA, KAZOOBA AND KOOKI

5.05
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Ms Winifred Masiko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Natural Resources would like to present the report on the petitions we received from your office, Madam Speaker, by the residents of the Central Forest Reserves in Te-ilwa in Lira District, Kooki County in Rakai District and Kazooba in Sembabule District. 

We have done extensive consultations and we have big reports on the three forest reserves compiled and circulated to Members. However, we made an executive summary out of that and allow me to present the summary which will combine all the reports. I will request Members to turn to page 2 of the report.

Background

Parliament received petitions from residents of Te-ilwa Central Forest Reserve in Lira District, Kooki County Central Forest Reserve in Rakai District, and Kazooba Central Forest Reserve in Sembabule District, which were accordingly referred to the Committee on Natural Resources for consideration.

Te-ilwa Petition 

The residents of Te-ilwa Central Forest Reserve petitioned Parliament over the recent moves by National Forest Authority to evict residents of Anyalo, Ayere, Ongica A, Ongika B, Ana Agali, Anai Ober, Anai Opio Onyoro and Apelo villages.

They prayed that:
    1. Parliament prevails over National Forestry Authority to abandon the disruptive and unattainable plans and acts of evicting the said communities from the reserve.
    2. Government instead effects the de-gazettement of the forest reserve to allow the affected communities live and develop peacefully.

The objectives of the study were
    i. To assess the extent of encroachment of the Central Forest Reserve.
    ii. To confirm the existence of the social amenities such as schools in the Central Reserve as alleged in the petition. 
    iii. To asses whether the de-gazettements of the Central Forest Reserve was viable and justifiable.
    iv. To establish whether it is indeed true that NFA was harassing, mistreating and threatening the encroachers on the Central Forest Reserve with eviction.
    v.  To get first hand information on the source and origin of the dispute between the NFA and the community.

Kooki Petition

The residents of Kooki County Central Forest Reserve in Rakai District petitioned Parliament over harassment and threats by NFA to evict and displace residents of Kagamba, Kyalulangira, Kakyera and Dwaniro sub-counties.

They prayed that:
    1. NFA desists from the untenable and disruptive option of evicting the residents within the forest reserve.
    2. Instead government considers and effects the de-gazettement of Kooki Forest Reserve so that the residents pursue peaceful development like other Ugandans.

The objectives of this study were

To assess whether de-gazzetement of the Central Forest Reserve is viable and justifiable;

To establish whether it is indeed true that NFA was harassing, mistreating and threatening the encroachers on the Central Forest Reserve with eviction;

To get first hand information on the source and origin of the dispute between NFA and the community that resides in that area.

Kazooba Petition

The residents of Kazooba Central Forest Reserve in Sembabule District petitioned Parliament over NFA’s issuance of tree planting licenses to other investors other than the residents of Kazooba Central Forest Reserve and NFA’s threat to render the current residents and occupants of Kazooba Central Forest Reserve landless squatters on the land that they had lived on for generations.

They prayed that Parliament prevails upon NFA to put a stop to the acts as per the Presidential Decree not to evict any encroachers from the Central Forest Reserve.

The objective of this visit was:
    1. To ascertain whether any persons have been granted licenses to plant trees.
    2. To ascertain whether the NFA is issuing any licenses for tree planting.
    3. To ascertain whether one such licensed investor by the names of Boaz Turyamwijuka had blocked residents’ access to Kempungu public dam by enlisting the help of armed Special Police Constables and LDUs.
    4. To assess the extent of encroachment of the Central Forest Reserve.
    5. To confirm the existence of social amenities like schools in the Central Forest Reserve as alleged in the petition.
    6. To assess whether the de-gazettement of the Central Forest Reserve is viable and justifiable.
    7. To establish whether it is indeed true that NFA was harassing, mistreating and threatening the encroachers on the Central Forest Reserve with eviction.
    8. To get first hand information on the source and origin of the dispute between NFA and the community, the petitioners from the villages of Lumegere A, Lumegere B, Lwemirama, Makukuulu, Kyattuba, Bigaaga and Kigando all located within Kazooba Central Forest Reserve.

Methodology

The methods that we used during these fact finding missions were through meetings. 
    1. We met with district officials, representatives of NFA and the affected communities.
    2. We also carried out observation and on-spot assessment methods on the Central Forest Reserve areas, to assess the infrastructure put in place by the affected communities and the population densities.
    3. We also carried out an evaluation of the level of existence of the affected communities in the Central Forest Reserve.

I will go through the general findings but what we need to note is that most of the findings were similar to those that we came across in the three forest reserves but the recommendations might vary because some of the problems that each forest reserve was facing were different from others.

General Findings

    1.  There is prolonged settlement in the three central forest reserves and this is evidenced by the presence of cultivation, cattle grazing, construction of permanent houses and social infrastructure like schools, health centres and roads. 
    2.  There was a high degree of deforestation due to the settlements. 
    3. There are fresh settlements in the forest reserves on a daily basis. In other words, people are still going to these forest reserves to settle there. 
    4. The central forest reserves are occupied by a large population and government-owned social amenities like schools, medical centres, dams and roads have been constructed. 
    5. There is a high level of political interference in the central forest reserves making it hard for the NFA to effectively carry out its functions. 
    6.  District authorities have been informed about the schools in the forest reserves and the illegality of their construction. 
    7. All the three central forest reserves have been encroached on. 
    8. Contrary to what was alleged in the three petitions, nobody is being harassed by the NFA. 
    9.  Residents knew for sure that they were staying in the forest reserves but that they had nowhere to go. So, the residents were aware of the demarcation of the forest reserves. 
    10. The residents were willing to co-exist with trees if they could be allowed to stay in the areas that they occupy. 
    11. The opening of boundaries of the Central Forest Reserve in Sembabule was done amicably and there were no problems. 
    12. The problems in Sembabule are more administrative than communal, which could be handled and satisfactorily resolved by the NFA. 
    13. The NFA has not carried out any evictions of encroachers in strict adherence to the Executive Order issued by the President. 
    14. There are social amenities like schools and health centres in this Central Forest Reserve, which had been constructed using public funds. 
    15. Some of the settlers were not aware that they were living in a central forest reserve until they were sensitised by the NFA. 
    16. Some few people claimed to have been settlers on the land before these areas were gazetted.
    17. NFA officials in charge of the three central forest reserves were performing their duties diligently. 

Recommendations

    1. The communities should be sensitised of the importance of the forest reserves. 
    2. Government should acquire land elsewhere to be allocated to the encroachers. In other words, encroachers should not stay in NFA reserves. 
    3. Government should desist from putting up social amenities in the forest reserves because we found many schools, hospitals and roads as already observed, and they are all funded by government. 
    4. Leaders at all levels should consistently remind the encroachers that they are illegally occupying the forest reserves instead of encouraging them to stay there. 
    5. Government should put up social amenities in case of Te-ilwa for the internally displaced persons as they return to their original homes. These social amenities should be in the areas outside the reserve. 
    6. All the current and future encroachers should be strongly warned and condemned.
    7. Where the establishment of the forest reserves have cost government a lot of money and it cannot afford to be forfeited, then government should acquire land and compensate the NFA. 
    8. Government should lift the ban and permit the NFA to lease out the land in the forest reserves to private investors for tree planting. 
    9. Government should make a concerted effort to hasten the process of resettling the internally displaced persons in case of Northern Uganda. 
    10. The Land Commission and NFA should take steps to verify the claims of those who assert that they occupied the said land before Government gazetted them as forest reserves.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in summary, those are the recommendations we made. However, I must say that it was a big challenge visiting these forest reserves. The populations that have lived there are big and to a great extent, political leaders seemed to side with those people and it was quite a challenge. It may be difficult for people looking for votes not to take sides; but we looked at this exercise from the technical point of view. I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, for the hard work. I know it took a bit of time but I am glad that you were able to accomplish that. 

5.22 
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. However, in regard to Te-ilwa Forest Reserve, we discovered that the area that was said to be in the forest reserve was not the correct area. When I visited the office of the NFA - as was directed by the communities - to get the real map on which the then Paramount Chief of Lango appended his signature when he gave out that area, it was indicated that he signed on a piece of paper which was showing a rectangle and on this rectangle, the width which was along the road was 100 yards and the length was supposed to be 500 yards. He was told we were going to plant the Mahogany and since 1962 no single Mahogany tree has been planted in the area. To my surprise, when I visited, the officer in charge told me that unless I produce Shs 300,000 they would not give map. 

When we visited Te-ilwa together with the committee, the chairperson was present, they produced a map and a map was no longer a rectangle; it was a map with nine sides and that was one of the first revelations that these people settled in the land were not aware that they were on a forest reserve and yet they knew they were living in their area. When we viewed that map I asked, “Where is the signature of the paramount chief on this map?” There was some indication on that map which was saying that the map was supposed to be signed by the paramount chief but his signature was not there. 
 
So that was the first and very serious revelation which we got after we had met with the communities and in fact I implored the chairperson and the committee on that day that they should address that anomaly. In addition, recently from East to West, the land bordering Lira Municipality - and the municipality has already applied to Lira sub-county, which is the smallest sub-county in Lira District, originally only three parishes and now recently one parish was divided into two making it four. So, from East to West at the border of Lira Municipality to the border of Apac District, is only five kilometers and then from North to South is only 15 kilometers. 

Lira Municipality is applying to absorb part of all of this Lira sub-county which they are intending to make a city. Then taking part of Erute South where hon. Odit is controlling Adekokwok sub-county, which is also not big because Lira sub-county was again divided from Adekokwok sub-county. This area was given to government on request that they were going to plant these Mahogany trees. An attempt was made to pant these trees in this area by the authority but because these communities were not considered the project failed. It was by the local government then. 

This area has been proposed for an international air field in the same Lira sub-county and then to the South of it there is Aber stock farm that used to be a very important farm and that has again been applied for by the local government to house the constituency College of Gulu, leaving this area without any area to live yet they are just at the border of Lira in Apac and part of forest reserve is in Apac District. This makes it very difficult for forest reserve to control because it is in two districts. 

The prayer is that if the government wants to take these people out, then they should acquire land elsewhere but now that the district wants to develop Lira into a city, they say why can’t they live there? Some of these people who are living here have sold parts of those who have developed it into permanent houses which actually are with in the areas. Then those who have been living there have their relatives buried there and these are more complicated.

So, for the special case of Te-ilwa where there are about eight villages involved and some of them were originally there but if that rectangle is what the committee would address, then the government will consider. They said this was fine because that was given by the Paramount Chief but the extension which they did not know because this was a computer business now; when I requested for that particular map the authorities could not give it to me until they produced that map to find that was not the original map. The original map had eleven stones which were planted in it but when you now you look at this one, there are nine sites. You can now imagine the number of stones which have been planted there, which nobody even knows. 

But we have tried to restrain them because the extension making it now a National Forestry Reserve was not with their consent and that is a major challenge that the committee should have addressed. That was the revelation which we got when we visited the forest reserve. Unfortunately, the only part which remained un-tampered with was 100 meters, along the road but the rest was already tampered with. I pray that the land be de-gazetted for the benefit of the Te-ilwa people. Part of it is in Apac and part of the land is in Lira District and the application to absorb this sub-county into the municipality and then turning it into a city. And now already with the reserve just at the border is a proposed university, which will be expanding into this area also because some of them are willing to vacate the area to give it for the development of a university.

5.31
MR ARIMPA KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I will start from where my colleague stopped. This Parliament should pronounce itself on the law regarding de-gazetting. It affects both the urban areas and all the other areas. It is very clear that before you de-gazette you must buy or have land and it is very clear in the Act and all the urban areas which are struggling to de-gazette like Mbarara and Gulu have already done that and I think Mbale is also trying. There is no shortcut unless we change the law.

Secondly, serious encroachment started in the 1970’s during the Amin regime when the double production campaign was launched. All the forest reserves including Mabira were encroached on. Since 1986 when the NRM Government came into power these forest reserves were saved. And the NRM did well for the first 15 years, but after 15 years we have found ourselves in the same problem. We recovered the 700 hectares which we almost lost recently, which had been encroached on in Mabira and we recovered a bit of the 23,000 hectares on Mt Elgon Forest Reserve and all the other forest reserves. 

Unfortunately, over time the NRM Government has also relaxed and since the Executive order which was issued - I think sometime in 2000, I do not remember the exact date - people interpreted it, as if it meant that people were now allowed by the President to go into the forest reserves. 

To make matters worse, because this country is ours, in the NRM Manifesto of 2006, on page 55, the government stopped evictions from forest reserves, and since that time all the forest reserves have heavily been encroached on in Busoga and all the other forest reserves. Unless we take a step to reverse this situation, I think it is very unfortunate. 

Why are people encroaching on forest reserves? The reasons are few: one, there was corruption by the forestry officers because at that time, they used to allow people to just settle locally. 

Two, of course there had been poor funding by the forestry department, and they used it as a source of funds. 

Three, there was infrastructure development as hon. Winifred Masiko has said, because there are hospitals, health units and other units. 

Four, there is the issue of population growth. The issue of politics increased the encroachment because many honourable members of parliament and people from local governments would promise people, “As soon as you elect me, I will allow you to go into the forest reserve.” 

Five, of course there has been uncalled for conflict between NFA and other government departments. So the issue of encroachment on forest reserves is something that we should look at very seriously as a government. 

I was looking at the extent of the encroachment on the forest reserves they have talked about. In Rakai, in the one called Kijanebalola, there are about 3,023 hectares of forest reserve, but about 2,774 have been encroached on. 

When you go to the one of Kazooba in Ssembabule, which is about 7,400 hectares, there are about 2,068 hectares that have been cultivated. So there are forest reserves that have been encroached on extensively, and if you look at the developments, it is hospitals, mosques and so forth. But there is something that should be saved. So, my call to the committee is that we should now move and first of all open the boundaries. 

Secondly, as NRM and as our government, we must now take a strong stand because the forest reserves - an honourable member was saying that some area is not planted. Forest reserves do not necessarily have trees, but they are reserves that are supposed to be planted. So, there is a feeling now that wherever there is no tree, people must invade with impunity. My call now is that as a government, Parliament and as the Executive, we must take a step and halt this encroachment because - if you could give me one minute, Madam Speaker, and I tell you the negative effects that are caused by the forest cover removal; prolonged droughts; the power crisis which you know; declining domestic revenues, which you know, resulting from the loss of soils; apparent decline in the environmental standards and, therefore, increased poverty -(Member timed out_)

5.36
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to thank the committee for this report and for the great job they did. The problem of NFA versus the forest reserves and the community should have been addressed as a national problem and not only as a problem of the petitioners who submitted petitions to Parliament.

I had interest in us capturing Busoga South Forest Reserves that has been on for quite a long time, within this report. Just as hon. John Kigyagi was saying, whenever it comes to the politicking season, like we are about to get to, the people of Mayuge and Bugiri always suffer. They are always encouraged, “You are free to go and settle and do cultivation and whatever you feel like.” But when elections are over you find NFA and even law enforcement officers caning people left and right. 

I pray and urge government to come up with a clear programme or policy on how we can de-gazette and have our people settled once and for all.

One of the observations, observation 10, says that the residents were willing to co-exist with the trees, if it meant them being allowed to stay in the areas they were occupying. The particular forest I am talking about is over 20,000 hectares. 

Just as they said, there are those who claim or assert that they were there before. It is alleged that they had been there in the 1920s or 30s until they were invaded by Tsetse flies and Sleeping Sickness. That is when they were shifted. After wiping out the Sleeping Sickness in that area, people thought that they were free to go back, but on going back the forest had taken root and government took it over as forest reserve. It is our prayer that government comes up with a clear stand on this so that we settle the people of Uganda once and for all.

In Moroto, there is a fertile sub-county called Iriri. It is very vital for agriculture production. You know very well that this region has always suffered from food shortage and I feel that if the barren side is taken on for tree planting, and this one is maybe given to the community, it could be a solution to the food problem that the people of Karamoja face. And you never know, we may solve the food shortage or crisis for them.

As far as the petitioners are concerned, petitioning is a sign of the suffering that these people have gone through. They did not petition Parliament for the sake of it. 

As per the recommendations, I should salute the chairperson that she has ably said that according to their recommendations they did it from the technical point of view, not taking care of the petitioners’ interests. 

It is my considered opinion that at least we come up with a percentage of say, out of the land in question or the land in contest, we could come out with maybe 30 percent of that land to be given to the community, and then we give sanctions to whoever continues encroaching on the gazetted forest reserves that we have in Uganda. That could maybe solve the problem and our people may end up settling. Madam Speaker, I thank you so much for the opportunity.

5.41
MR YAHAYA GUDOI (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the chairperson for the report she has delivered today, and I thank her for being brief because she summarised. 

I would like to know from the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources whether there will be a chance for you to come here with a comprehensive report, which captures all national forest reserves in Uganda. This is because I come from Bungokho North, Mbale District where there is Namatala Forest Reserve. I have always got questions from the community -(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Gudoi for giving way. You are raising a very pertinent issue because this problem, the controversy surrounding encroachment on forest reserves, is not only limited to the three areas, which were the subject of a petition. This matter has come up in different parts of the country. 

Hon. Muwuma has talked about Mayuge, which has been a perennial problem. In government, His Excellency the President has directed the Ministry of Water and Environment to study and come up with a report of all the forest areas in the country with a view to: one, establishing the areas that they originally covered; two, establishing where actual forest cover is; three, establishing the actual extent of encroachment in the different parts of the country; and four, coming up with a clear way forward in regard to what actual area we should have in the country, taking into account the imperatives surrounding or associated with having forest reserves in the country. This is because we cannot have good supply of water, clear control over the weather, and we cannot protect so many things once the total forest cover in the country continues going down.

The Ministry of Water and Environment, I am sure, will soon come up with their report and we should be in a position to brief Parliament accordingly as soon as this report has gone through Cabinet. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I don’t know whether you will also assist the citizens who live near the game reserves. I found that problem in Amuru, Pian, Bukwo and on the slopes of Mt Elgon. They are also a bit restless, and I don’t know whether anybody is looking at it because it is also a problem.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, it is not only the forest reserve areas that have been a source of conflict between communities and the reserves. The game reserve areas have also been faced with the same problem except that while it is true that the Ministry of Water and Environment is working on the report to cover the forest reserve areas, it is the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry that is in charge of wildlife, and that is currently pursuing the issue of game reserve areas and how the communities within the surrounding areas have been impacted as a result of the need to live together. 

I know the Mt Elgon area has been an area of huge controversy over time, but I believe that we shall be in position to find a solution in due course. I thank you.

MR GUDOI: I thank the minister for all that he has said. Sincerely, when that is done very urgently, you will have saved some of us.

As you go to get information, there is a tendency of meeting only National Forestry Reserve officials and probably UWA. When you meet them, they will always speak to the contrary, but as you go out, involve the area leadership, like in those communities which are near the forest reserves and probably the national parks.

Finally, I thought that these forest reserves in the country were reserved for the communities, but the communities always ask: we have a forest reserve but apart from getting water and probably the eco system, what do we get from it? Firewood? The NFA don’t allow people to get firewood from there. I am talking of Namatala Forest Reserve; good enough I come from near that place. They don’t even want people to get medicine; you see we use these local herbs. When women or men cross over or attempt to pass through, it is a problem. 

As you go out, I know the opening up of boundaries will take place. That is the most contentious issue, because in Namatala Forest Reserve, there are four boundaries and people don’t know which is which. Please try to solve these problems because some of us are going to lose votes because of them. 

I have captured one observation: that Members of Parliament promise air; that when I am elected, I will allow people to go and settle in the forest reserve. This is not true; but these conflicts are putting us in danger. As you know, we are now on a straight line; we are going to beg for votes and the question may arise. They will say we have been stopped from getting firewood; we can’t cross here; which is which? There are three boundaries; which one should we take? 

When the President visited my area in August last year, he said that he would tell the ministers concerned so that they would put on their gumboots and go and settle the problems of national parks in my area, the Mt Elgon and Namatala Forest Reserve in Bufumbo sub-county and Bubyangu sub-county. Up to now, we have not seen them. They ask, “When are those people coming?” And what do I say? Nothing! I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.50
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with this good report. First of all, I would like to say that as a nation, we have to protect and preserve the forest ecosystem and I am happy that the Ministry of Water and Environment has done a very good job in this area. I am happy because they have put in place some arrangements whereby if you have some big chunk of land, they can give you some money and you develop a forest. 

Having said that, I would like to request the same ministry through recommendation No.7 of the committee, which says that, “… where the establishments in the forest reserves have cost Government… - and I wish they could add, ‘and the local people’ … a lot of money and cannot be forfeited, then Government should acquire land and compensate the National Forestry Authority.” I support this 100 percent. 

Sometime ago, I presented a petition on the Floor of this House to do with Mpanga vs. National Forestry Authority. Little did I know that this was a national problem! I have seen almost a whole parish in a forest reserve, and worse still, Government has put there schools, health units and road infrastructure and I really think that recommendation No.7 should have come yesterday. I want to congratulate the committee for making that recommendation. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Kigyagi has talked about the law of de-gazettement. That law, as I have always said, is a bit complicated, and maybe, as he has lightly put it, we must think about changing that law because it has got so many conditionalities that cannot be met by the local people. If government finds that a whole sub-county is in a forest reserve, then we can look for other avenues of planting forests like the ministry has ably put in place. 

The other day I was watching TV and I saw the forest of the Minister for Micro Finance, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. She was in her forest and I was very impressed; and when I asked her, she said that there is a fund in place. “When you have land, you can apply and they give you money to plant forests.” So I think other than harassing the poor people and evicting them from these small pieces of land, government can put a fund in place - in fact we can give more money to that fund - so that people with big chucks of land can be given money to plant trees. 

For those areas which have already been encroached on - I am talking of reserves because there are two types here; we have reserves which have forest cover; and reserves which have no trees; and people have mostly settled in reserves which do not have tress. The committee has ably observed that the National Forestry Authority have not been given permission to plant more trees in these reserves, and I think that, that is partly why people have encroached on these reserves, because they do not have any forest cover. So I would like to urge the committee and this House to support this report because it is very good, and the recommendations are really balanced. I think if we adopt the report especially -(Member timed out_)

5.55
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. Given the importance of forests in this country, we really need to move more seriously because when you go to the countryside, forests are vanishing day and night and you have already seen the effects in Eastern Uganda and in Northern Uganda. 

The issue of boundaries, like my colleagues raised, is very important. It is not only limited to forest reserves, but even game reserves. I have a problem in my constituency; they can give you about four boundaries and they will say, “The other year, they told us the boundary was here.” and you fail to get which is which. I urge government to come up with clear boundaries for these game reserves and forest reserves. 

On the issue of evictions, I have witnessed the way they evict those in the game reserves and it is very inhumane. They come with guns! So, as government, we really need to come up – by the way, I do not support people encroaching on this land, but I don’t like the way we evict them. 

In the first instance, just like the report has captured, there are those people who were there before government gazetted these areas. So, you have to take serious consideration of these issues because if someone was there say around 1926 and you gazetted the reserve in around 1936; and now you say that this land belongs to government, then it is not proper. 

The other issue, Madam Speaker, is about the fresh settlements, as the report has captured it. Actually, hon. Kigyagi talked about the 1970s. History is going to judge us very harshly; it may take time but history will judge us harshly since we still talk about Amin who really did what he could not understand. But this is a very understanding government. Why do we allow people to settle? We already have problems with the people that are there. Why don’t we solve that instead of allowing these fresh settlements? When you look at the schools being built there, that means we are actually accepting these people there. So, we must really try to stop people -(Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI: There are different categories of people. There are those who are landless and they have been there for quite some time. There are those who have alternative land and come there to raid. Then there are those who have commercial interests in those areas and those who are there for subsistence. There are those who are local immigrants, who came from other places, but there are those who came from nearby. So, the types of activities that they carry out there are as important and your question is very important. Why are we allowing new encroachers to come and occupy the reserves?

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA:  Thank you colleague - 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I thought that I should clarify one thing; and this is to do with halting evictions. A halt on the evictions came up mainly as a result of the inhumane treatment by those who were carrying out the evictions. 

And as you may recall, the timing was of the nature that anybody who had any feelings for his people would simply not permit this to continue. It was a temporary undertaking, and I know that once this study which is being carried out by the Ministry of Water and Environment comes up, we shall, as a government, be in a position to come up with a clear way forward on this issue of encroachment on forests. But something had to be done because people were dying and losing their property.

MR KAGWERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really agree with my chief whip that what the President did was entirely right, but then those who come after the President’s pronouncement are the people I am concerned about, because even today, people are still encroaching. At that time when he made that pronouncement, it was ok. But how about those who are coming up now?

When they talk about political interference, we really need to know whether these people are interfering as institutions - because Parliament is an institution - or individuals. If a Member of Parliament came up and said, “I am giving you this land; give me votes,” then we should not allow that because we must have pronouncements made by institutions. We must have institutions in this country because someone like the RDC will come - I am just giving an example; I am not saying that they did it - and say, “Be there,” or an LC V or even a Member of Parliament. This is not proper. We should have respect for institutions -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank Hon. Stephen Kasaija for yielding the Floor. You see, when you look at the settlement patterns in the various parts of this country they differ. If you look at Northern Uganda, we have got our customary settlement patterns, where, for example, you move from Kampala to Mukono, and it is one clan. That is their place and that is where they stay. By the time the British came, they were already there. By the time the first mapping to say, “This is a forest reserve,” was done, these people were already there -(Interjections)- yes; clans have never changed. My sister here, honourable minister, you are from my place and you know how our settlement pattern is. Although you have relocated officially these days; but you are from there. (Laughter) 

So the point I am making -(Interjections)- we know my sister, we know; let us not digress. (Laughter) The point I am making - and this is the problem many of us are faced with - is that you go to a place and out of nowhere you see a billboard reading, “National Forestry Authority Forest Reserve.” The people are saying, “By the time these trees started growing and by the time others germinated, we were already here. Our great, great, great, great parents were buried here and we were born here. Where do you want us to go? Do you prefer trees to us?” These are things.

So when we are talking about these issues we need to be very humane. We need to understand the historic perspective of the settlement of these people. It is not like in Buganda here and in the West where people can buy land and relocate because they have money. In these other places - the whole of Northern Uganda - we have that type of settlement. You cannot just come up and say, “We are now asking you to -” where do they go? Where do they go? So that is the clarification –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe just to add; hon. Muwuma talked about South Busoga, most of that forest reserve is the land of Chief Nanyumba and they can trace the entire lineage. That is just for your information.

MR STEPHEN KAGWERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think before my colleague hon. Kassiano Wadri came in - I wish you could listen, hon. Wadri; before you came in, I actually put that clearly, that those who were there before Government gazetted those areas, should not be evicted. That is what I started with, but he had not yet come.

So as I conclude, I also want to touch on the issue of votes, leaders and government policies. We should not mix up issues. If you are a leader, take your stand on a correct thing; whether they do not give -(Member timed out_) 

6.04
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very informative report. It is really penetrating. 

I would like to comment on the committee findings and recommendations, and I will restrict myself to findings No.1, 4 and 5, on page 6. 

Finding No.1 indicates to me that there is an information gap between government, the local authorities and the communities. You see, there are social amenities like schools, health centres, roads and permanent buildings. These did not come up overnight. It was a process and the local authorities and government officials were there. It means that the fault may not be entirely for those who encroached on the forest reserve, because the government was in place.

No.4 is stressing the same thing. Some of these infrastructures which have been developed are Government-owned. If they are Government-owned, in a forest reserve, it is a contradiction which I do not understand.

No.5 talks about political interference, but this is not elaborate enough because we don’t know the category of political interference which is being referred to here. 

As hon. Kagwera has already said, most of the politicians who are here know the importance of central forest reserves; the importance of wetlands; and the importance of animal reserves to the country; and I don’t think that any politician who is interested in the balanced development of this country would actually interfere or encouraging people to encroach on forests.

As far as the recommendations are concerned, I would like to comment on one, five and seven, which have already been discussed by hon. Kaliba. I entirely agree with him on that. 

Recommendation No.1 is that communities should be sensitised. I think this is overdue. Government is responsible for making the citizens know what they can do and what they cannot do according to the law -(Interruption)

MR BUKENI: Thank you, professor for giving way, and I want to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to agree with what the professor is saying and what is in the recommendation, that communities should be mobilised and informed about the importance of having forest reserves. I want to give the example of Buterewa near Lira Municipality. 

The argument of the people to be left in the forest reserve was that for them they didn’t need the rain, which is contributed to by the forest reserve. Actually, their argument was that for them, they can even grow crops that do not need much water and, therefore, the importance of the forest to them is not there. 

To me, that meant that the community was not informed; they had not sensitised them and they didn’t know what they were asking for. Even when we went to Rakai, I met friends who I was with in Mbarara in the Rwampara area, who could not graze animals because of shortage of land. They were there grazing animals because they thought this other side had a lot of land and nobody was stopping them, without knowing that it was a forest reserve.

MR ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, hon. Member for giving me the information. 

I would like to end by saying that I am very familiar with one of the Central Forest Reserves; Te-ilwa. Te-ilwa has been occupied by people since I was a child. Yes, it means that the gazetting of Te-ilwa was done when the settlement was already there. I think it is unfortunate to do this because if the people who have been there have actually been working towards the fulfillment of their social amenities, I think government would be unfair to come and say that this is a forest reserve, which has been settled on for a long time -(Interjections)- Let me just finish. 

I would like to say that government should find alternative ways of preserving our central forest reserves. They are very important for our environmental protection, but at the same time, people cannot just be dejected. People are more important than the forest. There is a co-existence, which people should recognise. Without forests, life may be difficult, and without human beings, forests may not be there. I thank you very much.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we have been listening to other Members who have been concerned about resources other than forests and game reserves, there are also some resources that we have in this country like land, which is hosting barracks; Government land, which used to be ranches, and so forth. There is also conflict surrounding this kind of land. 

I was wondering whether we could task the Government Chief Whip to direct the ministries concerned. In my district currently, I am actually preparing a petition to bring before Parliament because there is a serious conflict between the UPDF Fifth Division, which is in my district, and the communities there. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that for 20 years, the people were in camps and two or three years ago, they were told to go back. As people were retuning, the UPDF occupied their land in 2004, and when they were going back in 2006/2007, they were told to leave. Where do they go? 

I want to request that the ministries responsible for these areas, like Ministry of Defence and so forth, come up very clearly and tell us where their boundaries end. I have been to Entebbe several times to ask them where the refugee land ends and they don’t have that information. They referred me to Gulu. So, I can’t actually trace where this paper work about the land is.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, could you not ask an urgent question, which is focused so that it can bring out the policy issues? Could you ask that and we fast track it because people are going back? We want them to go to their homes.

MS AKELLO: Thank you for your guidance, but Madam Speaker, as you are aware, I told you that I had already reported to the ministry concerned and they have been promising. I remember when hon. Ruth Nankabirwa was still Minister of State for Defence, we even arranged and mobilised people to welcome her. She was going there to explain circumstances but she never – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that is why they should be tasked to come and listen to an urgent question so that they can explain. 

MS AKELLO: With your guidance, Madam Speaker, I will work on it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can fast track it so that people do not fight with the Army. 

6.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): I would like to start by thanking the committee very much for their report, and I also want to thank the petitioners who brought this petition to Parliament; and I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for referring the matter to the committee. The committee subsequently visited these areas and understood the problems in these areas and the report is here. 

Essentially, the reasons that the petitioners brought here are most of the issues that have been raised before as far as encroachment is concerned in many areas. 

First, I would like to re-emphasise what my colleagues have mentioned about the importance of these forests. The reason why many areas were gazetted as forest reserves is that long time ago, the scientists noticed the consumption of forestry products by the people who were there, and the population was also growing; and as the population grew, there was need to ensure that there would be continuity and sustainability of these forestry products for the people. That is why many areas were gazetted for forestry services. 

Forestry services, as you may well be aware, are ecological and consumption based; ecological because a number of our wildlife reside in these forest reserves. These forests help in rain formation and in many areas; the forests also help in controlling soil erosion and many other functions. But the socio-economic functions are that we really derive much of our livelihoods from these forests. We get the firewood, the charcoal, the medicines, the timber, the poles, the honey and everything from these forests. In addition, these forests also serve as a laboratory because a number of studies and researches take place there. 

A number of forests were gazetted subsequently. The first forests in Uganda were gazetted in 1928 and subsequently, forests were later gazetted. For example, Te-ilwa was first gazetted in 1948 and the boundary was later expanded in 1949, in 1953, in 1968 and the latest was in 1988 -(Interjection)-  No, I don’t think it was without the consent of the people; my colleague here is murmuring but – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us listen to the answer. We want to understand. 

MS ERIYO: Let me first answer. If you really have issues to raise issues, I am sure you will raise them. 

My colleague here raised an issue about the maps. First of all, the National Forestry Authority produces their maps at a cost. Whoever needs a map from there has to pay for it. So, I don’t think you were just denied the map. I think it was a question of informing you that if you wanted the map, you should have paid for it. If you went to the Department of Surveys and Mapping in Entebbe, you would still pay for the map. So, really it is your responsibility, honourable colleague. Once we have set up institutions and there is an administrative way of doing things, it really should be followed. 

So, I implore you to make some payments where you are required to do so. They have to go into the maps, pull it out and print it. You cannot see it on the screen because it is a process and they have to pay for it first. 

On the issue of the boundaries not being correct, the National Forestry Authority has been opening the boundaries because as we know, the NFA was set up not so long ago, and as soon as they were given this responsibility in 1993, they started opening up boundaries of the forests. 

There are 506 central forest reserves and not even half of them have their boundaries opened yet; and in the process of just opening the boundaries alone, there is a conflict. People don’t even want NFA to open the boundaries. 

In ensuring that there is coexistence and in ensuring that the forest is managed properly, we really have to open the boundaries. Unfortunately, in some areas, even the leaders are inciting people not to allow the National Forestry Authority to open the boundaries. I think we should desist from that. 

On the issue of handling the encroachers, we open the boundaries, we register the encroachers, we analyse the extent of encroachment and if any de-gazettement is to take place, it has to be informed by these activities. But unfortunately, there are people who do not want us to do so. I really request Members of Parliament to support us because these forests are important even to those very communities. The values of these forests initially is of benefit to the people in those areas -(Mr Bukeni rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; you will look for her later. Let her finish.

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, in management of these forests, we have also set aside 15 percent of these forests to be managed together with the communities. So, if we do not open the boundaries and if we do not develop the management plan, how else can those communities benefit? Most of the communities just want us to let them do whatever they want in these forests, to settle and allow other people to come in so that they take over this land and do whatever they want with it. They forget about the values of these forests. 

Madam Speaker, you also mentioned the South Busoga Forest Reserve. I have been there three times. What I have discovered is that actually most of the people who have settled there are not even Basoga - maybe about 70 percent are not. They have come from different parts of Uganda and others have come from Kenya. The people who claim that the land is theirs have been selling this land to other people. So you find that nearly all tribes are there. If you are addressing people, you cannot address them in Lusoga alone; you have to translate into Swahili, Luganda and Luo. We have Luo and other people there. And I think that is not acceptable. 

We have even held a number of community meetings with these people and asked them why they sell this land and yet this forest is important. We wanted to open the boundaries, get the number of people who were originally there and see how we can manage the forest together with them but now if they bring more people, other people also allow more encroachers so that they are many in number and so that government can make consideration and not evict them, which I think is wrong. Let us all work together to stop this additional encroachment.

The President was actually approached by most of these encroachers and that is why he issued the Executive Order to halt the evictions. He also clarified - unfortunately I have not come with a copy here - that no more encroachment should be allowed but that those who were already there should not be evicted until we analyse the issues. And that we have already done but the situation is almost out of hand because more and more encroachment is taking place on a daily basis in nearly all the forest reserves and the aggressiveness of the people is just beyond our control. We do hope that we work together.

It is true that even leaders at all levels including LC I, II, III, V and Members of Parliament are supporting these encroachers and this is a very big problem. But as the report has clearly stated, for these three forest reserves, I think we will be able to manage the issue if the people there understand and if they are not encouraged to encroach further.

I would like to agree with most of the recommendations but before I go to the recommendations let me make comments on the findings -(Interruption)

MR BUKENI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you rightly noted, I am one of the signatories of this report which does not support encroachment on the forests. Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to make a blanket statement by saying that all MPs including the committee did support -(Interjections)- yes, including Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, she was making an appeal to all the Members of Parliament to assist her; she is asking for help from all of us and she is not accusing you. She wants support from the leaders from right up to the bottom. She wants all the leaders to help her do the needful.

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, thank you so much for your wise ruling. I have not accused all Members of Parliament but I have said that some support the encroachers. Some of the LCs also support them. I did not say “all”. But I appeal to all leaders, whether they support the encroachers or they do not, to really understand the value of the forests and support us in ensuring that we manage these forests with the communities for their own use, their own good and for the good of this country.

On fresh settlements, finding No. 9 on page 7 says that the residents acknowledged that they were staying in the forest reserves but had no where to go. I do not think this is entirely true because some of the people who have encroached on these forests may have encroached over time since the 1960s or probably before 70s but others, like in the case of the forest reserve in Lira, are IDPs who have where they came from and that is a fact. Then in the other forest reserves –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let her explain.

MS ERIYO: Others are new encroachers -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know today I do not want to delay the Moslems too much. I want her to conclude so that we can allow the Moslems to go and break their fast.

MS ERIYO: There are new encroachers and I do not think it is true that some of them do not have where to go. 

No. 16, some few people claimed to have been settlers on the land before it was gazetted into forest reserves by government. I think it is only this government of the NRM and this Constitution that gave land to the people. Initially, government was the one managing land and land was in the hands of government and government gazetted those areas. At that time, the population was small and people were either moved or recognised. In some of these forest reserves, we even have enclaves. Where people were found those areas were cut out and those people were left in those areas. So, all the land that was gazetted did not have people. In the areas where people were, enclaves were cut out and people were allowed to stay there. Some of them even own the land and they have land titles for Mailo land and so forth. So, I just wanted to correct that.

Recommendation No.5 talks about people going back. This is a routine for local governments and the districts to plan. And we would like to encourage that they plan according to PRDP and all other government plans that these people must be provided with the social amenities but not in the forest reserves -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us not deal with individual situations.

MS ERIYO: I would like to comment on No.7 and 2 concurrently. No. 7 says that where the establishments in the forest reserves have cost government and the people, government should acquire land and compensate the National Forestry Authority. This should be done according to the law on de-gazettment. The law is very clear on this and I think the law should be followed. I do not have to go into that because I think Members know it.

Regarding acquiring land, allowing people and so forth in those areas while another area could probably be provided for forestry services, this very House passed the Act and this should be followed in doing so. That is the comment that I want to make on the recommendations. Otherwise, I agree with the rest of the recommendations.

My colleague from Bugisu raised the issue of the forest reserves in Bugisu. This will definitely be handled but I think I need to verify the allegation that my colleague has made here that NFA does not allow the communities to pick firewood and medicine. No, I think that is not in our policy. Our policy is to work with the communities. Actually we allow the communities to pick the dead wood, unless it is a strict nature reserve and I think we need to understand that. 

The forest reserves have compartments. There are areas, which are strict nature reserves and no one is allowed to enter them except for research purposes and under supervision of the NFA but in nearly 70 to 80 percent of the reserve, the people have access and pick the dead wood for firewood. They can also pick medicine, put bee hives and get honey and actually this should be done in conjunction with the management plan. 

The communities should seek permission from NFA, we have offices in those areas, and they will be allowed. We need to follow up on this with my colleague and I think if the NFA staff is doing this then we will have to take action against such people.

Most of the recommendations that colleagues have given here are appreciated, we will definitely work on this. As my colleague the Chief Whip mentioned, the President requested us for a report on each of the forest reserves, which we have given. They are big volumes on the functions of each forest reserve, why those forest reserves were gazetted, the ecological values and the other values of these forest reserves and the extent of encroachment in each of those forest reserves. 

We also have a draft Cabinet paper, which we are now waiting to discuss with the President and then present to Cabinet. Thereafter, we shall come and present it to Parliament. It is on all the forest reserves but also deals with the issue of encroachment. 

There is the issue of information gap. Most of the local governments either understand or do not understand very well the importance of these forest reserves, the boundaries where they have not been open. Because of this, wherever people have settled, they have been providing services to the people including schools and roads. 

For example, in the case of South Busoga, there was a landing site. The boundary of the forest was a road but that road was too far to reach the landing site so the district local government decided to put a short road through the forest. Because the people know that the boundary is the road, they now move to this side and say, the boundary is the road so that is why there is more encroachment in that area. 

We really appeal that we should work with local governments and the Land Commission. Before they give out land titles and so forth, they should verify with us as to whether this area is a forest reserve or not so that we do not have more conflicts coming up. We will also work with UWA to see that the wildlife areas are also protected and dealt with in the same manner.

Maybe also for your information, 30 percent of the original forest cover of the land in Uganda was reserved and out of this, 15 percent is managed by the Uganda Wildlife Authority and NFA. Where you have the national parks or game reserves within the forest reserves, we manage them together. We shall work together with them and settle some of these issues. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much. I put the question that this House adopts this report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to announce that there will be a meeting of the Business Committee on Monday at 10.00 a.m. so that we schedule the remaining activities while we wait for the other Bills. Fortunately, we have got the Government Whip and the Opposition Whip. Please, ensure that all those chairpersons are available for the Business Committee meeting on Monday. The House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.35 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 September 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)

