Thursday, 14 September 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses, Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.


MR OKELLO OLUM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have just stoop up here to report that yesterday after the meeting got bogged down, the Financial Sector Adjustment Credit of US Dollars 2.9 million earmarked for this Financial Year.  The Minister for Finance requested for a Meeting in my Committee and some Members of the House who were interested.  The Meeting took place this morning from 11 o’clock up to 1.30 p.m. In that Meeting the Minister for Finance decided to give out some of the secret things which we thought could not be disclosed in this House, about the The Cooperative Bank is supposed to benefit from out of this money but it has not been allocated how much.

The Uganda Commercial Bank is supposed to receive US Dollars 1 million. The Secretariat of this Project, thus, the administrative wind of the Project is supposed to receive US Dollars 0.1 million.

UDB is supposed to receive 0.7 million dollars (US) and this money for UDB is supposed to be used for computer Add Wire and the rest. I think we tell the Minister for Finance if he stands up before this House this afternoon, he should give to the House the details of the activities back again to be financed out of the 1 million dollars earmarked for UCB.  I understand one of them which was given in the meeting was to study the alternatives for rural banking.  That is how this money will be used.  Members rarely get or approve this money - the 1 million dollars on condition that the Bank that is going to study the divestiture of UCB is a clear bank of reference. The term of reference which Members are directed to, we said it should be, that the bank should study how, or should come out with a report on how UCB is going to be divested so that we begin as Ugandans.  That is the reference that should be given to the Merchant Bank that is going to study.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE & ECONOMIC PLANNING, IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, as you might have heard from the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee, in Finance Planning,

END OF TAPE
