Tuesday, 12 September 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

MOTION

MR OLUM: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Before I start on this report, I would like Members to take an addition I want to make to this small paper on amendment to my report.  There is small paper of two pages amending my report.  I want to add something after the first paragraph, and it should read: “As a result of the satisfactory solution to the Entandikwa budget and the decision to defer the discussion on the over US dollars 1 million, paid from the Apollo Corporation funds, the committee decided to approve the above budget for the ministry plus the additional shillings 6 billion for Entandikwa.”

Mr Chairman and hon. Members I am sure you received budget speech of the Minister which he read before this House, and the other document containing the estimates of revenue, expenditure and the recurrent and the development budget for 1995/6.  Now I am before you, because the minister of finance and economic planning seeks your approval to spend the following sums of money.  The minister seeks to spend shillings 32 billion, 68, million 138 for the recurrent budget as recurrent expenditure.  And UShs 77,636,500,000 as development expenditure.  During the time my Committee considered the budget of the minister of finance  and economic planning my committee had noted two serious things.  One of them was that, the minister had not provided any money for Entandikwa scheme which should have been 6 billion in this financial year.  And then the other point which my committee considered seriously was the lack of explanation on money paid to ENERGO Project in respect of the refurbishment of the Apollo corporation building which now houses the Sheraton Hotel.  

My committee had reached a decision that the minister’s budget could not be approved unless the 6 million was provided for Entandikwa and unless  -(Interjections)- 6 billion for Entandikwa and unless the minister get a satisfactory on who receives the money the over US dollars one million paid or purportedly paid to ENERGO Project.

My committee has now decided as read before to approve the budget of the ministry of finance.  One; because I think we have reached a satisfactory solution on the case of the money for Entandikwa and secondly, we think there are certain facts missing on the 1 million dollar case and we have asked the minister to come back to us in two weeks time to make a clarification on who receives the money or to confirm to us who receives this money.  If we are satisfied then I think we shall come back and report according to the House.  But if the minister does not satisfy us, then we have decided that this matter should be brought before the House and we shall ask the House to appoint a select committee to investigate this case further.

We come now to the - looking at what happened in the previous year.  During the financial year 1994/95, the sectoral committee made with the approval of the House a number of recommendations for the minister to implement during that year.  While some recommendations required action, others were procedural, and the rest were objectives to be attained over a period of time. The minister’s report to the committee on these recommendations was quite satisfactory.  The committee appeals to the minister to make the committee’s recommendation - to take the committee’s recommendation more seriously from now onwards.  I do not want to repeat the minister’s budget in this report, but merely to comment on it.  Members of the committee agree that the Ugandan economy has been performing satisfactorily as reflected by economic indicators, and these economic indicators are such things like rate of growth of GDP, the rate of inflation, the stability for the exchange rates.  The improvement in the balance of payment and foreign reserves.  The reduction of government expenditure and the increase in tax collection by the government.  

Notably here, I think Members will note that one thing is missing and I think it is income per capita or the per capita income this is still very low and this is the reason for our poverty.  The measures are announced in the minister’s budget speech for the year 1995/6 are supposed to make further improvement in revenue collection as compare to GDP.  And to reduce government reliance on budget funding using grants and foreign loans and to stabilize the exchange rates. However, despite this satisfactory performance by the economy there are a number of negative social economic aspects that government should address.

I shall now go on to enumerate a few of them. Poverty; there is need for me to describe the nature of poverty now existing among Ugandans.  Hon. Members know it very well because it is the people represented by them who are poor. The committee noted that government has at last realised that the structural adjustment policy brought with it wide spread poverty.  The only issue now left is how to tackle the poverty so that it can be reduced.  The committee wished to put the recommendations forward for reduction of poverty. The Entandikwa Scheme should be adequately funded and managed so that it can create the intended impact. The shillings 6 billion should be released yearly and loaned to Ugandans.  At least for the next four consecrative years before it is stopped. (Applause) 

From then; the fund will be a revolving fund.  This will also allow the tax payers to benefit from the drastic increase in revenue collection announced by URA and the government.  There are other programmes that government introduced for alleviation of poverty among targeted groups of people.  Such programmes include the PAPSCA, the PAP, Masuliita development, small project programme support rural enterprise development. Our committee was informed that the PAPSCA Project will continue.  The Committee carefully considered these projects and evaluated their impacts on the alleviation of poverty and the committee found that the taxes of the PAPSCA project, especially, was debatable if not minimal. I understand there is currently under evaluation of the PAPSCA project going on in the ministry of finance and I think they - may be, a report to the Members of this House. 

Members, therefore, recommend that one; as PAPSCA project comes and end no funds should be sought to sustain further the various programmes initiated under this project.  Such funds should be channeled through the decentralised services in the district so that local communities can feel a commitment and to the sustenance of the programmes. 

Two; instead scattering numerous and duplicated poverty related projects, the minister should in future consolidate the projects or the funds into one scheme managed under the Entandikwa department of the ministry. This will not only be cost effective, but it will also introduce easy coordination and over time provide experience and capacity building in micro-project lending.  Three; with the increased tax revenue, the government should now plug all corruption channels. Reduce further government spending on defence so that more funds are made available for the social sector particularly held under education (Applause) 

The divestiture programme.  The divesture programme currently going on, of selling government assets is a very controversial one.  Many people are opposed to the programme.  But it is not my intention to discuss the plaus and cones of the programme here. The committee noted certain problems with the divestiture exercise which it wishes to bring to the attention of the House and the government with recommendations.  The committee wishes government to increase the participation of indigenous Ugandans can also participate in running their economy (Applause) 

The impending public flotation of six companies as reported by the Minister, is safe in the right direction.  Number two; the committee noticed that some of the foreigner investors who have purchased the assets have brought in foreigner workers to perform work that Ugandans can also perform.  An example which has been stated so much in this House are waiters in certain hotel which has been taken over by foreigner investors, and I am sure there are many others.  The investment authority, the immigration department should screen out all these workers so as to create employment for Ugandans.  This should cover all the enterprises already privatised.  I think this was also a recommendation of one of the committees.  Three; the Uganda Commercial Bank being a people’s own bank should be acquired by Ugandans through plotation of shares.  (Applause)  

I think the ministry of finance has so far been silent how the Uganda Commercial Bank is going to be privatised, and I think this is the message we have just given.  This will enable Ugandans to own their financial institutions and to allow them to directly benefit from this ownership.  The Uganda Commercial Bank should therefore plotted as a public company just like the other six companies which includes grain milling, consolidated properties etc as mentioned earlier by the minister.  Now that government has made decision to privatise UCB, the committee does not see any need to spend over shillings 2 billion earmarked for foreign to merchant bank to study the best way of privatising UCB.  (Applause)           

The committee, therefore, does not recommend the spending of the shillings 2 billion and over for that purpose.  The funds so saved could be used to strengthen other financial institutions in the country, especially the indigenous banks.

Employment; shortage of jobs for our graduands who are coming out of university colleges and all other institutions every year.  It is something to share the current poverty, no job just increases the poverty.  In order to reduce this problem which is now on the increase the following measures should be taken to help the youth.  Immigration should be tightened to ensure as much as possible that the job market is left for Ugandans only. (Applause) 

The committee recommends that legislations on employment be brought to be House as soon as possible in order to safeguard the interest of workers.  Members are aware of the current unfair treatment of workers which involves the following. (a) Poor pay/remuneration.  (b) Unfair threats of dismissal. (c) Beating of workers by employers, and (d) Unfair tendencies in the treatment of workers.  The education curriculum needs revision so that students are taught relevant subjects in management, finance and simple production technology in agriculture and workshops etc to enable them have gain full employment.  Steps should be taken to set up institutions to train trainers or impart knowledge to students. Government should also deliberately make a study and advise Ugandans who produce commodities how to market what they produce.  There should be special Entandikwa to set up for youth to borrow money and start off gainful life.  (Applause) In response to the budget, the President promised this nation, regional centres for mobilization of women and the youth in particular into productive and gainful employment. The committee firmly embraces this move.  (Applause) 

Revenue collection.  The committee noted with satisfaction the good performance of URA which enabled it in 1994/5 to collect over Shs.522 billion against a target of Shs.488 billion set b this House.  However, the minister for finance and economic planning was reminded of the need to implement the Uganda Revenue Authority Statute of 1991 which requires URA to perform as a parastatal rather than as a department of the ministry.  It was the committee’s considered opinion that if URA was given the opportunity to operate as cooperate body its performance would have been probably better than currently.  The authority would be in a position for example to acquire its property and construct physical facilities like the dry pot at Malaba and Busia.  This would ease the tax payer’s burden of bringing in goods up to Kampala for verification, especially those in the eastern and northern parts of Uganda and south Sudan and Zaire who would may be pass through eastern routes.  The problem of the anti-smuggling units, ASU, was also brought out by Members, it was noted that ASU had often acted unfairly and brutally on traders and the general public especially in the eastern parts of Uganda.  It was also noted that the ASU being military personnel are only accountable to the Minister of Defence for their action and not the URA. 

Recommendations on URA.  No.1; Members recommend that the URA should be allowed to operate like a cooperate body in line with the Statute set up - setting it up in 1991.  The Statute also empowers URA to retain a percentage of the revenue collections to enable it operate uninterrupted.  It will also give URA ability to build up reserves in line with the focus plan of activities and provide for depreciation allowance.  

It is also important that the Minister for Finance and Economic Planning facilitates URA to perform on a contract basis which will go along way to alleviate the inadequacies in its budgetary process by giving it a project of income rather than leaving it at the mercy or for government allocations.  No.2; Members recommend that the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning talks to the relevant authorities to make the ASU accountable to the URA for all their actions.  

It was further recommended that the URA Police be formed to constitute the URA anti-smuggling unit and I think when we say we are asking the minister for finance to talk to the relevant authorities about ASU I think we mean the ministry of defence.  Because the URA - the ASU is under the Ministry of Defence.  No.3; manufacturers should be allowed to open ware houses at border stations to facilitate trade with neighbouring countries.  This policy succeeded in South Africa when it opened warehouses on its borders with Namibia, Angola and Zaire.  Some ware house also benefit the body communities by creating employment and other multiple economic effects.  

Now I want to turn to some general issues.  Treasury accounts. It has to the notices of Members of the Committee that while government accounts staff or government accountants are posted to and removed or transferred from ministries by the treasury, a number of Permanent Secretaries are - have often rejected the transfer of accountants working in their ministries. Some Permanent Secretaries have even refused to accept accountants transferred to their ministries.  One can only have a closed guess as to why these permanent Secretaries are refusing to do so.  Actually this matter I want the minister of finance to note, is becoming quite serious.  Several reports have reached us, some of the reports have been sorted out, I think the current situation which is very serious is the one for a Permanent Secretary by the name of Katsigazi in the ministry of foreigner affairs who is claiming on an accountant I think called who I do not know.  He is claiming on this accountant he does not want him to be transferred.  Even when this accountant has been transferred.  I think it is big weakness on the port of the ministry of finance. Because how can an accountant refuse to be re-called to his parent ministry.  If he does so why don’t you just interdict him?

The committee recommends therefore, distillery measures against such Permanent Secretaries and accountants concerned.  The minister for finance and economic planning should therefore on top promptly report such Permanent Secretaries in writing to the public accounts committee, the Auditor General, and our sectoral committee on the ministry.

Payment to former East African Community staff members.  There is no doubt that the payments of the full terminal benefits and pension to the former staff of the East African Community, is their right.  (Applause) 

It is surprising to see that government has refused to see this, and has decided to pay just a small and miserable portion of their entitlements.  Members of the Committee recommend to the Minister for Finance this.  The minister for finance should accept full amount of benefits and pensions owed by government, I understand it is about 80 million shillings - I mean 80 billion shillings or something like that. The minister for finance should drop the saying that government does not have money so the beneficiaries should accept a smaller sum as final settlement.  I think this is wrong.  If I owe you 100 million shillings then I come and tell that please, I do not have money you accept 20 million shillings as final settlement, I think you cannot accept it.  But if I came and said I owe you 100 million shillings but I do not have all the money, can you allow me to pay by instalment, and you may allow this.  So after recognising the full amount of the benefits, the minister should enter into an agreement with the representatives of the beneficiaries so that these debts can be paid in installments over a period of time. If there is no lump sum of money to pay them.

Corruption and remuneration. The general matter of interest is remuneration. Job insecurity in the civil service and the resultant corruption it brings.  While it should be appreciated that the ministry of finance has been allocating more money in the last year’s budgets to finance the ever minimal increase in remuneration to civil servant, I must say that this - these increases have at the same time always been eaten by inflation, so always we are back to square one.  The Committee believes that the biggest reason for corruption and job insecurity in the civil service, inadequate remuneration and poor pension scheme, so you should provide for yourself if you want to survive during retirement.  the committee therefore, gives the following recommendations to try and address this problem.  The committee agrees with the public - with the other committees that the promised debate on corruption must be brought before this House.  (Applause) 

Mr Chairman, permit me to say that the celosia sum of money taken through corruption annually could be used to increase remuneration in the civil service by some good percentage.  Corruption is not just about stealing government money, there are a lot of other areas of waste of money by government which are more less or which more less amounts to corruption. The programme to reduce the number of civil servants seems not be ending.  It has gone on since 1991, and this causes job insecurity.  The committee recommends to the government to finalize the exercise so that civil servants who remain can settle down on their jobs with confidence.  (Applause)

The Committee noted the miserable pension paid to retired civil servants and urges government to increase these pensions to enable - that well enable them live with the dignity during their retirement.  And perhaps something on remuneration which we did not capture here is the differences in pay right now in the civil service.  There are some categories of civil servants who earn over 1 million, others will earn how much is it 100,000 or something like that, big difference, and I was reading about it yesterday, where medical staffs are now also planning to go on strike and I think they are right.  If it is going to be a certain level of pay, let it be uniform for everybody, but once you start creating differences between people, then you have invited problems for yourself.  

Payment for renovation of Entebbe Airport.  Government contracted DRAGDOS to rehabilitate Entebbe Air Port at a cost of US dollars 24 million with a loan from Spain.  DRAGDOS in turn sub-contracted ROKO construction company to do the job for US dollars 2 million.  The ministry was requested by the committee on parastatals to provide information on this contract.  The information has not been given. The Civil Aviation Authority has now been instructing - instructed by the government to pay the full loan of UShs US dollars 24 million for a job worthy US 2 million.  This is a very big burden on the Civil Aviation Authority.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, you should not forget that another sum of shs.20.5 billion has been included in the 1995/96 development budget for the renovation of the same Entebbe Airport, you can see the project number for yourselves.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the minister should account for the application of the US dollars 24 million, and why it is now again necessary to spend another over 20.5 billion within such a sort time on the same Airport. I am confident that within the next two weeks we shall have discussed this point with the minister.

Repetitive projects.  The Committee that some projects covering the same sector were scattered in different ministries for implementation including the ministry of finance.  These projects include for example, cotton, Aids project, Civil Aviation project, Environment veterans etc. This we feel increases the overhead costs of these projects and makes coordination and implementation of the projects difficult. The committee therefore, recommends the rationalization of the implementation of these projects.  

Indigenous financial institutions.  The Committee welcomes the step taken by the central bank to rationalize the performance of financial institutions following the introduction of the statutes on financial institutions.  The Committee, however, notes with concern that with the liberalization and open licensing of new known financial institutions, the local institutions may find it difficult to operate.  It is important that the financial - the indigenous financial institutions with the ability to assist the indigenous population more especially in the rural areas, these institutions should strengthened to enable them compete with the foreign owned ones.  Failure to do so will put the nation in pre 1960s positions where the indigenous people could not easily secure credit.  I think indigenous people started securing credit with becoming into existence of such local banks like cooperative bank and UCB.  The foreign banks it is feared do not help our indigenous people much.

Budgetary matters. On budgetary matters I want Members to note that vote 008 programme 016120 participation in order programmes which is over Shs.18 billion is the budget for the Uganda Revenue Authority which we have already stated should not appear in the budget for minister for finance and economic planning.  This is why we are saying that the minister for finance is still treating the URA as a department of the ministry because the budget for its operations is still include in the ministry’s budget.  Another budgetary point Members were not happy about its expenditure on consultancy in the development budget.  Members noted that the very high proportion almost 40 per cent of grants and loans contracted by the government is spent on consultancy.  It was noted that in some instances as much as 60 per cent of the loans acquired goes back in paying foreign consultancy.  

The Committee was not happy with this scenario. It amounts to failure by the minister for finance to help promote local capacity by employing qualified experts who I think would be cheaper.  There is no doubt that employing local experts would cheaper and produce more multiplier ethics in the economy.  Another related matter to the colossal amount spent on expatriates in the form of consultancy fee was the weak negotiating position that Ugandan’s team produces in constricting loans.  It was further noted that the loans created big burden on the economy rather than promoting it.  This is when a big part of the loan goes back to where it was contracted.  Fellow Members, let me demonstrate to you statistically the magnitude of the problem of consultancy fees that Members of my committee have complained about.  The statistics are there I do not need to read them you can just have a glance.  The Committee advised the minister to improve the strength of the negotiating team who negotiate and contract loans on behalf of Uganda Government.  

The Committee also wondered why the same team is the same that always goes for these negotiations.  The committee reminded the minister of the recommendations made by the committee on the economy in 1991/92, which were proved by the NRC regarding the procedure of contracting loans on behalf of government.  One of the recommendation was that whenever the minister for finance wishes to negotiate or commit the government to any loan in excess of US dollars 5 million, he must seek the approval of the sectoral committee on the ministry of finance and economic planning.  (Applause) This has not been done.  

In conclusion, let me thank hon. Member of the House for attentively listening to my report. Let me also thank the hon. minister for finance and his team for the many useful meetings we held during this year’s budget meeting, we exchanged many views and had many moments of rank discussions.  I am sure both sides benefited a lot from the meetings.  Let me also thank the Members of my committee for all the positive and constructive contribution which have been included in this report.  Lastly, let me not forget to thank the staffs of National Assembly the secretaries for this report.  The committee urges the minister for finance and economic planning to start implementations of these recommendations once they are approved by the House as soon as possible.

Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I beg to move and I request the House to approve and adopt this report. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. KAGONYERA MONDO (Rubago County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Chairman. Let me thank the -(Inaudible) but I was wondering why hon. Olum was presenting this report in such a very calm manner when in fact what he was telling this House had terrible implications. (Laughter) Obviously, I do appreciate the coolness of hon. Luwum, and I was wondering whether he took some tranquillizer before he came to represent this report, but seriously, I would like to make a few observation.  The first one I want to talk about is this question of consultancy.  I think the statistics given to us by hon. Luwum in this report almost show an obscenity in my own opinion.  The degree to which we waste public money on these so-called consultants.  I partly talk like this, and angrily at that for that matter, because I am totally convinced that there are many Ugandans who do not need any consultants whatsoever in doing their job if only they could be allowed to do their job and if only they could be allowed to do their job, and if only they could be facilitated to do their work.  (Applause) 

In the 70s while I taught at Makerere we had a consultant from Hungary, and what he used to tell us was that he wondered how we were able to do our work. And we would ask him why? It is because nobody could operate under the conditions you Ugandans are operating.  While I earned a cool 10,000 shillings that man was earning 5 million Shillings.  I was more educated than he was.  So I think this is not a Ugandan disease, it is a disease of the whole of Africa and the sooner we got out of this disease, the better it was for our countries. When I was a minister there was a consultant at the daily cooperation and may be sometimes it is wrong to appoint minister in areas which they know about.  This man knew absolutely nothing about the job he was doing -(Interjection)- yes it is a fact he knew nothing and he was consultant earning thousands of dollars.  So, I hope, that really enough has been said about these consultants and the sooner we and again as I said this is not a Ugandan disease; it is a disease of the whole of Africa.  We seem to think that when you have a dark skin, you are incapable of working, and yet it should not surprise anybody when Ugandans leave this country and go and work in other countries they do a very good job what is the answer?  They are facilitated.  (Applause) 

There was a project I am not going to go into details, people get this project for several million dollars and whom do they employ as experts in Uganda, people you have retrenched for good salaries. The rest of the money is taken away, it is not surprising those who know statistics will tell you how much of the money we borrow as Africa from the World Bank and IMF goes back directly before it enters even this continent.  I think, Mr Chairman that will do for that.

Let me talk about indigenous financial institutions.  -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, we discussing a very serious matter on finance.  The minister is here alone his technocrats are away and they are the people who put these things into practice.  Don’t you see, it would be in order to have these technocrats listen to our comments.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr Chairman, I am responsible formerly for my staff, and I am trying to take down notice and I should be able to report every case if it is necessary to my staff.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, much as the minister is saying that he is taking down notice, I being a member of the committee on economy, we have been trying to see that the government should take some of the Members of this august House for negotiations and I know that. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I say this with all due respect and hon. Mwandha is here, this is -(Interjections)- we are throwing away our money always and it is these technocrats who ignore the decisions of this House.  So what guarantee is there that the minister will next time make sure that once we pass this report it will be compiled with so that we save a lot of money which we know is going to foreigners, what guarantee is the minister going to give us. 

THE CHAIRMAN: He will have to answer that later. Proceed, please.

MR NTIMBA: Point of procedure.  I humbly beg to propose that officers from the ministry of finance should be summoned to come to this sitting and help the minister to answer these very important queries. 

PROF. KAGONYERA MONDO: One last thing I forgot about these consultants is this. One; a consultant has to permanently justify his existence quite often they are not necessary.  No.2; Ugandan consulting firms have been reduced to humiliation; they are just front men for foreign firms; they cannot get the jobs on their own.  They do the work but they are front men for foreign firms who get the booty of the money spent on these consultancies.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Related to what he says about consultancy permanently justifying their existence.  There is an example we learnt regarding Northern Reconstruction Programme where the coordinator who is a local recommended that there was no need for consultant in a particular field and he has been employed.  So when his term expired, he recommended that it should not be renewed.  His post was abolished. But somehow the gentleman found another job in Uganda and in so doing, he collaborated with some his IMF fellows here, and actually they managed to convince the ministry to abolish the position of a coordinator himself who recommended his dismissal. (Laughter)

MRS MUGARURA:  Thank you Mr Chairman. Two years ago, there was a recommendation to restructure Bank of Uganda. So the management and the board sat down and drew up a programme of restructuring, a point came when we thought we should introduce the element of external consultants to support our work and we go with this World Bank team.  What did they do, they just wrote down what had transpired and represented it and earned their millions of shillings without adding on a sentence and instead opened up for more consultants.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you Mr Chairman. I hope really the Minister of Finance who, by the way, as a person, is a very highly respected member of our community - (Interjection)- I was saying that the Minister of Finance as a person is a very highly respected member of our community and, therefore, I hope that he takes very seriously the concerns of the Members of this House which are the concerns of the people of Uganda and future generation.

I was going to talk about indigenous financial institutions.  It is most ironical, that in the first few you see, this thing was not on.  I think it should go on record that I said that the Minister of Finance as a person is a respected member of our community, and we expect him to take very seriously the views expressed by Members of this House which are a reflection of the feelings of the people of Uganda and the future generation.  Then I went on to talk about indigenous financial institutions, I was saying that it is more ironical that in the last few days or so you will hear many senior members of government appealing to banks not to abandon the rural areas; and at the same time we read in the newspapers Barclays Bank is busy closing up - upcountry banks.  What is going to happen when Ugandan Commercial Bank is privatised or closed? Is it not predictable? What is going to happen? 

Now, many people think that we support Uganda Commercial Bank because it gives us free money, surely! I do not know how many Members of this House owe Uganda Commercial Bank money, but even if they did, it has already been said by the Chairman of the committee, the government owes East African Community workers so much money; are we about to abolish government because it cannot pay? (Laughter) 

I served for more than 17 years at Makerere University, and I am going to get 20,000/= as my terminal benefit! How do you justify government’s existence? The financial institutions may have made mistakes, but they can be corrected.  Many of the people in government who are thieves are Christians; they need to be reminded of the prodigal son.  So, the other day, there was money available to various institutions.  One institution that is owned by foreign firms spent all their money on only three projects, while the local banks were expected to spend their money on hundreds of beneficiaries.  Now, who cannot tell that if I am given only three projects to look after, I can make sure that those projects will work, and if I must chose only three projects on which to put the money, what is the risk involved?  

On the other hand you have got a local institution that looks up to hundreds of projects and has to distribute this money as widely as possible, and it is doing a job it is supposed to do! Obviously that institution is going to find it more difficult to operate that this institution which uses only three projects, put its money there, sit crossed legged and at the end of the day they recover their money.  Is that what we want in the future? 

Mr Minister through the Chairman, I would like government to think very seriously about defending and even protecting local institutions. (Applause) If only we can demand from them to perform better, what is wrong with that? Those of you who read the Sunday Nation, you must have read, under motoring by a guy called Bennet, whose writing I respect, he says that there is only way to save the motor industry in Kenya and other third world countries, and that is to protect them; no other way! Now Bennet writes about motoring, but you can say practically the same for any field of economic endeavour.  If you want local institutions to get anywhere, they must get some protection.  I do not mean they should be spoilt, we protect our children but we also demand that they grow into responsible citizens.

Lastly, on a selfish note, I wanted to mention something on members of our community who used to contribute in the past at very great pains to their terminal benefits, and because of government’s mismanagement and misbehaviour, these people who include me will and up with nothing in their pocket. I am wondering, in spite of the problems the Minister of Finance has, I am wondering whether he will ever think about such people, because as hon. Okello Luwum was saying, really there are Ugandans who have lost out too much, and government should not ignore them, it should think about them especially, those who contributed so much of their own money, you imagine you have some money in the bank and tomorrow it is two zeros off, and you saved it at great pains, and government ignores that.  

So, lastly, I want to thank the presenter and the committee, but I also want to thank the Minister for listening attentively and I hope that really in future the recommendations of committees will not just be for government to not but seriously to implement.  I thank you very much, Sir.  I have two point to discuss very briefly; one, concerns the so-called experts, the consultants sent here by European countries to help us; most of these people are retired, they are either retrenched in their own countries and then they get jobs here or they are retired and they are too old to work in their own countries, so they come here really to become our consultants! They come and they find us retrenching people - so we retrench our indigenous staff to employ retrenched people or retired people from overseas.  Well, so I request the minister concerned, through you, really to consider these consultants and take only people of very high calibre, because they give money with one hand and take it away with another, and we find ourselves in a vicious circle -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman and I thank the hon. Member for accepting the information. I want to give information on the economic looting and rapping that is happening to our country, in form of grantees.  The concept we have ordinarily is that grants are free money given to Uganda, but of late we have realised that the donor agencies request that you must put an equivalent of the money they are going to give as a grant.  For instance, if there is an agriculture project worth Shs.6 billion given by Japan, Uganda must put an equivalent of Shs.6 billion so that it becomes to Shs.12 billion, and all the equipments, machinery and personnel must come from japan and at the end of it the Shs.12 billion will go to Japan, which mean Uganda will have indirectly injected Shs.6 billion under the guide of giving free money which is Shs.6 billion to Uganda.  Thank you. 

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information. Mr chairman, I thank the hon. Member for accepting that I give this information, not only to himself but also to the entire House.  I would like to recommend that Members of this House do take pain and read the little book called “Loads of Poverty.” After they have read that, they will find the basis for all these complaints and -(Interjections.  “Loads of Poverty” that is the title, I will give further information to other Members on this particular book.  I once met the Editor of Uganda Confidential who had many, many complaints with his paper and I told him to read that little book; he read it and he put in some three pages of that book.  I will bring that copy and give Members the address, the author and all the information concerning this book.  It answers most of our questions. (Laughter)

MR KAJUBI: Thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, my next paint is entandikwa.  I thank the committee for recommending that the scheme on page 2, to be adequately funded and managed so that it can create the intended impact, that Shs.6 billion should be released yearly and loaned to Ugandans, at least, for the next four consecutive years before it is stopped.  This is a grand idea, Mr Chairman.  We welcome the Entandikwa scheme and has boosted morale within our community, and of course, some people did not even know about the existence of NRM and so on, but through the Entandikwa, people are now beginning to know that NRM is really doing them a lot of very good service.  But in some places and in some cases Entandikwa is bringing more misery than jobs, because only about 2 per cent of the population has been able to get some of the money sent to us.  So, that is why anyway, it is really good to really to get another supply, another big sum of money, say Shs 6 billion this year, and then another one until we get this revolving fund. So, I really highly recommend this and I thank the Committee for recommending this.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR RWABIITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara): Thank you very much Mr Chairman. I have got about three point to make.  One is on employment.  It is a bit sad and ironic when you get positive economic indicators but on the ground the level of unemployment is increasing every year, and what is more annoying is the parents who take their children, and government does sponsor children in Universities, they complete their courses and some have got Upper Second in Economic, Statistics, Accounts but they are on this road for more than three years, walking for a job which they will never get.  Now, the parents are asking themselves what is the use of sending our children to school if they go to school and they never get jobs? While their elder brothers have been retrenched, now you can see the complexity of the situation. The elder sisters and brothers who were supporting the family have been retrenched; now the young ones who have just finished their universities and their colleges, having diplomas and university degrees have no jobs! Now, what is happening to the family? This means even that parent who still has other three kids he will never be able to educate them.  

So, the Ministry of Finance apart from giving us positive figures, let these figures be converted into action and employment so that the populace can see this increment in development in our economy; otherwise it will be remaining in books, but in reality people do not see what you are telling them.  I hope the Ministry of Finance and his staff will translate the positive figures they show us in economic indicators into real benefit for our people.  Otherwise, it is a very, very serious case -(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  First of all I would like to inform the hon. Member that the Ministry of Labour in conjunction with the ILO and UNDP will be organising a seminar which will be taking place in Entebbe on the 26th to 29th to discuss specifically the problems underemployment or unemployment in Uganda, and of course, also in the Ministry of Labour we have now created a desk which registers the number of people who unemployed so that that department can be able to look for jobs for those who are unemployed.  However, as you must note there is a big unemployment problem in Uganda like any other third world country, we would like to encourage more young men who are coming out of the university to generate employment on their own, themselves.  At least those who are not in the sectors, so that they can be able to generate employment.  There are many sectors where youths from university can go and work.  Number two is the other aspect of - as you know government has now liberalised the economy, there are many factories which are opening up; eventually many of these young men should be able to get into those factories and work there.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  They should institute this question find out how many people are employed and unemployed.  But as long as the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning holds on that sector of human development which should be in the Ministry of Labour and Social Services, this thing will not be complete and it is high time that the Ministry of Finance and Planning revisit a paper which was written by an expert on this question of where human development should be stationed.  He has got it in his ministry, it is also in the Ministry of Labour, and because those days it was Ministry of Planning and Economic Development they wanted to grab everything that they can have on projects, and that is why they took over this question of human development which should rightfully be in the Ministry of Labour and Social Services.

CAPT BABU:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, hon. Members, there is a few quotations which were made by hon. Rwabiita on graduates with Upper Second and Accountancy; I just want to give him some information Sir, that already we are short of Accountants in this country, and in fact, the chairman of this Sectoral Committee will attest to that fact that we have got a very big shortage of graduate accountants, and every time there is advertisement for these people, they even come to the ministry and request if we could find out how many have come out of Makerere University.  

The other point I wanted to put up, is that the majority of students who have got upper second and qualify, most of them are employed because we are following that particular case.  The problems we are having a people who get passes with degrees, not in professional cadres but mainly in social sciences; and even with those, they are beginning to get jobs in other sectors; unfortunately there are certain sectors there are various sectors in government that have failed to get members of the university cadre to join, because probably our salaries are still very low.  We hope that with time and with the increase in pay most of them will be able to join us.  Thank you very much.

MR RWABIITA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the two ministers for the information, but hon. Chebrot knows that it is easy to say but not easy to do.  It is easy to say that a student from Makerere can start his own business but not easy.  Because he needs capital; Entandikwa; if we can give him Entandikwa - (Interjection)- yes, he will do something.  Now, hon. Babu has said that there are some areas in government where there are jobs and these graduates are not going there.  I beg to be corrected but I would request the ministry of education, since it is in charge of education and these colleagues, to do some manpower planning, to indicate - with the Ministry of Finance actually - to know how many accountants do we need every year, how many agriculturalists do we need; how many vets, how many - what have you.  All these jobs should be indicated so that when these graduates leave college then they know where to go! But strongly speaking there is nobody who has been walking on a street for three years, and even if you call him to be a messenger he will come, definitely; even students are ready to come, these graduates! But unless they must know somebody who gives the job, but its an open entrance, many graduates are on the streets but they have failed to get employment both in government and private institutions because - not because they do not want, but simply there is no job! Everywhere you go they tell you ‘we are retrenching, no jobs’ and the man walks out, in both private an government bodies.  So, if the Minister of Finance and Education could give us figures on manpower planning so that our young graduates are - these people who finish colleges with diplomas so that they know where they can be suited in after their courses, otherwise, the situation is very fluid and our children are languishing with poverty.

The second point I want to speak about is divestiture, the policy of divestiture is quite good alright, but my question and the question of the people is; must we sell everything? I want an answer from the Minister of Finance; and if not everything, why can we not take our time and choose those companies that must go because of their failure to perform? But if some companies are still performing and they have shown positive change, then it is the right time to educate our people also to manage these institutions rather deciding to sell all of them.  

Hon. Kagonyera has reported the example of Barclays; as you know a businessman is always there to maximise his profits.  Now, the day we sell our local banks, Co-operative Bank, UCB, what have you, you will find out that the new private owners, their principle concern is to make profits.  You can imagine Barclays was not to stand a bit of welfare for the employees, to increase the welfare of the employees, because they demanded some extra pay! So what will happen if we have sold all our local banks, and these foreign banks join together to put us on a hanging rope?  This can happen that at one time even a government you have nowhere to day, you do this, they say no, we are maximising our profits. 

Therefore, in order to take a branch to Kapchorwa, please first give me a grace period of taxes for ten year.  That will be one of the conditions to give us; then you will find that it will be difficult to manage our economy if only we have to be dictated upon by these private and definitely when they are foreign owners; it will be difficult for government to function without any other bodies through which it can give its services to the populace.  So, it is very dangerous if you have only to sell everything in order to make money, while at the end of the day even as a government we may fail to run our political programmes because we have nobody to go through, even to collect our taxes! 

Now, we say Uganda Revenue Authority has collected taxes, but how?  Because this money is collected through the small commercial banks upcountry.  Otherwise, I do not think they will be able to collect all the cash, carry them in bags and bring them to Kampala! No, they go through these small branches which send drafts to Kampala in order to increase the revenues.  So, the selling of some of these government companies is a good policy for those which are not performing, but we must speak and chose and make sure we are not selling everything and eventually we shall regret.

The last point is addressed to the Minister of Finance on uncompleted projects, and the first one is the building of the Ministry of Finance.  for the last five years in this House many Members have talked about this; it is a sore in the eyes; because you are the controller of money, yet your own house is in disarray, in a terrible state! Definitely can the Minister tell this House when that house will be rehabilitated and be completed; because they have put iron-sheet around it for the last three years and nothing is happening?  

Now, sometime back we were told that the ex-telecom building, government has got money to rehabilitate it, but as far as I am concerned they have put iron-sheets enclosure there for about six months back now, but I see very little going around there.  So, can we know what is happening to these structures because, the longer we wait the more they deteriorate and the more they will cost us to rehabilitate.  I think the Minister of Finance should allocate enough funds. First of all, to put right his building and then all other important buildings like Extelecom which will provide a lot of offices for government and even individual businessmen so that some of these structures in Kampala can come out of this long deterioration situation.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Minister to reply.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, first of all, I would like to express my heart felt gratitude to all the hon. Members for the seriousness in which they have debated these issues. I want to thank them because the important national issues affecting not only our past finances but also, in some cases, our independence.  Many issues were being raised, Sir, but in the time I have, I shall be selective.  First the issue of consultancies; here, Sir, I would like to state publicly that this is really a matter of flogging a dead horse.  The government itself and the Ministry of Finance too, together they have already decided that as much as possible, as often as possible, we shall employ local people where they come forward and are qualified. (Applause) 

All these jobs are not given to people through the back door or in kitchens; advertisements go out and there is a tender board about it, local here, and people apply, we do not sit on these committees; the committees are local here, and we cannot have any consultant without she or he being allowed to go through this Central Tender Board.  So, we tender out the jobs.  Therefore -(Interruption) 

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  When we were debating the stabilisation funds, the taxes, the Minister assured us in the same manner that he is going to look into stabilisation funds; in the same vein, how do we know that the consultancy money will be saved! Will he not bite his cake and eat it at the same time after promising? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: I think, Mr Chairman, I should be allowed to develop my arguments. Now, at the question of stabilisation funds, I looked into it so much so that I reduced, in this last Budget the tax that has been imposed before the last Budget, on the coffee.  Secondly, the hon Member is seeking to impute my integrity, the I think I will take I want to give an undertaking, Sir, that what we say here as public officers, this we shall do. Now, going back to consultancies, one hon. Member said he was sorry that some local consultancy firms are fronting for foreign consultancy firms   Fronting? This is a shame! Why should they not come forward boldly and not front but stand for themselves? They have got the jobs; I know of cases and cases; the late hon. Kigozi he was time and again trying, in fact, to get local consultants from associations and by the time he died he had failed to do so.  So, let me say this, that this government will leave no stone unturned on this issue of consultancies, and at the same time I would like to appeal to hon. Members, especially, those who know that they have got the type of skills we want to a particular project, to come forward when the job has been advertised. (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the conviction and zeal with which the Minister is assuring this House of government’s intention to hire local consultants.  I just want a clarification from the hon. Minister as to whether this has been the policy hitherto or this is a change of policy.  Because time and again, year in, year out, we have got very good and convincing assurances on the Floor of this House, and yet an hon. Member a few minutes ago, Prof. Kagonyera stated, at least, one case he knew of himself being a trained veterinarian and a professor at that, and knew that these consultants hired government through those well qualified committees found somebody suitable only not qualified! Is this a change of heart; do we expect something new tomorrow, or more of the same? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, I would have loved to know who, actually, appointed this so-called consultant who was not incompetent? I do not know! Moreover, our regulations say that there should be bodies like the Central Tender Board other than the Ministry of Finance, which must tender out jobs and assess those who apply for them. Therefore, if the position is that even these people themselves on CTB or other committees who see through the applications, if the point is that they are themselves incompetent to select properly, now this is another issue, and this I can say we could also look into that, but this is not to say that the Ministry of Finance as such, or even government, deliberately refused to give jobs to Ugandans in favour of foreigners.  

Now, the issue of indigenous financial institutions.  This is something I would like to speak about not for a long time, and I will tell you why.  We are talking about banks in this country; the words used ‘financial institutions’ which is a cover word expression.  Talk about indigenous banks. If I where to tell you, and because of the public interest I should not say everything; but I want to say this that the banks the hon. Members are talking about their problem is not so much lack of capital in the first instance.  It is emphatically bad management; even if it was UShs 20 as a piece of capital you could manage it properly to make a profit.   The problem here with institutions is bad management! And one hon. Member has come forward and said we should bail these companies out.  Of course, we should, perhaps but let me tell you what is happening or likely to happen. One Tefe as a bank the hon. Member himself knows that there is a bank with which they associated, and I am not going to say anything about it. (Laughter and Interruption) 

MR SIBO:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify on this matter of the financial institutions, namely the indigenous banks; he is saying that the problem is management.  But, in fact, the Minister here told us in this House that these indigenous banks, if indeed all the banks, had poor capital and that he was giving these banks three years to capitalise themselves to the tune of Shs.500 million.  Indeed as we speak now he has said the three years are not available, it is only one year, and that was since last year. In addition, I do not know whether he is being pressurised, but he is importing external auditors from United States to come and audit some banks; I suppose it is some banks, because I have not been told that it is all - some banks! Under what kind of legal arrangement are these external auditors from United States coming to inspect these indigenous banks! Can the Minister tell us, if this is not really witch-hunting what is it?

MR MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr Chairman, I did indicate that hon. Members know something about a bank here, and I think I will not mention the bank - let me say this; it seems to me the hon. Member’s problem is why have external auditors, not so much being - well, they say witch-hunt; are they witch-hunting; are the auditors witch-hunting when they look through the accounts of an organisation?  They do not! What they do is to establish the financial soundness of an institution.  I would have been happier for the hon. Member to say, they have come, they have inspected, and we are sound in the country.  They came, they inspected these indigenous companies or banks and are not sound.  Let me tell how this problem arises; we passed here a financial institutions Bill, not Statute; and we made a difference between local institutions, banks and foreign institutions.  The local banks, UShs.500 million capital; foreign, double that amount.  But I want to say this that even in three years time, the local banks have been unable to raise these Shs.500 million, which we have by  -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Is it in order, and has the Minister ever seen a Ugandan who has been invited to audit the books of the City Bank in the United States.  Would it, therefore, be in order for us really to water down our independence as though we have no qualified auditors within the country. Is it, therefore in order, Mr Chairman? (Applause)


THE CHAIRMAN: It is in order, Mr Chairman?

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you Mr Chairman.  Now, on the question of indigenous institutions; the problem is that first of all the capital is very small in relation to what these institutions want to do; and this is a general problem of our economy.  You will find that about 80 per cent of our private companies, not banks, are owned by husbands and wives; two people, probably a son or a daughter! What do you find? They cannot raise the necessary capital to operate, they refuse to go public, they just hold on what they have.  Let me tell you something else; these banks with small capital as this, in a number of cases less than the statutory amount of UShs 500 million, they have gone and by through inside arrangement of borrowing, they have eaten up even the capital they put in, and now hon. Members are calling upon the State which is themselves and people outside this Chamber, to bail out these institutions.  First I said, yes, I think we should - why? Because of public policy; these banks were not bailed out, then the public’s confidence in the financial system could go; when that goes it the problem of the economy developing.  

So, in public interest we should do something, but there is another matter.  Someone for public reason, to make profits, sets up a company; it goes almost bankrupt then the tax payers of this country, who when the company is doing well getting profit they do not share - maybe, okay, through taxing.  But when this company goes down, the tax payers must come and bail out.  Now, this is the problem and we are thinking about it. When Tefe we had to pay out the depositors.  So, what I am saying is this, let the banks, indigenous or other ensure that management is efficient; let this practice of inside borrowing, particularly -(Interjections) 

Mr Chairman, I am morally very calm and very - but why do you not let me also to develop my argument; you have been talking and I have just been sitting there.  So, we are going to look in this; one of the ways of helping out these banks is to borrow funds from say, eight here or outside and give it to them.  But if you do that, who is responsible for paying back? As we are living now in posterity, this I think we shall do later on, sometime, this House must consider that policy than saying this.  We shall only do that upon conditions that those banks present and future can improve on their management.  This is excrement important; we cannot take on a policy of simply bailing out private organisations, as a matter of cause, because something is going to go wrong.

Now the question of unemployment, there is ways; employment as everybody knows is a function of economic activity. These economic activities made for the growth of the economy! So, the more we expand in the country, the greater will be job creation.  It is not necessarily this specific problem of finance, not employment expanding; in essence we could say so, but we have, I think, acquitted ourselves.  The micro-economic policy which we have put in place, the liberalisation of the economy, all these things - the monopolising, I think are enough to attract people, more people to invest in this economy, and they are doing so. But of course, when we get ten per cent rate of growth in this country, we must be saying, good next time it may be 12 per cent; and the economy is growing, the employment is growing, but you see we cannot have same proportion of educations, graduates come out of universities, as the jobs are being created; that is not possible! If we do that, then a number of our people will never go to school or university.  

So, the important thing is this, let also the type of education in this country somewhat be tackled, so that you see people come out not only to look after sheep, so many, they should be able to employ themselves, to generate employment themselves somewhat.  The question is, but they have no capital, someone said! Is it not really, in a sense a shame, that most of our richest people in this country - you go and find out - they are not graduates! How is that? In this country, they are not the graduates, and some of them have not even gone to ‘O’ level; what is it?  This is the question, I dare say is this; it is the question of entrepreneurship; the capacity to dare, the capacity to certain things; and there is a tendency, I know for most of us academics, most of us intellectuals, most of us professionals, we are not very good on that side of business creation.  However, Entandikwa is there; we feel for these young people, the Entandikwa is there for them to take off.  I am glad of this recommendation that as much as the state can collect the revenues every year, we should be able to put UShs 6 billion off-side for the Entandikwa. I am glad about that; however, so far we have not even appraised how the money is so far being used.  In the countryside, if one fails to push money in the economy, it is another for us to say it has been optimally used, shilling for shilling, this we shall know sometime.  What I am saying is this, that whereas we want money into the economy, these people to use it, you must also demand that money is used optimally.  

The question of divestiture.  I am surprised somehow.  First of all, we had a meeting down there, and this matter was flashed out by the same hon. Member, about the policy of divestiture, we came on this Floor, we brought a Bill, a Bill was debated; that is to say, the policy itself was passed by this House, still I find people denigrating it, as if it is the first time divestiture is being talking about!  I think we should like St. Paul who said, ‘when I swear that I will do something, I do it even if I may lose.’ 

Now, on the divestiture Statute, in the schedule 1, even companies to be divested, which these hon. Members passed! Now, they come and say, Finance, no do not. I think I take it that they did pass this with their eyes open, and for good reason.  One hon. Member says that it is dangerous to sell everything in order to make money.  One, we are not selling everything; two, we are not selling to make money; we are selling to save money.  I would like to tell hon. Members, if only you know the extent, which these companies are indebted, even now.  They are really a hemorrhage on the public purse, year by year, you say we should maintain them; I am putting it to you that if we continue doing so, we shall be taxing people in order to encourage these companies to exist. This is why we decided that because management is not good enough, let us sell them off.  When we sell them off, we do not sell them just anyhow, we intend that those who buy them, with their hearts in them, having spent money of them they can look after them because they want to make money. (Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify one thing; it appears that he is accusing the House of going back on what they, actually, passed here, as far as Divestiture Bill was concerned.  But would the Minister clarify whether in the schedules where various categories of companies were put - in different categories, it was revised in part there, whether they have brought this back.  Because we passed a list as we saw it at that time, but as time went on, they went on revising this list and putting on companies where were not in fact, supposed to be sold at all, and they are now the divestiture list.  Can he clarify whether this is true?  (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Another clarification, the Minister is blaming us for having and at the same time he has said that they are selling to save money.  Now, I want the Minister to clarify on the selling of the fish industry in Jinja.  When the fish industry cost 14 million dollars and it was sold for one million dollars; is that really saving money?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hold on, hon. Minister; hon. Lady, please.

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I seek further clarification on mismanagement. If the minister has found out that most of these parastatals, it is due to mismanagement and that is why they should be subjected to sell off.  Is it not cheaper to import somebody from outside, the way he has done to the Uganda Revenue Authority, who has proved to have done a very good job, and we save these parastatals from selling?  Mr Chairman, I seek that clarification.

MR KASAIJA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I am standing on a point of clarification; I would like the minister to clarify to this House as to whether he is following the law, especially, section 25 which says that the companies that have been divested, that as much as possible the government shall try to change those companies into public companies in order to increase or facilitate the participation of Ugandans in owning these companies.  Would he like to tell us as to whether he is following this law or not?

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, this is what I have been saying, Sir, that there is possibly an attempt to re-open on divestiture.  Now, as to the question of hon. lady here, she says why do we not import someone to cure this mismanagement in these corporations? The answer is, in some cases we have done, but for instance, go to Sembule Bank now, they are employing somebody, and I hope that people will not complain too much about foreign consultancy or assistance or whatever, but on the whole, we in this House took the policy of privatisation after we have looked at what could be done, and what was being done by these parastatals, how they were going to finance every almost year; give us money, and we took a decision to privatise; this is what we are doing, and I think you will not now go back on that decision because I think it was right.  

Now, concerning the issue of hon. Kasaija, he says section 25, that government as much as possible - we have tried as much and as possible, and the problem is this - Mr Chairman  -(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, government had proposed that we amend section 25 to include the phrase the Minister is repeating ‘as much as possible’ but that Amendment was never done and for that reason it should not be taken as being part of the Statute.  Is he in order, Mr Chairman, to keep on repeating it, to confuse the Members of this House?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is in order; proceed, please.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, if one hon. Member confuses the House and they object, I think, I should cancel out. Now, this difficulty you will find; many of these parastatals are really bankrupt; when they are bankrupt and you say first of all make them public companies, like to make the public to be bankrupt; call for those who want to take shares in these companies, I put it to you, Sir, they will not come forward.  This is our problem, that these in some cases are now trying to use to some extent proceeds of some divestiture to crop up some companies, then you can make them look nice, like girls who want to marry off, and then you can sell them.  At the present moment, whatever we do the picture is not very encouraging.  

Now, people are talking about UCB in the national interest, I want to appeal to hon. Members not to seek to say that all is well - I am not saying all is bad; but to give impression that all is well with UCB, therefore, the decision to privatise it is wrong. I think that one of these days, Sir, if you agree we shall have time.  I could give you one of the reports, recent reports, to see whether the decision we took last time was wrong or was right; but what I am saying is this, let us follow privatisation but always with this point in view. No one would like to sell off UCB to anyone at all! At one point - at some other occasion I have requested, I think it was Members of the Committee on the Economy; I said, please go out, get all those Members of the Assembly to start something, to start even units to come to purchase these companies whenever we announce them - whenever we advertise them.  Do they not see them, they see them! Sometimes we advertise three times; recently we went out of way, we gave a company to a local group of people, about three times they bend backwards - we have every interest to sell to ourselves, Ugandans; but please, Ugandans, especially, the leaders do something about it.  Let us be able to find a way of getting the necessary funds to be able to purchase these companies.  

Mr Chairman, although I really would like to keep on being interrupted - at least, I have nothing written; when I came here I just tried to react and I keep on being interrupted.  I think it is very, very difficult for me -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like the Minister to clarify the statement he has made, that with UCB all is not well, and then he said I am not all is lost or something like that.  Because, the Managing Director of UCB has demonstrated that UCB is profitable, is viable is doing well; and, this gentleman is an appointee of the Minister, okay? So, really, I think, this House would benefit from clarification from the Minister whether really UCB  -(Interjection) or has he puts it or is not well, what he really means by that statement or is not well. 

And the other point is that really the House would like the Minister to be a categorist and inform the House and the country the manner he is going to use in privatizing UCB. The Minister has dodged that point it is the one of the points in the report and that point I think is very important for the Minister to actually clarify.

CAPT. GASATURA: Thank you again, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Minister has showed flexibility that where certain companies have not been doing well and they could help they have imported manpower such as Sembule and Nile Bank which of course a lot of Members wondered when those became parastatals.  In fact, a question lingered in my mind if that operation was good for the goods why not for the Ganda? If hired, management can do good for Sembule and Nile under the hand and direction of the hon. Minister why not UCB. We the people here seated in this House representing the masses still we do own UCB we are speaking for our people he has not attempted even demonstrate how he is going to collect his taxes from Kotido and Kapchorwa and Bushenyi.  When these banks are restricted in Kampala alone, we would like the hon. Minister to touch on some this silent element.

Finally, on another clarification.  The hon. Minister pushes us against the wall that we have forgotten the very statute we passed and when it is shown to him that a list was attached and they have deviated from the list and it is in his good judgement seeing the spirit of the House has gone on to do a, b, c and the Members are - we ask you in good judgement and wise if you want to bring the statute for amendment, therefore, if he continues he would breaking the law and I doubt that is really the intension of the Minister.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to take this occasion to make the views of the people very, very clear to the Minister, I hope the Minister by now does understand what we feel like the House has demonstrated very clearly not now but for the last one month the Government’s decision in privacy to privatize UCB is not according to the decisions of this House this has been demonstrated very, very clearly and if any decision is to be taken the bill should be brought to this House for reconsideration I think this is the desire of the House.  A question was put to the Minister whether UCB was on the list of privatization right from the beginning the answer is no, many more things which were on list one which were to be reserved by this House and by Government after passing the statute in the secrecy under the chairmanship of the Minister for Finance they have decided to short-cut undermine the House and they are busy privatizing in our name the property of Uganda against our will, I would like to say the House is will to say please, Sir, Mr Minister let us revisit the decision.  Thank you very much.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification regarding Africans applying for some of these assets.  I am well informed that ‘Bulangiti Company’ which happens to be an African company had applied for one of the assets which now belong to Madhvani having joined up hands with some other African groups to take over that company, but these people had never been considered.  They applied for Madhvani group of companies for the sugar factory in Kakira having joined up hands with several other African companies but then they were not considered at all.  They wanted to buy the shares which belonged to the Government in that company but then they were not considered at all because in one of your remarks you said as much as possible where Africans apply for some of these assets or shares they are given the priority, but here is a case where these people were not even considered.  So, can I have a bit of clarification on this, Mr Chairman? 

Note: Power went off.

