Thursday, 15 September 2011

Parliament met at 04.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Global Junior Primary School represented by hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament, Mukono Municipality. They have come to observe the proceedings. Kindly, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2011

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2011” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill has been read for the first time. The procedure with these Appropriation Bills is clear. When these Bills are brought, the rules that apply are that we immediately move to the second reading of the Bill.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2011

4.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2011” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am advised that not all Members have received copies of the Bill. (Hon. Wadri rose_) Would you like to move the motion for suspension? 

4.50
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, knowing very well that the Appropriation Bill does not follow the normal procedure of enactment of other laws but that it goes through a short cut in the sense that as soon as the first reading of the Bill is done and tabled, it does not have to go to the appropriate committee but it goes to the second stage of the committee, I would like to move that the appropriate provisions of our Rules of Procedure, which apply to the other normal enactment processes, be suspended for the purpose of considering this Appropriation Bill. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, under the provisions of rule 133(7), a motion has been moved for the suspension of rules requiring Bills to be forwarded to committees before the second reading. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2011” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded.

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for the authorisation of public expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the sum of Shs 8,902,187,020,000 for the Financial Year ending 30 June 2012.

This Bill is supported by the Certificate of Financial Implications made under Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2011. It is duly certified and has been examined as required under that section. 

The Bill has the following objectives:
1.	To efficiently and effectively allocate public funds for expenditure in order to achieve the desired levels of economic growth, employment and economic transformation for prosperity. The estimated recurrent expenditure for this year is Shs 10,377,497,566 of which – 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am hearing figures being read of the final budget process, which is very crucial and I do not have a copy myself and neither do my neighbours. (Laughter) I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to continue listening to the mover of the motion without us participating in the process.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, is it true that many of you do not have copies of the Bill? (Interjections) The information I have is that few copies have come but then there has been a situation – maybe Sergeant-at-Arms could order for a lead car to go and clear traffic for the car that is bringing the Bill? I am told it is stuck at the Clock Tower. Meanwhile, we could proceed. (Interjections) Hon. Members, in that case, we stay the proceedings on the Bill and we move on to the next item then we will come back to it later.

MOTION FOR THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $50 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR GENERAL BUDGET SUPPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT POLICY OPERATION

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION)(Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, on the Floor of Parliament is a proposal to borrow US $50 million from the International Development  Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for general budget support for the financial sector development policy operation. This proposal was laid before Parliament and was presented to the Committee on National Economy and discussed. Therefore, there is a report on this motion to borrow and the committee chairperson will present it accordingly. I beg to move.

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present a report on the request by Government to borrow SDR 30.9 million, the equivalent of US $50 million from IDA of the World Bank Group for general budget support for the Financial Sector Development Policy Credit.

The committee on page 1 used the methodology whereby we interfaced with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the parliamentary committees related to the budget, and finance. We did also request the ministry of finance to give to us a report on loans, grants and guarantees for the last financial year and we availed copies to all colleagues through their pigeonholes. I now lay on the Table a copy of the report on loans, grants and guarantees by the new finance minister, hon. Maria Kiwanuka as per 08 June 2011.

The committee also engaged the ministry to present their own debt strategy and we have requested it to avail enough copies for all Members since this is a new Parliament. But I will lay on the Table a copy of the debt strategy, which we got a presentation on. We further had an interface with Members of the Budget Committee to understand the sustainability of the debt and at an appropriate stage on the Order Paper, after the budget process, the committee will give a comprehensive presentation on that subject matter. The minister should also be able to make a presentation then. I also want to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee and responses to the questions, which were given to the ministry.

I will try to summarise the report. The first page ends with the background, which talks about Government’s efforts to reform the financial sector in establishing a sound and profitable system. These reforms, aligned with the National Development Plan 2010/2011 to 2014/2015, which is now being implemented. 

Page 2, regarding the financial sector reforms, contains Government’s economic reform programmes since the late 1980S. The first generation of financial sector economic reforms focused on the liberalisation of the financial markets, institutional reforms, to the prudential regulatory framework and the divestiture of Government owned financial institutions. These reforms were supported notably by Financial Sector Adjustment Credit, which focused on strengthening Bank of Uganda and the banking system as a whole, to increase the efficiency of financial intermediation and contribute to sustainable growth and mobilisation of domestic savings over the long term. These reforms have led to a stronger and more efficient financial sector, which performs relatively well on a number of crucial tasks.

Mr Speaker, you will realise that unlike other projects, specific financing – where we get money, for example for roads or health, this is budget support to the pool and it is supposed to imply that our financial sector is trusted to have the allocation efficiency required with the NDP and the Government priorities and that is why I am saying that this is in line with the NDP on the next paragraph.

The Financial Sector Development Credit Overview

The proposed development policy credit would be the first in a series of the two programmatic single-tranche credits. These credits will support the implementation and consolidation of Government’s financial sector reforms as outlined in the NDP. The NDP outlines the constraints of performing among others to be:
i.	High risk borrower contributing to high interest rates;
ii.	Narrow range of assets acceptable as collateral;
iii.	High interest rate spreads by regional standards attributed to higher operating costs and credit risks;
iv.	Weak competition among financial institutions;
v.	Old legislations that need to be reviewed or repealed, and lack of sector-specific laws as is the case for the leasing and mortgage sector;
vi.	Limited insurance options;
vii.	Under-developed capital markets and limited financing options;
viii.	Absence of medium and long-term financing including equity financing for small medium enterprises;
ix.	Absence of medium and long-term financing for agriculture; 
x.	Low coverage of banking services in rural areas and a poor saving culture; and 
xi.	Weak enforcement of contracts that may limit growth of the financial sector.

As you will find out later, this financing conditions Government to streamline the policy challenges, the legal gaps and the necessary institution building to make sure that the economy is structurally performing –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, just a short interruption - in the strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Wambabya Primary School represented by hon. Julius Bigirwa, Member of Parliament for Buhanguzi constituency, Hoima District. (Applause) They have come to observe the proceedings. Join me in welcoming them. 

MR MUKITALE: I thank you. You will realise that among the conditions set, some of these policies like the PPP and Bills like mortgages were passed by the Eighth Parliament and so, by the time the loan was negotiated, some of these had not been achieved and in the report, later, you will realise that among the prior action activities, there are those where we have achievements and there are those where the Ninth Parliament will have to help Government to achieve.

On page 4 – I will now try to summarise after giving the background. Among the policy areas which interventions of this financing is targeting, is supporting the development of markets for term financing – term financing normally refers to long-term financing. And among others to mobilise this kind of funds, the pension system reform – you are aware that the last Parliament did work on the regulator and we are now working on the liberalisation.  

6.12	Developing the housing finance market - colleagues, you are aware of the need for an affordable housing scheme. 

6.1.3	Developing Public Private Partnerships framework for infrastructure financing - you are aware that we have a PPP policy and we are waiting for the Bill, which is a challenge.  

6.2 	Improving Access to Financial Services
6.2.1	Improving the legal and regulatory framework for the financial sector. We have been talking about the Tier 4 micro-finance regulation. 

6.2.2 	Strengthening financial consumer protection and financial literacy. 

6.2.3 	Establishment of a quick commercial dispute resolution system. 

6.2.4	Development of a National Payment System.

On page 8, the IDA financing facility terms and conditions are the figure as we have already put it. The loan maturity is 40 years, including 10 years of grace and the service charge is 0.75 percent per annum on disbursed and outstanding balances. Payment date is 15 June and 15 December in each year. 

Prior Actions for Funding 

The following prior actions for this funding were agreed between the Government of Uganda and the World Bank:
i.	Approval by Parliament of Uganda of the Retirements Benefits Regulatory Authority, which was done as I have mentioned;
ii.	Submission to Cabinet of the Retirement Benefits for Sector Liberalisation Bill, which we can get an update on, from the Executive;
iii.	Undertaking an independent assessment of assets and liabilities of the NSSF;
iv.	Completion of evaluation of the Public Service Pension Scheme to assess the financial viability;
v.	Establishment of non-statutory unit within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with the responsibility of PPPs;
vi.	Issuance of regulations for implementing the Mortgage Act. You are aware we passed the Bill but we do not have the regulations;
vii.	Presentation to the Cabinet of amendments for the Financial Institutions Act;
viii.	Launching of the small claims court procedure; and
ix.	Issuance of Uganda consumer protection guidelines.

So, the committee on page 9 took an effort to benchmark and as you can see in that table, we have given a status report on the prior actions 1, 2, 3 up to 8. In No. 1, the review took place in March 2011 – Mr Speaker, should I go through the whole review? Colleagues have the table. They can see what challenges we have either on Government side for the Bills which have not come here - and where we have passed Bills for the regulations, which are not yet here and those that we are yet to handle as the Ninth Parliament.

Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be responsible for implementing and monitoring progress under the programme in collaboration with the Bank of Uganda. The finance sector reform will be monitored through Government monitoring framework for its National Development Plan and as provided for under the National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy (NIMES). The Bank of Uganda will also be directly involved in monitoring as part of its follow up of the Financial Markets Development Plan.

I mentioned earlier that this not being project specific financing, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has to work with the Bank of Uganda, the ministry of finance, the OPM and the other committees related to make sure that there is follow up to ensure that these outputs, institutional policy reforms and legal improvements are done.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that in a number of developing countries, budget support has evolved into a fairly well established aid modality, with positive results at least regarding donor coordination and alignment to country strategies and systems. In addition, early experiences and evaluations confirm that budget support can be an effective instrument when it comes to strengthening the quality of policy dialogue, transparency and accountability in the budget management and enhancing donor coordination. 

However, a central challenge is the need to develop adequate evaluation methods for budget support to guard against the possibility for these funds being used inefficiently or other purposes other than those intended. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development ensures that there is credible will to implement the agreed financial sector reforms and also ensure that measurable outputs are put in place that will facilitate Parliament in evaluating the effectiveness of this budget support loan. The committee of finance, as I have already mentioned, should as well regularly update Parliament on the progress of these reforms.

The committee has observed that Government has made substantial progress in reforming Uganda’s financial sector landscape, save for the recent challenges. A number of prudential and institutional reforms have been implemented in the financial sector with commendable success. However, major constraints still persist and full benefits associated with a well functioning financial sector have not yet been realised.

The committee observed that NSSF monopoly over mandatory pensions hindered the emergence of alternative schemes and products. The committee commends Government for the progressive opening up of this market as a result of enactment of the Uganda Retirements Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill as this market is now expected to foster financial market and development.

The committee observed that Government’s commitment to provide public sector employees with unfunded Public Service Pension Scheme had resulted in a large implicit pension debt. New arrears are being accumulated every year due to under-budgeting of Government’s commitments. The envisaged reforms of the Public Service Pension Scheme would alleviate pressure on the government’s financing needs while also contributing to the development of the local capital market, which is much needed through the gradual transition of fully funded public sector pensions as suggested in the reforms. 

The committee recommends that the Government should fast track the submission of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Bill to Parliament, which will lead to the emergence of the regulated, competitive and sustainable pension industry to cater for both the mandatory and voluntary pension savings.

The committee observed that the adoption of the Public Private Partnership policy and establishment of a non statutory central PPP unit in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will serve to enhance the capacity of Government to successfully manage the risks associated with a growing number and value of the Public Private Partnerships. 

The committee recommends that the Government should expeditiously submit the PPP Bill to Parliament for its subsequent scrutiny in order for its timely enactment into law.

I would like to mention here; even when we already have the policy, most Members of Parliament have not been furnished with the policy. I think it would be proper that Members are furnished with the policy as we await the Bills from the Executive. This will lead to increase of the private sector investment in public infrastructure and related services and development of Government capacity to complete and manage effectively the relevant PPPs, let alone the regulation, which has been lacking in the non-strategic segregated interventions we earlier had.

The committee further observed that the local market for term financing remains underdeveloped. This posed a major constraint to the financing of much needed infrastructure investment and severely curtailed the development of finance for the housing market. The investment in infrastructure has repeatedly been identified as the major constraint to economic development.

The committee observed that obstacles for housing finance development are present at every stage of the lending process. There are some legal and regulatory constraints related to the implementation of the new Mortgage Act and uncertainties regarding the Land Act (Amendment) Bill. The implementation of the Mortgage Act is pending the adoption of the regulations, as I had earlier put it. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should expeditiously finalise the signing of the regulations to facilitate the implementation of the good Act in place, without regulations. This will further show commitment to resolving issues associated with the Land (Amendment) Act to clarify ownership issues with the view to facilitating land development in general and housing finance in particular plus strengthening the consumer protection rules. This actually also touches the much awaited comprehensive land policy. These will improve confidence in the mortgage market and foster mortgage market growth leading to affordable mortgage products and low cost housing units.

The committee observed that the Small Claims Court is one of the things that a lot of businessmen and ordinary people in Uganda have been waiting for, since it does away with the high cost of litigation and shortens the legal process, which can drag on for years considering the huge number of cases that judges have to dispense with.

The committee observed the persistent low access to finance for the majority of Uganda’s population especially in the rural areas. The divide between urban and rural areas is significant. Through the Rural Financial Services Strategy, emphasis has been put on having strong SACCOs in every sub-county. However, much remains to be done in promoting a saving culture. These SACCOs are meant to deliver to make them sustainable and for greater financial inclusion.

The committee also observed that agricultural finance is still limited and does not reach the majority of the population. Some of the larger farmers get some funding, but they do not even get long-term funding, which matches the gestation period of the sector. Subsistence farmers, who are the majority, get very little short-term funding, mainly through micro-finance institutions. The collateral requirements of banks are still a hindrance to financing and the potential for leasing has not been fully developed. 

The committee recommends the establishment of a regulatory framework of the Tier 4 segment of Uganda’s Micro Finance Industry (MFIs) that will be cost-effective in protecting the savings of the poor and in ensuring that weak MFIs do not undermine the stability of the financial system. 

The committee also observed the slow progress in the computerisation of the land register and yet this would address difficulties of obtaining land titles and information for facilitating the expansion of financial services towards lending through the banking system. 

Conclusion

The committee has noted and appreciates Government’s efforts in deepening the financial sector by undertaking reforms, including the pension sector reforms, to help provide long term investment funds, and development in the mortgage industry. 

The Uganda financial system is stable and growing but also small as related to its peers, it is under-developed and not able to fully support economic growth. The Government has made remarkable progress in laying the foundations for a sound and profitable financial system. The key challenge facing the Government is to create conditions that would lead to increased inter-mediation and, therefore, a greater role for the financial sector in supporting economic development.

The main objective of this Financial Sector Development Policy Credit is to help build a more efficient, robust and deeper financial sector, which can support broad-based private sector growth. Much remains to be done to increase the depth and the breadth of the financial sector in Uganda in order to contribute to higher economic growth and increase poverty reduction. The country needs higher levels of financial experience, better resource allocation, higher GDP per capital growth and faster rate of poverty reduction in order to achieve a sustainable increase in financial deepening. This remains an important goal for Uganda’s development agenda.

As I conclude, the committee has rightly observed that unlike other, project specific financing, this is more related to policy refinement, legal refinement and institutional building to the financial sector, which we badly need, including mortgage and pension. We have also mentioned the need for the sessional committees of Parliament to always do more oversight at implementation because our role as Parliament is not implementation but using our sessional committees there is a lot we can achieve. That is why I laid on the Table, on the very onset, the performance of all the loans as per the closing of the last financial year. This should be routine because the problem is not necessarily the borrowing - by the time the budget was passed, we had agreed that close to 24 percent will be borrowed; but the challenge is where is that 24 percent put? That is what the sessional committees should be instrumental in following up. 

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the Government’s request to borrow SDR 30.9 million, equivalent to US $50 million, from the IDA of the World Bank for general budget support for financing the First Financial Sector Development Policy Credit. 

I must make a correction here, the last appendix of signatures; the printer received the earlier page of signature. I want to lay on the Table the updated one; the words should have been photocopied because only five Members did not sign. I beg to submit. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a clear motion for a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow US $50 million from the Internal Development Association of the World Bank Group for general budget support to the financial sector development policy operation. The issues outlined are fairly clear. At this moment I ask the Opposition to give their input.

5.31
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of the committee and the minister of finance. I basically seek clarification. On page 8, item No. 7, IDA loan financing terms and conditions, you have stated in (iii) that the service charge is 0.75 percent per annum on disbursed and outstanding funds. 

Therefore, I seek a simple clarification: if today the Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi walks to Stanbic Bank and signs up for a loan and he gets a loan of Shs 10 billion but the bank says, “We do not have all the money. We shall give you Shs 5 billion, and you will get the balance after one year.” So I want to find out whether it is logical for the Prime Minister to be charged for the undisbursed amount. This is a colonial mentality that this country has continued to accept from the World Bank. Other countries like Nigeria and Ghana have objected to it. Why should we sign a loan and we are charged for undisbursed funds? If you walk into a bank here and the bank does not give you all the money, do they charge you? 

I want to ask this Government to renegotiate this so that we are only charged for the disbursed funds. I say this because this loan, if you go to page 9, there are terms and conditions, although the chairman said that this is an untied loan. It is tied to several Government reforms. And some of these reforms cannot take place within a period of twelve months. 

In the previous Parliament, we passed the Retirement Benefit Regulatory Authority but the Government has not even been able to put the institution in place or to operationalise it. Now the World Bank may say, “Because you have not fulfilled the conditions and terms of financing, we are not disbursing the loan”. Yet at the end of the day, they are charging us for the undisbursed amount; from the day we approve this loan. That is a very dangerous colonial mentality and I call upon you, hon. Members, to pass a resolution to reject it in totality. 

Secondly, the chairman has stated in the heading thus “This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow SDR 39.9 million, equivalent to US $50 million from the IDA, World Bank for General Budget Support,” but when you read on, you realise that the money is basically tied to the financial reforms. So the information I would like to hear from you – because you made it categorically clear even on the last page – is whether  the main objective of this fast financial sector credit policy is to help build a more efficient, robust and deeper financial sector or not. How much of this money is going to help each reform being proposed? We need clarification on that. Is it going to support agriculture in Omolo County, Tororo County, Kabong or it is already tied to something? We need that information because there is a contradiction. 

And for my colleagues, if you read the Budget that we are about to pass, you will realise Shs 764 billion is for debt payment, part of which is interest and service fees for the loan. If you look at the document that the chairperson laid on the Table – and I would like to request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – in the past as a House we guaranteed loans to the private sector - some of the players in the private sector have been paying that money back to Government. 

Parliament approved money from donors, but some commercial banks have continued to hold the money instead of declaring it. I want to tell you, with authority, that if you look at that book, there is some interest that we are supposed to pay back, the money is not indicated. For example, DFCU Bank has some of the money under the APEX Fund, which has not been declared to the Consolidated Fund. That also applies to other commercial banks that participated in APEX I and II –(Interjections)– yes, I am speaking with authority. The Government should lay on the Table information on all the loans guaranteed to the private sector and how those loans have moved from each commercial bank that participated in that project back to the Consolidated Fund. That is because we are paying!

The issue of the financial sector reforms should be taken in mind; it should not only benefit the international institutions. Bank of Uganda created a reform to require all commercial banks to move the minimum reserve from Shs 5 billion to Shs 25 billion. This stifles the growth of indigenous commercial banks, which leaves only Stanbic Bank, DFCU Bank, Orient Bank? –(Interjections)– not Orient Bank – please, do not put words in my mouth. (Laughter) With all the due respect, even Orient Bank cannot open up branches because of the limitations by the Bank of Uganda. 

So, I request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - the reforms – even Kigezi National Bank cannot expand because Bank of Uganda moved the requirement on minimum deposits with it from Shs 5 billion to Shs 25 billion. So, the liquidity that the banks would have to lend has now become limited. That leaves only Stanbic, Barclays, and Standard Chartered banks, which are foreign-owned in the market to spread to rural areas. 

What is required in the financial and banking sectors is efficiency. The Government already took up that reform by introducing the Credit Reference Bureau system. So, why should Bank of Uganda stifle these indigenous banks from growing? I think some of these actions are taken by Bank of Uganda without the involvement of Government. I need that clarification so that we can support this loan.

In conclusion, the Auditor-General, in his report of 2010/11, reported that the Bank of Uganda account has been overdrawn by Shs 3.18 trillion, which is about one third of the national budget, but without the authority of this Parliament. This is a total violation of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, which allows Government in times of problems to overdraw to the tune of 18 percent. This one third I have just talked about moves to 25 percent. That lowers our level of credit reference internationally. If we were at level A, we now get down to B. Thank you very much.

5.40
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and his committee members for a good report submitted. However, I have got one or two issues on which to seek clarification. But before I get there, I want to point out the fact that the chairperson laid on the Table a booklet from the minister of finance indicating how efficient we have been in using the loans that we have borrowed before.

It has been the culture in this country to borrow and to excessively borrow without even putting to use the borrowed money –(Interjections)– yes, because I do vividly recall that in the Seventh Parliament, we borrowed for the construction of 21 bridges. We have continued to pay interest on this loan yet no single bridge has been constructed anywhere as a product of the loan. This is something very serious! 

I have not had a look at that report but I would be interested because even when you look at the Auditor-General’s report, you realise that the second major issue concerns international debts. The biggest proportion of these debts has been acquired as a result of borrowing for which the purpose may be very convincing, but with no trace of the results. Some of these monies that we have borrowed are either in our books of accounts or still with the institutions from which we have borrowed.

Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that a good document like the one the chairman has presented should come here so that when we get this money, it is put to proper usage.

The other issue on which I would like to seek clarification from the chairman and the committee members relates –(Mr Nasasira rose_)– even before I seek clarification on bridges? Okay, you were the life Minister of Works –(Laughter)– so you tell us.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, my former colleague emeritus has taken this emeritus thing too far. He said that I was the life minister then; have I died? Anyway, let me give you some of my institutional memory. I think the hon. Kassiano Wadri knows very well that the money was borrowed for bridges in the areas of Arua, Koboko and Oraba but the Government decided that instead of building bridges on a murram road, it was more important that the road from Vurra to Arua, to Koboko and Oraba be tarmacked. Doing that road needed a new alignment. And it would have been stupid to build a bridge and then later, when the road passes somewhere else that bridge remains hanging in the bush. That is why we suspended that project and money was eventually negotiated to be diverted somewhere else. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A few friends were of the opinion that probably, I had had a slip of the tongue. No! When I said life minister then, I meant it; he is the one who has served longest in that docket as minister for works. That is the reason I said “life minister then”, and not line minister. I was sure and was selective of the usage of those words.   

Having said that, my friend has even tied his legs; the bridge he is talking about is from Vurra; and in any case from Vurra to Arua, there is no bridge that you cross. From Arua to Oraba, you cross bridges but there were other bridges on Arua-Yumbe-Moyo road. Are you also telling me that those roads are on programme for tarmacking? Are you telling me so? And how about those which are in the greater North, in the Acholi sub-region? Are you telling me that you are going to tarmac all those roads? And in any case, if you were not prepared, why did you go ahead to borrow money if you knew that you first needed to tarmac the roads because as a country, we are losing. That is the point I am making. We are losing in that we are paying interest on those loans. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, my senior brother, hon. Wadri, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that one of the bridges for which money was borrowed and not constructed is called Kia-kia Bridge. It is on the road from Pakwach to Rhino Camp, Obongi then Moyo. There is no plan indicated to tarmac that road. Maybe it is a dream. So, if you are saying the bridge should wait because of tarmacking, what about the Kia-kia Bridge, which is on the Pakwach-Rhino Camp and Obongi road? This is the information I am giving. 

MR NASASIRA: I thought I should give information because I don’t want my friend, Chief Whip emeritus, to keep misleading the House. I told you that when there were those changes, the credit had to be renegotiated. And when you are renegotiating the credit, the whole package is renegotiated.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I wish now to go to the substantive issue that I needed clarification on. When you look at pages 4 to 9, the committee has elaborately shown us the various areas, which are going to be covered by this loan if we agree to secure it. I am very interested in the committee sharing with us information, if any, as to how much of this money is going into these sectors because in other loans that we have secured, we approve them on the basis of full knowledge that out of this overall amount, this fraction or amount is going to be used for a, b, c, d so that at the end of the day, we are able to put Government on check to be accountable. Otherwise, as of now we run the risk of obtaining this loan of US $50 million and it may be taken to say ministry of finance and dumped there and the technocrats begin playing around with it depending on which minister talks. 

So, can you tell us how much of this money is going into these sectors so that we know what we are approving this loan for? That way, we can then be able to use it as a yardstick of measuring success and failure. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.49
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the ministry for this effort. We definitely know that Uganda cannot grow without borrowing. I have looked at the report of the committee and studied it and I don’t know whether as a Parliament we can pass this loan request for three reasons. 

Firstly, this report does not show us what this money is going to be put into. What are the actions that have been put in place where the money is going to be targeted? It is not there. 

As hon. Wadri pointed out, I have tried to read all these pages and all I get are the objectives: to improve efficiency among other things but it does not tell me what we are going to do in NSSF [MR KAJARA: “Information.”] can I develop my point and then I give you way because you cannot give me information before I have given you way? I wish you had given that information in the report; it would have made it easier for us. (Laughter)

I am talking about what I am seeing and reading. They talk about Private Public Partnerships and developing the policy. Can the ministry tell me how we spend millions of dollars in developing a policy for Private Public Partnerships? You talk about the establishment of a dedicated, central, non-statutory – what are you going to do with the money? Because when you talk about policy, you don’t have to borrow millions of dollars to develop policies. We have a ministry that is well staffed with experts. Are you going to use all this money for engaging experts or consultants? If you are going to engage consultants, can we know how much of the US $50 million is going for consultants? How much is going for computers? How much is going for seminars? That way we can understand it but right now, they have just given us words. 

Mr Speaker, I want you to address your mind to this thing. They say it will do this and then we will go and do this; it will strengthen the policy but they have not specified that say, US $10 million will go into this, train staff, engage experts – they have not told us anything. Can we as a Parliament pass this request [MR KAJARA: “Information.”] before I get his information, I want to let you know that personally, I prefer budget support borrowing because it gives Members of Parliament opportunity to scrutinise how the money is utilised. It is a better way of understanding what we are borrowing for. Loans that have strings attached are sometimes difficult for us to track but budget support loans can be tracked. Let us know how much of this money is going where so that we, as parliamentarians, can help you track this money. Otherwise, this document has told us nothing. So, can you now provide me with information? (Laughter) 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you. Mr Speaker, part of the information I want to give is that this loan was discussed by the committee. It was discussed in Mukono where hon. Cecilia Ogwal was present and we did say that these funds that we are borrowing are not going to finance any of the components of the financial sector development strategy. The funds are going for budget support for this financial year, which she supports very much.

The information I want to give is that these funds being sought have already been budgeted for and allocated in the 2011/2012 budget, which is due to be approved now. These funds have been part of the resources that the Government has allocated to various priority programmes like our domestic revenue has been allocated. Some of the funds are going to roads and many other sectors. 

If the Members listened, we did say that this loan is for budget support. This means that money is put in a pool of Government, which allocates it to different sectors. On the assumption that this loan is going to be approved, we have allocated this money in the different sectors in the current budget we are talking about. There is need for us to pass this loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will use my prerogative to differ debate on this motion and we will deal with the Budget now that the Appropriation Bills are here so that we can make progress. We will come back to this later. 

MR SABITI: I have heard the minister of finance say that part of this money has been allocated in this budget. If part of this money is in this budget and they are asking us to approve now, are we not going to have a problem?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My directive for now is that we suspend debate on this; we will deal with the matter that was on the Order Paper first. We stayed it because the Bills were not here. I am looking at the trend this debate is taking; it is going to eat into our time of passing the Budget and the Appropriation Bill and I do not like that to happen today. Can we now proceed from where we stopped with the Bill? 

MRS OGWAL: I beg to move that we suspend debate on the report from the Committee on National Economy until we get the details of how we are going to utilise the US $50 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just ruled that we suspend debate on that and when we come back to it, you can then move that motion.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, the guidance I want from you is that the chairperson and the minister indicate that the loan is part of the figure we are going to appropriate. In a situation that we have not yet approved the loan request, are we going to be guided when we reach that sector to approve, excluding the loan request? Once we pronounce ourselves on the figure including the loan which is not approved by Parliament, then I do not know how we will have proceeded. Are we going to exclude the loan amount when we reach that particular Vote?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, even some of the money that we are going to appropriate has not yet been collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority. Some more borrowings are going to finance this Budget. Can we move forward? The minister had spoken about the Bill and we are going to the Committee Stage. Hon. Minister, wind up the speech and we move.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2011

MR KAJARA: There are four clauses in this Appropriation Bill and a schedule, which lays out the current expenditure as well as the capital expenditure. The provisions that are in this schedule have gone through the scrutiny of the sessional committees, reports have been generated and discussed by Parliament and adopted with amendments.

The draft estimates by expenditure category were discussed and amended and passed by this Parliament. Yesterday, we supplied the estimates of recurrent and development expenditure. That is why we are tabling this Bill to provide for authority of public expenditure from this Consolidated Fund. The sum as I stated earlier is Shs 10,323,750,826,000 seven hundred and fifty million, eight hundred and twenty six thousand shillings of which  Shs 892,187,020,000 is for appropriation while Shs 1,421,563,806,000 is for statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund. Out of the stated Shs 892,187,020,000 for appropriation, Shs 3,579,802,116 is for recurrent expenditure while Shs 5,322,384,904,000 is for development expenditure. 

I, therefore, beg to move that this House considers and approves the Appropriation Bill, 2011 to enable Government execute the Budget in accordance with recommendations, in accordance with the mandate of Government and the approval of Parliament so that the people of Uganda can get the required services. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is an Appropriation Bill. As you are aware, under our rules, ordinary Bills cannot come to Parliament until the lapse of 14 days upon publication in the gazette but this rule does not apply to the Appropriation Bills under rule 114(7). That therefore means that we already know that the Bill was just printed today and was read for the first time today. Therefore, it had no chance to go to the committee. So, we will not have any report from any committee. The specifics are already discussed in the general discussion that we had in the ministerial policy statements, in the reports that we presented by the committees and also in the discussions we had here when we were doing supply and these are the figures that have come back to us. I, therefore, propose that we put the question and then move to a stage where we need to look at the specifics of the figures and then move from there. If that is acceptable, I will put the question because what has been presented here are just principles of the Bill; the actual tabulation of figures is in the Bill and that is not at this stage; that will come when we get to the Committee Stage. 

6.07
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I have no objection to what has gone on with the figures and with the presented Bill, but as a matter of principle, I have a proposal to Members of Parliament of this House. Seeing how much effort we have put in during the Budget preparations and the Budget process up to this point, and seeing what happens after here, until we come back at the end of the year to find that a lot has gone under the carpet and has got lost without delivering the services that were intended; and as a way of supporting and augmenting the existing agencies and bodies that we have put in place through this Parliament, of fighting corruption, I want to propose that as a matter of principle, all the Vote holders, which are provided for in this Act commit themselves or this Parliament guides that every Vote holder puts one percent of their Vote for protecting the 99 percent that is normally under threat. The report under the survey says that for public funds, we lose 20 to 50 percent of the budgeted money because it does not go to where it is supposed to go. 

Just as a matter of principle, for every Vote as it is, instead of losing 20 to 50 percent, we should look into it and put aside one percent with an internal mechanism - if one percent is put aside, it would help every Vote to protect the money that we are budgeting for and I will be moving a motion at a later stage – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Gen. Tumwine for accepting this clarification that I would like to seek from him. Honourable colleague, you will appreciate that in every ministry, there are institutions to ensure smooth management of resources. That is the reason why we have both internal and external auditors and that exactly is their work. They are fully paid by the taxpayers of this country and among those other budget lines that we have even voted, there is their salary. The clarification I wish to seek from the honourable colleague is as to whether he will want to come up with a parallel institution apart from that which is already in place and as to whether this will not have legal implications, and as to whether this really is the appropriate time for us to begin conceiving such an idea? I seek your clarification on that, colleague. 

GEN. TUMWINE: I think that is genuine need for clarification. One, on whether the internal and external auditors are not enough is a result - much as the Auditor-General’s reports come - it is the role of every citizen, according to Article 17(1)(i), to combat and fight corruption and stop wastage and loss of public property. It is a post mortem and our role is to prevent, deter, detect and enforce and there isn’t enough, according to the present situation, to do that before the Auditor-General’s report comes out. And the enforcement bodies for anti-corruption are not well facilitated with enough budgets. So, in each Vote, we should look into its internal mechanisms to see how one percent could be put towards guarding against corruption on a day-to-day basis before you go for a post mortem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the point is made. The point of principle that he has stated, I am sure, has been understood by everybody. I understood it myself but he says he is going to bring a motion at an appropriate stage and it cannot be brought at this stage. Why don’t we deal with it when the motion comes? Members, we agreed that it is a clear motion. I now put the question that the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2011 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that when the minister was making his summary statement on the Bill, some figures came up which seemed to be contrary to the figures I read yesterday and particular reference is made to the statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund. You remember I first read a figure of Shs 1,478,000,000,000 and before I finished, Members rose and they needed to consult and we kind of delayed proceedings to allow them to consult on the actual figure that I should read. They came back with a figure which I was able to read yesterday of Shs 1,000,000,968,000; but that is not the figure that has been read by the minister now. 

The reason is this: yesterday when they were doing their calculations, they put the Uganda Land Commission as a statutory body whereas it is not. And then secondly, they had given a figure of half a trillion shillings - Shs 500 billion - as statutory expenditure for the Uganda Land Commission. We discovered this later and we found that there was an error. We also found that the amount that had been agreed to be given to the Auditor-General had not been properly reflected in the final figures that I announced yesterday. 

So, after further consultations we now confirm that the final figure that will make a proper budget, after removing the Shs 500 billion and moving the money for the Auditor-General back to where it should be, the total statutory charge on the Consolidated Fund for the Financial Year 2011/2012 therefore is Shs 1,421,563,806,000 and the Hansard should reflect this correction. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, what you are telling us is very serious because we are talking about the Budget and utilisation of taxpayers’ money and borrowed money from the donors. Can we be privileged to know whether you are able to identify persons who are involved in those misrepresentations; or was it just a tactical error or a tactical omission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me deal with that.

MRS OGWAL: I just want to know whether if any person was involved so that they face disciplinary action. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are entirely correct but what happened was that we were all here in the Committee of Supply when I read the figure of Shs 1,478,000,000,000. Immediately, there was some movement and I remember - I do not know whether you recollect properly - the people who caused the movement said we needed to consult before we could agree on the figures. When they came back with this figure, this amount had found its way here. So the error was not a deliberate one but it was arising from anxiety from the Members that maybe some of the interests of the people had not been taken care of properly. That is why it was done like that. There was no cause for alarm over this -(Mr Sabiiti rose_)- hon. Member, can we move on?

MR SABIITI: I want to know if what is being presented to Parliament today is the same amount of money that was read and presented on the Table by the President through the minister of finance. Have we added more or is it the same estimate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is the same. We only tried to do some reallocations from within what has been -

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I want the minister of finance to confirm this because there seems to be some variations. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have that information now so I can give it to you because I was presiding over the whole process. Thank you. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2011

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

The Schedule 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I have and I hope all the Members have the Hansard and have got this document. I want to put it on record that I have gone through this Schedule for both recurrent and development expenditure and I have not found any error. (Applause) So -(Interjections)- yes, I have to put this across clearly because the total is Shs 8,902,187,020 as printed in this. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

MR EKANYA: So, I hope that once this is passed, the Government will not have any excuse to delay releasing money to the necessary institutions. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move a motion, as a matter of principle that will not change any figure - that Parliament passes a resolution to direct every Vote holder as contained in the Appropriation Bill, to put one percent of their Vote to protect the 99 percent against corruption.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it seconded, General? 

MR AWONGO: Seconded.

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My motion is mainly to emphasise Article 17, sub-section 1(i) which talks about the duty of every citizen of this country to combat corruption:

“AWARE that 20 to 50 percent of all the budgets we have had here has been wasted and spent through corruption;

CONSIDERING the fact that corruption needs to be fought at every level in every Vote;

REALISING that recently a survey was in the papers showing that most of the ministries, from President’s Office to the local governments down to Parliament and to the IGG’s Office, everywhere;

CONCERNED that the departments and law enforcement agencies that are available today and that were passed by this Parliament and actually Uganda got 90 percent on the score line but 45 percent on the implementation against corruption;

AS OF NOW, those agencies do not have enough budgets to protect the money we are going to pass today. 

I beg to move that there is need to put aside, in every Vote, one percent to protect the 99 percent.”

The modalities would be that each vote sits down and it is already a requirement but for purposes of guidance and showing willingness; political will and the ability to fight corruption -  and puts in place preventive, detective enforcement body within their vote and half of that percentage should go to an independent anti-corruption agency so that we supervise it on a regular basis.

In Apac, the anti-corruption coalition put six - I am winding up with that example - they put six budget monitors in every sub-county. They were not paying them as they were volunteers. It has ended up with an arrest of more than 20 corrupt public officials. So to support that effort, every Vote needs to fight corruption within itself and I am proposing only one percent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think the motion has been put and the explanation is very clear. I am going to put it to vote. The motion is that on each of these Votes, one percent be reserved for combating of corruption. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the Schedule to the Bill stands the Schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title stands the Title of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question to the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2011 with the Schedule thereto and passed it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.30 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2011

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, the Appropriation Bill, 2011 be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2011 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

“A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2011”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Members for delivering the Budget safely up to this point. It is finished and done. Congratulations, again! (Applause) We have to thank ourselves for the extra effort we put into this process. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have one matter here for clarification by the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We have just passed the Appropriation Bill, which is now the Act for the Budget 2011/2012 for the amount of Shs 10,324,000,000,000 or thereabout.

In April, the minister laid on the Table the National Budget Framework Paper. On page 31 of that paper, we are given the expected revenues that will be utilised to fund this Budget but I see a problem. The total resource envelope that was given in that paper amounts to Shs 9,247,000,000,000 or thereabout. There is a clear unfunded deficit of about Shs 1,100,000,000,000. I am seeking clarification from the ministry of finance: how does the ministry intend to fund this unfunded deficit, which has arisen from the fact that the total resource envelope does not match the total expenditure, which we have just appropriated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, even before the minister answers, this is a process that we have to go through to bring in more money and deal with this matter. I thought we had already done the framework and it is Government’s responsibility now to raise the money to finance the Budget. So do you need to be informed now that we will do one, two, three, and four?

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, in the National Budget Framework Paper, Government indicated its resource envelope and the expenditure side. When it indicates its resource envelope, there is now way it can indicate that it is going to spend more than it can get. That is the basis of my argument. Even in the Shs 9.247 trillion –(Mr Byabagambi rose_)– No, I am seeking clarification, hon. Minister. This is a serious matter; the expected income should balance the expected expenditure. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure after realising that we are actually moving in circles. We have just completed the Appropriation Bill; in other words, we have passed the Budget. But I am seeing a Member pulling us back to just a framework paper of April. The reason it is called a framework paper is because the actual thing is the one we have just passed. I do not know whether it is procedurally right to go back to April to start looking into the framework and yet hon. Akol has been in the Budget Committee throughout? (Mr Sabiiti rose_) This is a procedural matter and since you are a veteran you should know that it takes precedence. Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to continue in a vicious circle?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me get information from the Shadow Minister of Finance then I will guide on that matter.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to invite all of us to look at the Budget Framework Paper of April. The Government issued the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure for recurrent and development and every MP was given a copy. If you look at page 25 – in fact I want to inform the House that the total Budget, including non-tax revenue is Shs 10.464 trillion. In fact we have even passed less. So I am giving this information to the Speaker. It means the Budget has balanced and Government has a surplus. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we stood over debate on the issue of the US $50 million and I suspended that debate to pave way for us to finish with the Appropriation Bill, which has been done. Thank you very much. Now let us resume debate on the loan. Who was on the Floor then? Mr Chairman, you will speak last. Hon. Members, if you start the exchange now, it will not be helpful. Let them finish the debate then you wind up. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $50 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR GENERAL BUDGET SUPPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT POLICY OPERATION

6.39
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a brief to Parliament, there are also responses to the committee, which were photocopied but were not given to Members. I think it is partly the reason why Members have raised the question to the effect that this loan is not outlining what figure goes to what sector. The title of this loan is, “Budget Support Loan”; it is pool money. The Ninth Parliament has just appropriated and approved the Budget read by the finance minister on behalf of the President with a 76 percent Government financing and about 24 percent borrowing. Therefore, honourable colleagues, if you get the brief to Parliament, responses and the presentation in the Mukono meeting, you will be able to appreciate that we are now dealing with a technicality. 

The Budget Support loan, as I mentioned in the beginning, as opposed to project-specific financing, is a loan to the pool; it is part of the 24 percent we have just appropriated that we shall borrow and it is not true that any of these sectors should require a percentage. Actually the sessional committee reports to the Budget Committee, arising from the policy statements, have already by default confirmed how much of this money you are appropriating to a different sector. So I thought this information would be critical and I request the clerk’s office to give Members the brief to Parliament, the responses from the ministry and other presentations which we photocopied. I have a few copies, which I can give to leaders of either side as the clerk gets more copies; but actually it is a technicality we are dealing with.

Parliament has been used to project-specific financing of roads, health – but if you read in the responses, you will realise that the committee asked: “Will the proposed US $50 million financial sector development policy loan benefit, say, salaries of doctors and nurses requirement?” The response is: “The World Bank is providing untied, general budget support and the proceeds of this loan will be disbursed through the Consolidated Fund.” This means that Government will have flexibility to allocate it to finance its priority expenditures in the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think there is some confusion here because what is appearing on the Order Paper is: “Motion for the resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow US $50 million from The International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for general budget support for the financial sector development policy operation”. In the report of the committee, the title is different. It says the purpose is: “... for general budget support, for financing the first financial sector development policy credit”. So which one is which? Is it a development policy credit or development policy operation? What is the actual title of this loan?

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, before the chairperson of this committee comes to the Floor it is exactly that contradiction which made me to seek that type of inquiry from him. I would like to inform the chairperson that in this House, there are senior financial managers who have worked in Government before and, therefore, know what it means to have blanket budget support given to Government. So, you should be specific and stop talking as though you were talking to amateurs! There are financial managers here together with senior, civil servants who have been at the helm of these things for some time. So please, the type of confusion that you have caused actually gives the indication that you, as a committee and the Executive, were not prepared as far as this motion to borrow the US $50 million is concerned. We are not here to do your work; if you want to come to us for such an appeal, come with clean hands and clean work and then, we shall be able to give you the support. (Applause)- –(Interruptions due to power failure)- Therefore, Rt Hon. Speaker –(Interjections)- I know there is no power but I can still address you without the microphone – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The cameras will not “see” you.

MR WADRI: Well, it is dark and I am dark so the camera will not “see” me. Darkness, “pakalast” - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the problem will be rectified very shortly and so let us just hold on a bit – only for a few seconds. You will not be on record - hon. Baryomunsi, you will not be on record – that is what I am saying; that you will not be on record if you speak now - 

MR WADRI: As I was making my submission, the rationale for creating committees of Parliament is for them to do the nitty-gritty in terms of scrutiny on behalf of the entire Parliament. However, now here is a situation where a committee, which was given that mandate has brought us raw work meaning that they now want us to do the work on their behalf which, therefore, negates the purpose for which they were created as a committee –(Interjections)- yes, I mean what I say because they are able not to tell us exactly what they stand for. The objective of their motion or report differs from the content of the report and that is the reason why even the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is asking what exactly they want; is it budget support? What is it? 

So based on that I wish to move a motion that having seen the loopholes in this report and non clarity in terms of purpose for this loan request, I move that we stand over this request and ask Government to go and come up with thorough work to tell us what exactly they want from us before we can pronounce ourselves on this. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

6.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, first of all we have made it clear that the funds that are being sought under this loan are for general budget support. The name of the loan is, “Financial Sector Development Policy Credit Loan.” It is a policy loan and the area of reform for which the credit is anchored is the financial sector. Just like the poverty reduction support credit is used to finance areas of the budget, which reduce poverty. 

The reform areas have been identified, just like in other project loans. If you read the brief to Parliament, this loan is talking about prior actions. Prior actions are discussed in advance. When you go to seek the loan, they give you perimeters of what you must do for you to qualify for this loan and this loan in the policy prior actions; they talked about focusing on key reform areas, which is the area of the financial sector and these have already been outlined - what they required us to do - issues like the Public Private Partnership policy and law, which Government has already done. 

The PPP policy has been passed by Cabinet and it will be forwarded to Parliament. The law on Public Private Partnerships is before Cabinet. Those are some of the issues, which the World Bank required that before they give us any budget support, we must focus on certain sectors and improve on them. That is why I say that this is support credit, which has been an instrument of the World Bank and it has been used not only now but for the last eight years to finance our budget; they give you time lines and things you must improve and after you have improved on those sectors – that is why they come out very clearly in the report of the committee but also in the brief to Parliament. 

The World Bank says you must do a, b, c and d things, like the mortgage regulations. They say that the Uganda Retirements Benefits Regulatory Authority Bill must be enacted before we access this money. I must tell this Parliament that this authority was already passed by this Parliament and accepted by His Excellency, the President. The Mortgage Act regulations were issued in June 2011 by the Minister of Lands. It is on that basis that I would like to ask for the indulgence of the hon. Members of the House that we pass this loan to support our budget, well knowing that our own resources were not enough to finance the budget, which we have just passed. 

This is part of that percentage which you are to get from loans and from grants, Government having provided the bigger part of the budget. I beg the indulgence of the Members that we pass this loan so that we are enabled to access this money and this money will assist us -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there is a motion on the Floor. Can you speak to the motion?

MR KAJARA: I did say that, it is very important that we pass this loan. The issue of the heading; I have just clarified, that is just a name, “Financial Sector Development Policy Credit”. It is not in the body of the loan. They call it that because the perimeters, which they lay down before accessing this loan, must be achieved. 

Some of them, like the Credit Reference Bureau, the reform in the financial sector, in the banking sector, the regulation by Bank of Uganda must be correct and the support to the financial institutions like we have the SACCOS. In fact, one of the areas they talk about is the regulation of SACCOS and this Government is working on the law to regulate the financial institutions other than the commercial banks, which is already in the process. It is being discussed by the ministry, it will be tabled in Cabinet and eventually reach Parliament so that the financial institutions; the lower ones in the category of SACCOS, that we have at sub-county levels, can be regulated.  So -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what do you say about the motion? Directly, what do you say about the motion?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, I beg hon. Kassiano Wadri to withdraw his motion so that we are enabled to pass this loan. I beg to move.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have even got more reason to reaffirm my motion because the hon. Minister, a few minutes back said that even the President had already assented to this other Bill, which we passed in April about the regulatory authority for social security. However, in the report it is clearly stated that the Bill was enacted in April 2011 and is pending presidential assent. How can the hon. Minister mislead this House, contradicting a position which has been made very clear in black and white by the committee? This is the more reason why I said that the minister and the Executive in total, together with the committee, have not done a thorough job. Let them go and rationalise their work. It is there! (Applause)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I just want to comment on what hon. Wadri is quoting - one phrase to dismiss this whole document. I refer hon. Wadri and colleagues to page 3, No.5, in the same document. It is stated that the Mortgage Bill has never been revised or repealed, which is not also right. That one was a slip of the writing as this one is, but he corrected it on the Hansard. So, you should not read it there and think because of that, therefore, the minister is telling a lie.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter that is now on the table is the motion. If you are not rising to talk about the motion - we should finish with the motion of hon. Kassiano Wadri. If you want to speak on the general debate on this matter, then this is not the proper time but if you want to speak to the motion by hon. Wadri, then this would be the time for you to speak.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to seek clarification as we debate the motion: clarification from the minister and the chair. The way I understand budget support is that Uganda has been pursuing what we call the Sector Wide Approaches (SWAPS) and financing arrangements have been negotiated with development partners so that the way partners give funds to Uganda are clear. One aspect is budget support where the donors put money in the basket with the understanding that the Government of Uganda knows its priorities and that is where the money will be spent v. project support where a project is formulated with clear objectives and the money is given for financing a particular project.

This loan request is for financing the budget through budget support but I think where the trouble is, when you look at the title of the report of the committee, it says it is for general support. It goes ahead to specify particular areas and yet budget support would mean the money goes to the central budget of Government and then Government knows the priorities as health, safe water and sanitation, roads; that is where the money is dispersed. So, I want to seek clarification, as we decide on the motion, are the interventions to be financed by this loan request already specified and who has specified them? Are they part of the conditions you agreed with the World Bank on where this money will be spent? I think the clarification should be made because the way the report has been structured is as if those interventions are outlined and they do not appear to be the priorities, which we think money should be spent on. 

So, the minister should clarify for instance: will part of this money finance the health sector and will part of this money finance water and sanitation? I think that clarification should be made because that is the understanding of budget support as we take a decision on this as Parliament.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In addition to what hon. Chris Baryomunsi has said, my understanding of this report is that it is a specific project with specific objectives outlined in section 5. This specific project has actually got specific components and they are very clearly given. I think we need some guidance on this matter. If we accept that this money goes in the basket, what is the framework for monitoring the inputs and outputs of the project? To what extent are the funds flexible? How do we at the end of the day declare that we have realised the objectives as given in this section? I think it is genuinely required that the honourable minister really clarifies.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the fundamental question that all Members are raising is: would this thing still stand if what we approve stops at “general budget support”?

MR KAJARA: Mr Speaker, all these things will still stand but in the brief to Parliament, which was the basis of discussion with the Committee on National Economy; let me read out two paragraphs of this brief to Parliament:

Paragraph No. 3 states that to support this effort, the World Bank is providing untied, general budget support in recognition of the important reforms that Government is undertaking. The proceeds of this loan will be disbursed into the Consolidated Fund and Government will have the flexibility to allocate it to finance its priority expenditure using its own country systems. 

It goes on to say that this lending instrument is called development policy support, which is available to encourage member countries of the World Bank undertaking major economic reforms.

Number four says that it is important to note that because the prior actions are mainly in policy and institutional development areas, the funds are not allocated to the specific components in the reform program as such. It is deemed that the Government uses its own resources, both human and financial, to implement the mutually agreed policy actions, which makes the country eligible to access this highly concessional funding. But that is after the prior actions have been implemented or significant progress has been made towards meeting them. 

Mr Speaker, the priority areas – the information we have is that most of these funds have been allocated to support USE, health, energy and roads. How much will go - 

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order in respect to the contradiction and misguidance the minister is leading us into. He is selectively reading No. 3, 4 and 5. However, when you go on the same brief to Parliament, page 2, it states in No. 8: “The ongoing reform programme is aimed at addressing the constraints identified in the NDP through programming approach in a phased manner over the medium term”. 

Then it goes on to enumerate the medium term this loan is going to address. It talks of improving supply of long-term financing, focusing on reforming the pension sector, development of the Public Private Partnership Framework for Infrastructure Financing, development of long-term mortgage finance; reforming the pension sector, development of financial services, improving legal and regulatory framework – it goes on up to page 4, talking about what the loan will specifically do. 

Now the minister is saying off cuff that it will deal with USE and that it will deal with roads. Is it in order for the hon. Minister to contradict what is here and starts talking of what is not here, confusing the whole Parliament as if we do not know how to read?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the brief that was given to the committee of Parliament states those various things but I have looked at that brief and I do not see where there is USE, health or roads. Hon. Minister, you either stick to the texts you presented to Parliament as a brief or you stop talking. (Applause)

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to appreciate the views of Members on this loan. I said that this loan was providing for what we call prior actions. These prior actions are what we mention from No. 9: “Mid-term financial sector reform programme ...”, those were prior actions and they are actually in this report. 

We had to do reforms in the pensions sector, which Government is doing. We had to develop the Public Private Partnership Policy and the legal framework, which Government is doing. We also had to develop long-term mortgage financing, which Government is doing; to increase access to financial services, which Government is doing; to improve the legal and regulatory framework of the financial sector. 

Mr Speaker, the gist of this loan, as I have just stated is in what I read to this House, that it is providing untied, general budget support in recognition of these other reforms, which I have just stated. The proceeds of this loan will be disbursed in the Consolidated Fund and Government will have the flexibility to allocate it to finance priority expenditure. 

I talked of these other areas like USE, roads and energy because the budget we have just passed is geared mainly to support those infrastructure projects but also human development in terms of USE and health among others. That is why I mentioned those others. But it is actually general budget support; it is in a pool –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am looking at this document on page 7 of the parliamentary brief and that is the draft resolution of Parliament. That is what Parliament is going to say. Let me read it:

“To authorise Government to borrow US $50 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Ground under the Financial Sector Development Policy Credit.

WHEREAS a financing agreement for US $50 million is to be concluded between the International Development Association of the World Bank and the Government of the Republic of Uganda as general budget support for the purpose of financing the budget, for Fiscal Year, 2011/2012;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to any constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval authorisation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorised to secure the said credit of US $50 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group upon terms and conditions therein stated.”

Hon. Members, this is what Parliament is going to say. Parliament is not going to say, “Let this money go to the financial sector or development policy operation”. Parliament is not going to say any of the things that are listed here. So, are we comfortable with the text of the resolution or not? Yes, hon. John Nasasira.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, I think we are trying to – maybe before I say something let me use this opportunity, since you congratulated us, to also congratulate you for driving us through this Budget process, usually from morning to night. I think you deserve a big handclap. (Applause)

We are getting to the end of this long process and when sometimes clarifications are asked in regard to this budget and especially when they are raised by senior parliamentarians like hon. Cecilia Ogwal and my friend Opposition Chief Whip emeritus, we could easily be diverted because we are fairly tired. However, let me give some few clarifications. The headings notwithstanding, I agree that maybe these headings should be harmonised, but that is not the substance. Let us look at the substantive issues in the report. First of all –(Mr Tinkansiimire rose_)– let me first build my point. Please, let me build my point –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member holding the Floor has to allow you to give him information. You cannot force it on him.

MR NASASIRA: Let the Member just hold on; I will give him time to give that information.

It is like the World Bank coming here and asking us whether we have enough money to fund our budget or not and the Government of Uganda says that they do not have enough money and that they are short of so many billions. Then the World Bank sets conditions that for it to contribute to part of that budget, Government needs to carry out certain reforms here and there, for example, in the financial sector as a condition – do they call it condition precedent? Those conditions are summarised on page 9 of the report. And later on the World Bank accepts to give the Government of Uganda that loan in addition to the money from URA and other grants in order for it to balance its budget 100 percent. So, the planning of that budget on what goes to education, roads and so on - is the business of the Uganda Government, which must present something to its Parliament. 

I know that we have been going through that process since October last year knowing that on top of money from the URA and the grant from donors, there is this US $50 million coming in as part of that basket. That way it will be like you are asking Government to tell you where they take that money; to tell you which money is sent to roads and so on. Just assume that if we were able, we would have collected this money using URA. What I am saying is that this money was already in that process. So, to come here and begin asking the component for roads and how it is going to be monitored is like asking for a monitoring mechanism for money from URA. I wanted us to understanding that point.

The first one is about the conditions for providing that money –(Interjections)– just a minute! Let me now talk about the loan process. The loan was brought here and there was a brief to Parliament. In fact this loan has taken a longer process than most loans because of its new nature of going into the pool. But when the Committee of National Economy was discussing it, there was an opinion that Members and other stakeholders should be given more information. In that regard, a workshop was organised in Mukono and about three papers were presented to give more information. I am happy that my elder sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal also attended this workshop. There are also minutes from that workshop. All the people who attended that workshop, after more information was given to clarify on varying issues, agreed to have the loan approved –(Interjections)– yes, there are records.

Then the committee returned and in June the World Bank approved this loan. So, to ask where this money is specifically going, is like asking for where URA money goes - 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, it is in the interest of the Executive that we take a second look at this loan request; it is in their interest. I do appreciate the contributions made by the various ministers in defence of this loan application. However, there are two issues I would like to raise. One is that the presentation of the committee and the brief to Parliament clearly lay down the purpose of this loan; it is there, in black and while and has been captured on the Hansard. We cannot run away from it and that is very important.

Two, in that workshop which people are making reference to, we raised some areas of concern including the conditions that are given here. We actually advised that the loan be renegotiated –(Interjections)– please, listen to me; we were talking on behalf of the people of Uganda. We advised like that because we had never seen a loan where interest is charged on undisbursed balances. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you rose on a point of procedure.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I rose because the Government Chief Whip was saying that we don’t have to go into the details and so on, but it is here in black and white in our Constitution. Let me read just one – I cannot read the entire clause because it is too long. It says we can approve the loan –(Interjections)– you want me to read it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Article of the Constitution are you reading?

MRS OGWAL: I thought you should now know it by heart –(Laughter)– it is Article 159; I mean I just open the Constitution and I get the Article. The Article is too long and so I don’t think it would be necessary for us to go through it wholly, but it is important that we note certain sub-clauses. One of them is about the extent of the total indebtedness by way of principal and accumulated interests, which we are concerned with.

The other one is the utilisation and performance of the loan. We are approving a loan, so we need to know the utilisation of the loan. We cannot go by the generalisation, which we are being told here. Mr Speaker, I want to seek your guidance. If it were possible and if the House could agree, let us give it time! To tell you the truth, I totally support this loan. I support budget support loans but the presentation is not done in a manner that we as a Parliament can approve. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you rose on a point of procedure. What is the procedural point you are raising?

MRS OGWAL: The procedural matter I am raising is that is it in order for us to continue debating when we know that the presentation of this loan is not done in a manner that would satisfy us as Parliament so I –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a motion on the Floor. The motion proposed by hon. Kassiano Wadri is that this matter should be differed. Is that the motion? That is the motion. We want to finish this motion and then it can open for us the way to – please, conclude.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, before I was interrupted by my elder sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, with no procedure – I had left Mukono and came back to the committee. The committee analysed - I have seen these people who signed and the spirit and purpose as to why parliamentary committees were set up was to help the whole House so that they go and scrutinise, ask questions and analyse. All that was summarised in the committee’s report; and Members have signed the committee’s report that they are now satisfied. I can quote. The report concludes and I quote, “Honourable Speaker and Members, the committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the Government request to borrow US $30.9 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for general budget support for financing the first financial sector development policy credit.” 

After due analysis, I would like to oppose the motion moved by hon. Wadri that we differ this. I beg the House that having gone through this process, including even approving our Budget today, we go ahead and support this loan and approve it today. (Applause)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: I am rising to give information with regard to the motion on the Floor. Hon. Members, this is the first time we are getting budget support under the financial sector development policy credit. We have been used to getting money under the Poverty Reduction Support Credit. We have done this several times; we are now in No.4 or No.8. It is the first time we are getting money under this credit of the World Bank. So, whereas they have accepted to give us this money under this credit, they also want us to do certain things, the prior actions. It is also true that the money goes to the basket. In the past when we used to get money under the rural development part of the World Bank, they used to give conditions that, “This money goes to agriculture; this money goes to rural feeder roads”. There were similar conditions. I think that is where the confusion is. Otherwise, hon. Members, this money has been budgeted for under the Consolidated Fund. It is just because we could have had a workshop for everybody to explain this new development in our budget support. Let us approve this loan, hon. Members. Thank you. (Applause)

7.30		
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all I also stand to oppose the motion by hon. Wadri.

Hon. Members, I want us to appreciate that the problem we are going through today is a problem Uganda has and we need to work very hard to run away from the problems we get because of borrowing. If we were not borrowing, we would not get these problems of conditions. What we are debating today is as a result of conditions put forward by the lending bodies. Many of us have gone to banks to borrow money. They give conditions. But what happens when you get that money? 

I need to clarify more. I am a Member of the Budget Committee and I was privileged to attend the Mukono workshop and very many other meetings. This money is for general budget support. We passed the Appropriation Bill this evening. It means that we need this money to operate. We need to appreciate what Members are raising. Members are concerned that if we pass this loan, it might go to financial sector policy operations. That is what some Members are thinking; they would not want this to happen. This is what I need to clarify to Members. If what is disturbing us is financial sector development policy operation, then I need to propose to the minister that let us leave it as it is that we are passing this loan for budget support and then the ministry of finance can work out the technicalities.
  	
7.32
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At this stage I am actually shocked as to where we have reached. What I understand from the Government is that we are to borrow US $50 million for the Financial Year 2011/2012. The conditions, which are set out will apply for the next 40 years -(Interjection)- this is the condition of the loan. We are borrowing money and we are paying for 40 years. If I am alive I will be 84 by then. The conditions are: reforming the pension sector –

There has been a lot of interest in the monies, which have already been raised. The liberalisation is one issue but there is a lot of interest in money, which has been raised for generations. That is where the key interest is. You can liberalise but people are targeting the monies, which already exist. For all these institutions to come and access that money - we are getting US $50 million but 40 years down the road, we will still be dealing with this issue. 

When you deal with Public Private Partnerships – we have blundered in the past. One of the blunders was that we privatised a public company and that is a question of Umeme, which continues to haunt us - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have a motion we are debating!

MR AKENA: I am supporting hon. Wadri’s motion based on these conditions because they will exist for 40 years. We are spending the money we are borrowing in one year but the conditions will continue to exist. And a whole process is based on these conditions: open up these sectors to Public Private Partnerships, as well as the issue of Umeme, which is fully owned by CDC. 

We were discussing the question of Uganda Development Corporation which went into limbo and we are trying to revive it. Have we carefully thought through all these conditions or can we be informed of the impact they will have on me, my children and my grandchildren because that is the scope of this loan? 

The last point I want to raise, which still ties on the conditions, deals with the question of mortgage finance. In recent history, the housing sector has been touted as the fastest growing industry in Uganda. When we look at the global crisis we continue to go through, it was tied on mortgages and housing. We are opening ourselves up for 40 years but we are not getting the full impact of what this will mean to the Ugandan economy. The whole thing is that let us pass because we are getting US $50 million for one financial year. My concern is not only for today because my grandchildren will pay this loan. We are not briefed on what we are supposed to do. The conditions are very clear, “Reform then you can get the money”. 

Until we can be clearly informed and we know the full impact of this loan not just for this financial year but for the next years, I support the motion of hon. Wadri that we defer this matter.

7.36
MR JACOB OBOTH (IND, West Budama County South, Tororo): I must say that at this stage the Ugandan Parliament is debating US $50 million as budget support of less than 30 percent; we should congratulate ourselves; we used to get 70 percent from outside and then 20 or 30 percent from the locally raised revenue. 

Whereas I appreciate the precautions we need to take before we borrow, I think that the brief from the ministry of finance was clearer than most of us are thinking. When you see pages 5 and 7, paragraph 27; the planned utilisation of the proceeds of the proposed loan, in this whole document, this is the only provision in this brief where it tells us where the money is going. We have confused prior actions, which are really conditions, with the planned activities.

Prior actions for the funding are things that should be done before. Fox, me, the Speaker and many other privileged Ugandans would call this “conditions precedent”. What we must do to qualify for this loan not what you are going to do with loan. I am one, minute person but today I thought I should do a little more. 

Somebody else was asking: what are the terms and conditions of this loan? These prior actions formulate the conditions. The terms are clearly spelt out on page 8. They are there and they are six terms for this loan. There are about nine conditions of the loan. Mr Speaker, I find myself between a rock and a hard place to oppose the motion of my senior colleague, hon. Wadri because the premises upon which we are debating this has not been made clear by the ministry of finance and that did not facilitate our understanding. The committee of this Parliament has done a great job and this is as a voice of reason, on the basis of these two documents, I see no reason why we should not approve this loan. I rest my case.

7.40
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I know we need budget support and in fact if you follow the news, countries are finding it difficult to get foreign exchange but Uganda is privileged. Why do I say this? I have managed to read the documentation on this loan within a few minutes. In this loan, the Government of Uganda has agreed with the development partner that we have moved away from project support although we are still implementing it selectively. There are several reforms that are needed to move the country forward and those reforms are not going to be implemented through project support. 

This money is specifically tied to financial sector reform. I have a letter written on the 25th of May 2011 to John Macntyle, Country Director of the World Bank Tanzania by the Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Chris Kassami. It explains in detail why we need this money and it is basically going to be budget support but the entire money is going to be used to create reforms in the financial sector of our country. Let me read it for you:

“Expected outputs and outcomes: In the brief to Parliament ...” - we are all economists, we have done management, we have done history, sociology and we have expected outputs and outcomes in our firms - the above reform measures will reduce the cost of doing business for the financial sector as well as other businesses, increased coverage in other rural areas such as mobile money. There are so many regulations that are needed in the mobile money sector, in the pension sector, in the micro-finance sector and others. I really want to tell you that this money is going to be used for legislative reforms but under budget support.”

The point the Minister needs to make clear to the Members is that this money is not going to do the roads like you have said and it is not going to do UPE schools, provide water, or drugs. It is going to reforms in the financial sector under budget support. That is the purpose of this money. The requirement -

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much hon. Ekanya for giving me way to give you some information. One, I want again to reiterate what hon. Oboth said that we have appropriated Shs 100 trillion today but that Shs 100 trillion is going to come from somewhere. Part of it is going to come from URA’s domestic revenue, the rest will come from grants and loans and part of that money that is going to finance our budget, which we have appropriated today is coming from the US $50 million. 

This US $50 million is going to go to general budget support but the World Bank says - and I want it to make a difference - that before they give us this money, we need to reform and we need to commit that we are going to do the following reforms. So, the expected outputs and the ones that hon. Ekanya is referring to are not for this loan, they are not for the reforms that the Government is committing itself to do in order to get this money. I agree with you, hon. Wadri, that we should be organised when coming to present these loans so we can make a good presentation. However, honourable colleagues, we have committed ourselves and we have approved the money today and, therefore, if we do not approve this loan, we are going to have a crisis tomorrow. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR EKANYA: I think hon. Bahati has misunderstood the point. If you convert this money at the exchange rate of Uganda Shillings to the US Dollar, the basis for which we are approving this budget is about one point one trillion, three hundred billion. I have just done a rough calculation, unless I am wrong and I can be guided. So, the point I want to say, hon. Bahati, is that you have misunderstood me. This money is tied to legislative reforms in the financial sector. I have read the document and I am telling you that according to the letter written by Kassami, he talks about mobile money that they will use for reforms, the pension sector, the Bank of Uganda, Tier 4 and all this money will be used for this purpose. I, therefore, support the motion. 

7.48
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, thank you so much for giving me an opportunity. Hon. Geofrey Ekanya articulated it so well but he contradicted himself at the end. Getting a loan for budget support with conditions for reforms - the reason I insisted on rising up is to tell this House that these reforms are not only demanded by the World Bank, but our own committees here one of which I am privileged to chair. And with hon. Geofrey Ekanya as a member, we have been so strong here in our reports demanding for these reforms. Namely, you may recall Members that we refused at one stage to pass the Uganda Regulatory Retirements Authority Bill because we wanted Government to present the liberalisation Bill, which was presented then. Whether the money is to go for legislative reforms or not, if you are to put in place a regulator, you need money. 

Two, developing housing finance markets causes amendments in the mortgage industry. How are you going to arrest the shocks and surges in the economy if you are not coming in to make credit cheaper and affordable? When you talk about PPPs, this House has castigated Government to come up with a PPP policy framework, to come up with a law to make sure that projects like the Police project are well guided, so why don’t we support them when they are responding to our demands? 

Mr Speaker, I was about to come to this House with a petition because I was among the affected clients. There are banks in this town – I don’t want to mention them – where you go and ask for a loan but they will never give you what they call an offer letter. Why? They want to keep changing the terms as and when they wish. I had to go to the accountants of Parliament to force a certain bank to give me an offer letter. So, when you see something like “strengthening financial consumer protection and financial literacy”, you should support it strongly. Really, whether the World Bank has demanded these reforms, even we need reforms. So, even if this loan alone was solely going to finance these reforms, I would put my foot on the ground and I would support it. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we need to take a vote on this motion so that we can move forward. The motion is that the request for the approval of this loan be deferred. I put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion for the proposal to authorise Government to borrow US $50 million from the International Development Association.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have a few brief announcements. One, the Uganda Revenue Authority is currently doing registration for new Tax Identification Numbers and this has been going on in this Parliament in the front lobby for the last two weeks. Not all Members have registered. You are urged to register because it will help in the future and they have given us special treatment as Members of Parliament to do the registration from here. Because of the turn up which has been low, the URA has decided to extend by another one week to allow you, Members, get your electronic Tax Identification Numbers. If you fail to do so within the precincts of Parliament, you will then be required to go to the Crested Towers where you will not have any special treatment. So, the choice is really in your hands. You either do it from here or you do it from the Crested Towers. 

Secondly, the Public Service Commission has mandated the House to investigate the issue of the bicycles for LC I and II chairpersons. Parliament gave the public service committee three weeks to report to this Parliament and that ends today and they still have a long way to go to complete this report. I am, therefore, using the prerogative of the Speaker to give them an extension of two weeks to enable them finish and report to this House when they are properly ready. So, the committee is allowed a further period of two weeks to enable them complete. The clerk is accordingly directed to take care of the committee for the next two weeks until they finish what they are supposed to do. Of course reporting will be done when Parliament is sitting.

Hon. Members, as I indicated earlier, after this Budget process we will be taking a break. Many of you have not had the opportunity to go back to the constituencies - chairpersons and members of committees - because you have been engaged all through. You have not had the opportunity to go back to your constituencies, including myself, because I also have a constituency. Therefore, at the end of this sitting, I will adjourn this House sine die. You will be told on notice when Parliament will reconvene for the second meeting, because this is the first meeting. This is the 40th Meeting of the First Sitting of the First Session of the Ninth Parliament. So, this Parliament will stand adjourned sine die and you will be told on notice to convene for the Second Meeting of this Parliament. 

I want to say this before I adjourn: I want to express my gratitude to you. Having participated in this process for the last few weeks, at the co-operation that the chair has received has been tremendous. (Applause) It is only fair that I say thank you. The perseverance you have exercised and the stamina you have demonstrated clearly shows why your people elected you. (Applause) Even when we were to go up to midnight - there was a time we went on up to a few minutes to midnight - we still could vote without any worry over quorum. I am eternally impressed by this demonstration. It is the spirit and this demonstration of commitment that will make the public have a different perception of the Ninth Parliament. We owe it to ourselves and we owe it to this country that the Ninth Parliament must be the Ninth Parliament because as I said before, there will never be any other Ninth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. And the Ninth Parliament is the Parliament that has been privileged to steer Uganda to the Golden Jubilee of Uganda as a country. What better opportunity would God have accorded you to be part of the people who will make history? 

With these words, unless – yes?

7.58
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you, on behalf of the Opposition, as the acting Leader of the Opposition and as a shadow minister, for having accorded us full co-operation during the Budget process. We would also like to thank Government – the ministry of finance and the Prime Minister - for their co-operation. 

However, as we go on recess, I am seeking clarification from the Prime Minister. The business community in this country is aching and I would like to request the Prime Minister to take action - during recess if he agrees – the landlords and people in the hotel business are violating the laws of this country, that is, the Foreign Exchange Act. They are charging rent in dollars and this is causing a crisis for the Government. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you do not know, one of the reasons for shortage of foreign currency in this country is that landlords and hotels that are not licensed by the Bank of Uganda are trading in foreign exchange. This is violating the Act. I have looked at it and I want to request you that you need to take action on this matter very urgently. Otherwise the country is going to suffer shortage of this currency day in, day out. I beg you and I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

8.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must apologise that my side is speaking a language I am absolutely unfamiliar with because they are talking of governor and things like that. I will sort it out later. 

I rise to speak on behalf of this side of the House, the ruling party. I rise to speak on behalf of that side, the Independents and as Leader of Government Business in this house, I rise to speak on behalf of everybody including the Opposition and to register in very clear terms, the confidence of the Members of this House, the gratitude they have in your very explicitly exhibited ability to preside over the House -(Applause)- your maiden time to preside over the House and manage it as if you are a veteran Speaker. I know you ruled me out of order -(Laughter)­­- and I accepted it with humility because I actually thought you did the right thing. If I were the Speaker, I would have made the same ruling. 

I think there is something new in this House. I have been here as you know for a while - I am not sure that there is anyone with a longer experience than mine in this House -(Interjections)- so, I have had the luck and fortune to experience and be in this House for as long as the age of hon. Cerinah Nebanda. The day Nebanda was born is exactly when I was in this House –(Laughter)- and here we are together in the same House. Really, this demonstrates the change that is occurring, the evolution of change that is peaceful, democratic and, therefore, calculated to sustain progress in our country. 

So I would like on behalf of these Members, to express the gratitude of Government to Members of Parliament and members of the committees, for the care they took, the commitment they had to examine all the statements of ministers, the minute figures that were presented and; to present, for the first time in my long experience, the kind of questions I had not witnessed here, to Government. I think I can only say, Bravo! This is what we have always fought for. When you criticise us, it pleases us most because that is what we would like to see happen in this country.

These reforms that we were talking about in the financial sector are the ones we have been fighting for all round. The conditions of the World Bank actually conform to our desires as a Government to bring about change. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think as a young one – yes, this is the first time he is Speaker and, therefore, as the Speaker he is absolutely young. I want to say that you have started off very well. If we maintain this speed, the fact that we have been meeting - the other day we met up to almost midnight and I think this should be the spirit. As long as we have business to do, let us do it. I want to register our appreciation and applaud you for that spirit. If we continue like this, I am sure we are going to deliver the results that the people of Uganda voted us to deliver to them.

I want to thank you and hon. Members and I want you to know, as I have said many times here, that even when we disagree, we really belong to the same House. Even when she is in the Opposition -(Laughter)- and she has a different view and I made this point in my remarks the other time, I want you to know that we still belong to the same House and the same family and we must work to build this together. That is why I did not respond to some of the things that were said the other time because I did not think it was necessary to do so in order to promote harmony in this House and in the country.

As we go on recess, I wish you successful Independence Day celebrations because I do not think we will be back by that time. I wish you successful consultations in your constituencies and you can count on this Government to give you maximum support. Even if you are Kassiano Wadri representing Terego in this House on behalf of FDC, NRM will support Terego and the development of its people because that is what -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, for the first time, I do take cognisance of the right state of mind and talk that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has had about me and the people of Terego. I wish he could continue with that spirit, thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank my honourable brother and friend, hon. Wadri for his kind words. I wish you happy recess and we look forward to interacting with you when you come back, clearly rejuvenated after this rather trying period in the passage of the Budget.

Hon. Ekanya raised an important point. We have taken note of it and we will discuss it in the Executive, ask the ministry of finance and give the necessary guidelines in due course. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I would like to remind you that the National Prayer Breakfast will be held on Saturday, 08 October 2011 and it will start at 07.30 a.m. I already announced the people who will be there so please, join the Parliamentary Prayer Fellowship for this function at Hotel Africana.

The other announcement, which is directed to the clerk, is that the Public Accounts Committee also has pending business, which must be completed before we come back for the Second Meeting of this House. I am, therefore, also authorising them to be helped to work for an additional week to enable them finish what they have to finish.

I have also got information from the Parliamentary Commission - the members of the Parliamentary Commission have given me a message that in the middle of next week, you could be receiving some messages on your telephones asking you to come for an informal kind of session, I do not know what it means.

Hon. Members, as we go for whatever period we have been given, I want us to go reflecting on one issue: where will Uganda be five years from now under our guidance? Where will we leave this country when the elections bells are called in 2016? Where will Uganda be? How will the Ninth Parliament be remembered? As you go, think about these questions. When we come back, we will be dealing with these issues in practical terms. The House is adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 8.12 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)
