Wednesday, 16 September 2009

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I wish to welcome you to this sitting and to thank you for turning up in large numbers to attend yesterday’s special sitting in which His Excellency the President addressed you in accordance with Article 101(2) of the Constitution.

As I promised you yesterday, once the copies of the address by the President are availed to the Clerk, I will fix an appropriate date for you to be able to debate this important item. I think your contribution is required in this matter so that the structures put up in our Constitution are preserved.

On 8 November 2007, the United Nations adopted 15th September as the International Day of Democracy. They called upon all the member states, organisations, non-government organisations and individuals to commemorate the day in an appropriate manner that contributes to raising public awareness. In the case of our Parliament, in recognition of this day a mock debate by the youth wings of the different political parties that are represented in Parliament had been organised by the Office of the Clerk. It was scheduled to take place in the Conference Hall of Parliament. It was expected that 400 youths would participate in this debate on the topic, “Political Tolerance under the Multiparty Dispensation in Uganda.” 

However, given the importance of the national duty that took place in Parliament yesterday, this mock debate could not take place and has been rescheduled to Tuesday, 22 September in the Conference Hall of Parliament beginning at 10.00 a.m. I encourage honourable members to find time to attend, watch and listen to our youths, who are our future leaders, debating.

The Business Committee sat on Monday in the morning and charted out the business to be handled by Parliament. The Office of the Clerk will shortly provide you with the programme. I wish to, however, point out that we first intend to dispose of the financial Bills in order to complete the Budget process and then handle any other business lined up by the Business Committee. 

In order to be able to clear as much business as possible, the Business Committee agreed that where necessary, the House should be able to meet on Friday morning and Monday afternoon. I urge members to cooperate with this humble request since we have a lot of business awaiting our consideration. Honourable members will be allowed to proceed for a short recess between 8th and 19th October and thereafter Parliament will resume its business until we break for the Christmas recess and end of year festivities. 

Once again I thank you for your continued co-operation and your work in the committees. Thank you very much.

2.45
MR THEODORE SEKIKUUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek guidance from your communication. First of all, I thank the President for having made the address on the state of the nation, which we received yesterday. As you are aware, these are matters of national importance. In case we delay to receive the copies, I understand we have a record in the Hansard which will be distributed to members so that the matters can be fully debated and appreciated by all. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, you are aware that indeed there is a lot at stake. We thank government because while you were away, Members of Parliament from Buganda walked out. I am glad that the statement that was required was personally presented by the President. So, I would really request, as a matter of national importance and as a matter of urgency, that opportunity is availed so that we can get to the depth of the matters, and so that we can really overcome that ugly incident that happened so that together we can commiserate with those who lost their lives and those who lost their property in the otherwise unfortunate incidents. 

Mr Speaker, may I at this point in time request that this Parliament observes a minute of silence for the 24 Ugandans, some of whom were children -(Interjections)- we did it yesterday I understand, but today we are constituted as Parliament -(Interjections)- so that it is now our time as Parliament to pay our homage. I request that -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sekikuubo, yesterday it was Parliament, meeting in Parliament, and motioned by His Excellency the President, we did observe a minute of silence for not only 24 but for all others that might not have been counted. So, I think we can skip that. 

MR SEKIKUUBO: Mr Speaker, concerning this matter, you could give a time frame -

THE SPEAKER: As I said, I do not see a lot of problems because the President’s address was written and therefore producing copies might not - but since the Leader of Government is here and he has heard, I think he will help us to expedite the process so that this is not delayed. It is an urgent matter and we need to make our contribution. We need to ensure stability in the country and the region. So, your point is well taken. 

2.49
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been in my constituency for 12 days, which ended yesterday, and these problems even got me there. I just read from the New Vision but I was not available in Kampala. 

I rise to raise a serious matter of concern regarding the salaries of police officers in more than half of Aruu County, in Pader District. Over the last two years, several police officers – and I have the list of their names and numbers - have not been able to get their salaries. I refer specifically to the Special Police Constables who have stayed for over 23 months without getting any single coin from the government coffers. This explains why three weeks ago, a police officer had to kill people because of an old debt of Shs 5,000. 

Now that peace is returning to the North and now that the Police is playing a very instrumental role in ensuring that people resettle in their traditional homes, can the Minister of Internal Affairs tell this country why we always have problems with salaries of police officers and yet these are very instrumental people for the peace and resettlement of Acholi in Northern Uganda? 

Can the minister assure us that he can urgently send a high powered delegation specifically to Pader to find out which categories of police officers are not getting their salaries? Many of them refused to give me their police numbers because they are afraid that they can be disciplined for insubordination, but a few of them gave me their numbers, which I can make available to the minister at the earliest possible convenience. 

Secondly, in relation to the Police, I donated metals for building bridges in Purang sub-county in Pader District. Unfortunately, the Police in Purang sub-county carried away those metals and sold them to metal dealers and the whole community is not happy, and there is a petition which I will present to your office. So, could the minister not prevent these activities of police officers selling metals donated by Odonga Otto to help the community build a bridge? Could this be because of the pressures of staying without salaries for over two years? Can the minister assure us that we are safe on the road since these policemen are armed and they have stayed for over two years without earning any income from the Government? Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: But don’t those police officers who have not been getting salaries have bank accounts?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes; some have bank accounts and some claim that the problem is due to disjointed bank statements. They have several categories of problems. For some their bank accounts are not in tandem with what is in the ministry. So, they have several clusters of problems. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let the minister assist us on this. 

2.59 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, hon. Otto did bring this matter to my attention I think late last week. I took immediate action, got in touch with the DPC and even the RPC of that area and he gave me a report. If today were not Cabinet day, a written answer to his query would be in his hands. I can assure you that this afternoon or this evening, I will find that letter giving the answer. However, since he has decided to raise it on the Floor of Parliament, let me also give him a verbal answer but also promise that he will get a written answer as well. 

There are two problems not only in Pader but in quite a number of districts. One is that about six months ago, we carried out a verification exercise to find out who is where in order to clean up the payroll in the Police Force. Some of these officers were not found on site and, therefore, a conclusion was reached by the investigating team that they had actually absconded from duty and consequently, their names were deleted from the payroll. We are now trying to see how to get them back on the payroll. 

Secondly, lately we have actually discovered that there were some ghost officers on the payroll of the Police. You have already heard about some casualties. As I speak, or at least as of Friday, there was a team in Pader carrying out a verification exercise again to ensure that whoever is on our payroll is actually within the force. I want to promise this House that those officers that were found – because I have discussed this with the management of the Police – on duty and verified to be properly recruited, their salaries will be paid by the end of this month. Thank you.

2.55
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime ago, some police officers at the headquarters were arrested in connection with what the minister has just called “ghosts in the Police Force”. After appearing briefly in court, they were taken to Luzira and to date, they are still there. Word getting out from some of them indicates that they could be used as sacrificial lambs for doings that were not of their making. 

They are appealing to the justice system to bring them speedily to the courts of law so that they have a chance to tell the country their side of the story. May I request the honourable minister to expedite this process? I thank you. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I will need your guidance, as a lawyer, on whether a minister can stand here and make a statement on a case of this type since these people are before the courts of law. My only prayer is that let the law take its course. You can be assured that government will not victimise people. Investigations have been carried out and I suggest that we wait to hear what court has to say. If court says these people are innocent, let it be so. Otherwise, I do not think I can make any statement on this matter when it is still before court, but I need to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: No, we should leave it to the court.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Odonga Otto for raising this issue. The minister has indicated that he will be having a team in Pader to re-admit those officers who, at the time of verification exercise, were not at station. 

But I would like to inform the minister that even in Katakwi, there are quite a number of such cases because that exercise was conducted at a time when the officers had not been supplied with food items; most of them had gone to their homes to pick some food supplies. The others, as the honourable colleague indicated, had not been paid for a number of months. So, although they were found out of station, it was due to inevitable circumstances. My clarification to the minister is whether his team will get to Katakwi District for the same exercise.

THE SPEAKER: I notice that we have prolonged this matter.

2.59
MR PATRICK OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli South County, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, I come from Sigulu in Bukoli South constituency. I would like to say that I see a similar situation in my constituency, most especially in the islands. This problem has been compounded to the extent that now it is taken for granted. Many people are arrested and detained beyond the mandatory 24 hours with excuses that communication is a problem. We have had problems in explaining this to the people.

The other issue is that such areas are defined as hard-to-reach. The salaries that are paid to these constables cannot enable them leave in those areas. I have talked to the minister on several occasions requesting him to see what to do for these officers just like other ministries are doing by giving something to enable –

THE SPEAKER: No, honestly, the subject we are dealing with is non-payment of police officers but now you are bringing in general policies of – no, I think we should restrict ourselves to issues of non-payment of police officers and I think we have done so.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, allow me respond to what my colleague from Katakwi said. I would like to assure him that this exercise is being done country wide. So, that will not leave out Katakwi; we will definitely address the problems there. 

However, I would like to inform this House and also appeal to my colleagues that we also have a problem with our own people. I refer specifically to Katakwi because I have a lot of interests in that place; we are also developing a police college there.

Some people, and I have received this complaint from some serving officers and this is especially as far as ASTU are concerned - that people will only appear on the pay day. After receiving their payments, they will disappear again. So, the officers who keep themselves on duty have been asking this question: “Sir, should we all disappear or we should not?” 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to my colleagues, especially those from areas where we have ASTU, to please help me have the officers on duty.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, police is everywhere. I also have police stations in Masaka with a lot of personnel. That is why I am concerned with whatever is said here about police. The minister, in my opinion, is not in order –(Laughter)– let me re-phrase it. What I am saying relates to what the minister said that if somebody is not on duty, in his opinion, that person does not belong to the establishment. But, first of all, I would like to find out whether the minister knows his establishment.

Secondly, the minister in his last point, talked about absence. But that is not Parliament’s duty; it is the minister’s duty to ensure the administration is done properly. So, is the minister in order to assume that if one is not on duty on a day when a verification exercise is done, that person does not exist? And is he in order not know the establishment of his force? He should tell us what is happening. Is he in order to confuse us? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, my understanding is that the administration became suspicious that they were maybe paying people who were not in existence. So they decided to make surprise checks at various stations and actually found that some people were not on duty. What would you expect them to do if, as a result of the surprise visit, they found some officers not there? I think that is what he was saying. And I think we have ended this matter. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, let me just make one point clear especially to my sister, hon. Sauda Mugerwa. SPCs and ASTUs are not a permanent group of employees within the police. They are recruited as and when the situation demands. And they are sent away as the situation demands. That is why we do not have constant numbers of such members of the force; their number keeps changing depending on the security challenges in a given area. 

So, it is not because I do not know the establishment of my force; I know it. And for the regular police, I can tell you the strength: for ASTUs and SPCs, the number varies from place to place and could even vary from month by month. I thought I should make that clarification. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Minister.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to move that the Appropriation Bill, 2009 be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is seconded? Okay, it is.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, the Appropriation Bill, 2009 has an objective, which is to provide for the authorisation of public expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the sum of Shs 6,625,141,545 for the financial year ending 30 June 2010. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister.

This is the Appropriation Bill, which follows the Committee of Supply in that it is an instrument tying up whatever is supplied so that the money that you have appropriated can be spent. 

Previously, the problem we used to have was that sometimes the figure in the Appropriation Bill was not in agreement with the figures that we supplied in the Committee of Supply. Otherwise, it would have been very easy to dispose of this Bill because there is no policy matter other than saying these are the figures supplied and this is an instrument carrying out what you supplied. But because of the past happenings, it is necessary that this Bill goes to the committee for scrutiny and to ascertain whether the figures are in agreement with what we had. So, the Bill is sent to the appropriate committee to handle and report back promptly. 

This is a one-day’s affair really and I hope the report from the committee will be available this week by Friday.   

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PROHIBITION OF FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION BILL, 2009

3.09
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Earlier this year in April, I moved a motion in this House seeking leave of the House to allow me introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill, 2009” and the motion was unanimously passed by this House. 

I, therefore, have the pleasure and I would like to move that a Bill entitled, “The Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill, 2009” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is seconded. 
   
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to lay a copy of the Bill on the Table. 

In the same vein as required by our Rules of Procedure, I would also like to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications. (Interjection) Somebody is asking for copies, we have made enough copies and I think each Member has been availed a copy in their pigeon hole. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to handle and report back. I have heard the question that, “Which committee?” I think this is a matter of gender so it should be the committee dealing with gender and labour. But it should feel free to co-opt Members from other committees who can be of use to it so that they dispose of this Bill promptly. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US$10 MILLION CREDIT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE AVIAN AND HUMAN INFLUENZA PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE PROJECT

3.12
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I presented a motion to the House and it was committed to the committee. So, it now has to be the chairperson to the committee to present. 

3.13
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Erinah Wangwa): Mr Speaker, I would like to request for more time for our report to be ready, most probably by Friday. I am sorry, we do not sit on Friday but it will be ready by the next sitting. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean tomorrow? 

MS WANGWA: Okay, we will do it tomorrow.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable vice-chairperson, I have got a copy of a report of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request for the Avian and Human Influenza Preparedness and Response Project but you said you are not ready to present the report today? 

MS WANGWA: Mr Speaker, there were a few things that we had to correct in that report so we just ask for a little more time. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we should not press you much. We appreciate the circumstances you are in and we concede to your request that you present this report tomorrow. 

MR SEKIKUUBO: Mr Speaker, I just want to point out that now that the scare of avian flu and human influenza has dissipated, is it a matter of urgency that we continue with borrowing when there is no scare in the country and worldwide? It has really gone down. I would imagine that we may not really have it. 

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the scare is real. Some of our neighbouring countries already have the disease, that is, H5N1 bird flu but I would also like to inform the House that there is another cousin disease to avian flu, which is H1N1, commonly known as swine flu, which is already with us. The methods we use for surveillance or prevention and treatment are more or less the same.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. A few minutes ago we were told that the committee is going to present a report to this august House tomorrow whereby the Members will have an opportunity to discuss all these in detail and the minister would in return respond.

Is it procedurally right that we start alluding to this report before we receive the full report as it was promised tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: I think the issue was raised by hon. Sekikuubo. His point was that is it necessary to consider this when the danger is out. Therefore, the minister came in to explain the prevailing circumstances that it is necessary but we are not dealing with the report. He is just giving information to hon. Sekikuubo and the House otherwise we shall discuss the report tomorrow when it is presented.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I think that report was prepared but there were questions, which were raised and what the committee did was to liaise with us, the social services committee, and we did undertake a visit to the various sites, including Mulago Hospital, Entebbe Hospital and Uganda Virus Research Institute to look at the areas where some of the construction is going to take place.

We held discussions with a number of officials so I think the committee is compiling a report to accommodate some of the observations we have made. So maybe the chairperson did not clarify that.

Secondly, maybe to answer hon. Sekikuubo, in addition to what the minister has said, much as we may see the Avian and human influenza, what this project is going to do is to build the capacity of the health system to handle epidemics, including Cholera and others so that you can have isolation wards and we will be able to manage better any other epidemics apart from Avian flu. I just wanted to give that information.

THE SPEAKER: So I think that ends the business of today. We are adjourning prematurely. Can I appeal to the committee handling the Appropriation Bill to utilise this time so that tomorrow we dispose of this matter fast? It is just a one-page report. So I am appealing to the committee to expeditiously handle this matter so that tomorrow we can deal with the Appropriation Bill.

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.19 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 September 2009 at 2.00 p.m.) 

