Wednesday, 14 September 2011

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for yesterday. We were able to cover a lot of ground and that has lessened the work that we have to do today, although we still have a lot of work. I am happy that we are starting at this time, and we should be able to push on until we accomplish what we need to accomplish today. 

We did not finish supply, so the Appropriation Bill is not ready. That means we cannot appropriate today because it is based on the supply that we should have finished. Those figures are what go in the Appropriation Bill. So, we will not be able to deal with that until we finish the supply, then it will be sent for printing and those figures will come back. That now means, inevitably, we have to roll some business to enable us to finish. That is all. I thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OUTBREAK OF HEPATITIS B

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday, we asked the honourable Minister of Health to make a statement. The statement attracts a debate and the debate will take 30 minutes.

2.45
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Mr Speaker, I am here to brief you on the status of Hepatitis B and other outbreaks in the country, which have been of great concern to the honourable Members of Parliament. Our country has been experiencing a number of disease outbreaks and of major concern is Hepatitis B. 

Uganda is highly endemic for Hepatitis B virus infection. Currently, it is estimated that 10 percent - that is more than three million Ugandans - are living with chronic Hepatitis B infection. The highest burden has been recorded in Northern Uganda with 25 percent of the population infected. Other infections are recorded in West Nile, central and north-east of the country. About four to seven percent of the people infected are in the southern and south-western regions. 

While most people are infected with these viruses, they are unaware of their infection. They face the possibility of developing devastating or fatal liver diseases at some point in their lives, and unknowingly transmit the infection to others. 

The wide ranging impact of the disease from health to social and economic issues, means it presents a considerable barrier to development.

The causes of Hepatitis B

The disease is caused by the Hepatitis B virus and the symptoms of Hepatitis B include, among others, fever, yellow eyes, dark urine, fatigue or feeling tired quickly, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. 

Other symptoms of Hepatitis B occur later in life when complications of Cirrhosis and Liver Cancer have appeared. This time the patient may present with a swollen abdomen due to a big liver, which could be Liver Cancer, vomiting blood and mental illness. When these occur, the condition is at the advanced stage and may lead to death.

Ministry of Health interventions to prevent the transmission of Hepatitis include the following:
 
Health promotion and education

The ministry has undertaken a number of sensitisation campaigns to sensitise communities on safe ways of preventing the spread of the disease. These programmes are conducted on a continuous basis throughout the country. 

Routine immunisation

The ministry has continuously provided vaccines for immunisation against Hepatitis B. Since 2002, this vaccine has been available in the country, administered as part of Uganda National Expanded Programme on Immunisation (UNEPI). Children who are immunised are protected from getting Hepatitis B. 

Early screening

The ministry promotes the screening for Hepatitis B and C. This helps individuals to know if they are infected with Hepatitis B and C. Early diagnosis provides an opportunity for medical support before complications occur. It also creates awareness so that infected people take precaution to prevent transmission of the virus to others, and allows for precautions to adopt lifestyles that will reduce harm caused to the liver such as reduction in excessive alcohol intake.

Blood screening

The ministry has in addition instituted a policy of screening of blood before transfusion to other persons. This is done to prevent transmission of diseases that are likely to be got from unsafe blood.

Re-use of injections

The Ministry of Health instituted a policy stopping the re-use of injection needles as a way of fighting infectious diseases.

Safe sex practices

The ministry, in addition, advocates for safe sex practices including minimising the number of sexual contacts and use of condoms. This in a way helps in prevention of the disease.

Vaccine availability

The ministry has also procured and distributed Hepatitis B vaccines to all districts to vaccinate the health workers.

Regarding specific concerns of honourable Members of Parliament from Kitgum and Mbarara, the Ministry of Health has noted and followed up the issue. Kitgum District has reported 99 infected patients of Hepatitis B since July 2011. A total of 18 tested positive and are currently admitted in the hospital; three died. 

In Lira, the district has reported eight confirmed patients of Hepatitis B of whom four have died. 

The ministry has noted all these reports and is working with local governments to put control measures as outlined above to combat this disease. I wish to assure the House that the ministry is committed to controlling the spread of Hepatitis B.

There are, however, other forms of Hepatitis which need mention in this august House. These are Hepatitis A, C, D, and E. Of great concern to Uganda is Hepatitis E.

Hepatitis E

It is found in faeces of infected persons and can be transmitted by eating contaminated food and water. 

In many cases, the infections are mild with many people completely recovering while others remain immune from further infections with the same virus. Most people get infected early in life.

The Ministry of Health received reports of Hepatitis E outbreak from the districts of Kitgum, Lamwo, Pader and Kaabong in August 2009. We worked with the local governments to control the outbreaks. 

Kaabong District is still reporting patients with Hepatitis E. It is now endemic due to poor sanitation and unsafe water sources. 

The cumulative patients in Kaabong District are 1,042 and two percent have passed away. A response plan was developed and mobilising resources is ongoing. The ministry is working with the district to improve water and sanitation systems including health, education and health promotion to prevent Hepatitis E infections.

The status of other outbreak diseases are herein outlined in this paper. Perhaps I will stop with Hepatitis E so that the honourable members will look through the other disease status.

In summary, Hepatitis B is a disease that is transmitted sexually. The preventive measures that we have put for HIV/AIDS are the same preventive measures we need to put for Hepatitis B. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.02
MS BEATRICE ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for her prompt report to this House. I would want to really congratulate her. I think maybe because she is a mother, she knows the urgency of these issues, and I thank her for the timely response to my plight.

When I talk of the minister, I think she does not work alone. My brother the Minister of State has been the one I have been so much in touch with, but credit still goes to the boss, and more so, a lady.

I also want to congratulate the minister for the accurate data she has presented. When I presented the issue yesterday, they went back to the source and the data she is quoting here is exactly what I have. That means that she did her homework immediately I raised this.

I just want to say that other ministers should emulate this work by getting facts right rather than getting them wrong and going defensive. 

However, I just want to bring to her notice that in her report she is saying that Government is doing all that is possible, including screening of the patients. As I speak, Lamwo does not have the reagents for testing. They have 80 patients who are not yet screened because they do not have the reagents. That is only those who were able to report to the hospital. There are those who have not made it to the hospital. As you rightly commented here, it is a slow disease and we, the people from the North, are very resistant. You put aside your health, continue working and by the time you are sick, you are really dying. So, those ones are still in the village and they are not yet accounted for. I want to pray that you move quickly to put in place the reagents to help the medical personnel screen these patients.

I also wanted to inform you that there is already one person who has died with Hepatitis C and another person who has died with Hepatitis E; an expectant mother. That means that as we are talking about Hepatitis B, Hepatitis E is also resurrecting. Even if we had already dealt with –(Member timed out_)

3.06
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am a physician. I want to thank the Minister of Health for bringing us what exactly we were expecting, and I have some additions.

Yesterday, when I was submitting in this Parliament, I said that when I was actually overseeing an undergraduate student, we did a study in Mbarara and more so Kiruhura, and found that the prevalence in Kiruhura was about 10 percent. But in your report, hon. Minister, I think the data from Mbarara is a bit scanty. The Minister of Health has to go to Western Uganda and find more information.

The screening is very minimal and yet this disease is almost becoming as bad as HIV. We talked about treatment, but what will happen to those patients who are already infected? Yesterday, I talked about some option treatments like Interferon gamma and some anti-retroviral drugs, which you use. However, the outcomes of treatments are not very reliable. Sorry to speak that language, but that is the language of the doctors.

I was of the view that the ministry looks at how we treat those who are already infected. Do we leave them to die and say we have only prevented? Because we have them already with us and they are going to transmit the disease.

The way forward should be that we should actually start some trials, which I saw being carried out in Bristol when I was in England. We can try them on Ugandans and we see whether we can salvage them. Otherwise, if we do not, we are going to lose very many people to Hepatitis B.

I urge everybody in this Parliament to at least screen themselves. Do not go for only HIV, but also Hepatitis B, because you might be having it. I beg to submit, thank you very much.

3.08
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for the statement. My fears are that in this liberalised movement pattern, anybody can move anywhere. You know the method of transmission of Hepatitis B is more or less the same as that of HIV/AIDS. So, it is not useful for us to concentrate our energies in just one region and say it is Kitgum, Pader, Lamwo and Kaabong. The whole country has to be put on alert because there is a likelihood of the disease being everywhere.

On page 2, bullet two, under routine, the minister said that the ministry has continuously provided vaccines for immunisation against Hepatitis B, and that since 2002 the vaccine has been available for routine immunisation. On page 3, on vaccine availability, the minister said that the ministry has procured and distributed Hepatitis B vaccines to all districts to vaccinate health workers.

So, is the routine immunisation only for health workers? May we get to know what you are talking about exactly? Is the Hepatitis B vaccine, which is available, only preserved for the health workers or is it for routine immunisation targeting all those who are susceptible to it?

I would also like to underscore the current tragedy that we are faced with, of floods all over the country. As I said earlier, the focal areas of infection now cannot be limited to those districts where the minister mentioned in her statement. With Hepatitis E being transmissible through contaminated water and food, an infected person may get into some area with poor sanitation and I can assure you – we really have a big problem! Hon. Minister, can you let us know whether the ministry has adequate capacity to re-assure Ugandans that you are able to contain the situation? Or does Parliament need to do something to help the ministry get on top of the situation. Thank you.

3.11
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister of Health for the report she has given us. However, there is a lot that was not captured because when you look at Hepatitis B, that is the biggest threat we have in health although the minister has never come out to educate the people. I was once working with the Red Cross, but I noted that the responsibility of disseminating information on this disease to the masses has been left to Red Cross and the Blood Bank. When I was there, I saw a catastrophe because we would go and get blood; the HIV would be low, but Hepatitis would be plenty. And because you cannot transfuse that blood, you destroy it together with the bag. And yet a blood bag costs a minimum of Shs 65,000, meaning we are throwing away that money because of this disease. 

This disease is easily transmitted; it is transmitted even through kissing – the moment you have exchange of saliva, you get Hepatitis B! Even when people share straws during malwa drinking, they get this disease. No wonder the trend shows that the disease is more pronounced in the north and less in the west. (Laughter) But I urge the Minister of Health to come on board and work with the Red Cross and engage your people. 

When it comes to immunisation, the vaccines are not even enough. One time I was immunised, but when we went for a second round, there was no vaccine in the country. So, when we stand here, let us not say, “We were given these doses” when in actual sense we know the doses are not enough. Thank you.

3.14
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for bringing this information to us in time. In 1984, when HIV/AIDS became an issue, the approach that Government and communities took in order to fight the deadly disease was sterner than what I am now seeing with this Hepatitis B. That time, Government came up with full commitment; there was drumming on radio – which made you think twice even if you were about to make a decision. (Laughter) But now I have seen, from the information that we have been given, Hepatitis B is more deadly than the HIV that we have feared.

The minister in her report is giving us the impression that there are vaccines out there, and yet every month I go to my constituency, but I have never seen medical workers move round to sensitise the communities, let alone to establish immunisation centres where people can be vaccinated against this disease. Actually, if Government were more serious through Ministry of Health, this disease could be contained, since we have been told that there is a vaccine for it, unlike with HIV. But where are the people? It now looks as though focus is being put on babies at birth because it is clearly stated in the minister’s statement. She says, “UNICEF has provided vaccines and children are now being vaccinated.” What about those of us, who are no longer within that age bracket, are you leaving us to die? (Laughter) Is it because you think that we have done all that we were supposed to do in this world and, therefore, we can be sacrificed? What is being done? I think there is need for the health ministry –(Interruption)

MRS KIIZA: Thank you, hon. Wadri. The information I want to give is that nobody ceases to be a child; at any age, you are always your mother’s child. So, even now, you are still a child. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: I am happy that I have been informed by a mother; that is the way they take us. Even if I am an octogenarian, I am still a child to somebody somewhere. 

But I appeal to the health ministry to stop only looking at children, because, in order for them to come into being, we adults are a prerequisite. So, you need to protect the buffer stock – that is the adults. Is there a programme that targets the entire population, regardless of where the outbreak has occurred, so that we are able to contain this deadly disease from the very beginning? 

I think we should not just limit ourselves to this vaccination exercise; there is need for us to come out and sensitise the community. Sensitisation is the only key; if we can go out to the public and tell them about the causes and ways of preventing this disease, then we will be safe –(Member timed out_)

3.18
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the health minister for giving us this report. However, the report was prompted by a debate in Parliament. I hope in future, she will bring reports even when matters have not been raised here. If we have an epidemic like this, I think it is important that you report to Parliament so that, together, we can look for solutions.

I have a few points for clarification and probably the minister will give us further information on them. When you look at the viral infections which are hitting this country, and you look at the epidemiological profile, there seems to be a geographical axis that touches Northern Uganda and South Sudan, probably extending to the North Eastern part of Africa, and maybe extending to DR Congo. I just want to inquire from the minister whether, apart from the internal interventions which we have in the country, there are some other cross-border regional programmes where you work with neighbouring countries like South Sudan and DRC, to contain some of these viral epidemics at a regional level. You may do a lot within the country, but if the neighbours are not doing enough, then it becomes a challenge.

When you look at the diseases we have had like Ebola, haemorrhagic fevers, there seems to be an axis which goes beyond the borders of Uganda. So, I would like to know if there is some regional intervention –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Baryomunsi for giving way. The information I want to give you is that the minister stated here that the disease has become endemic. This means that it is now an epidemic –(Interjection)– but they are almost closely related. I remember when hon. Nduhuura, in the last Parliament, when he was state minister for health, we had a major outbreak in West Nile of – I have forgotten the disease but that one –(Laughter)- and the response you gave is what saved the situation, and I am sure hon. Minister, having come from West Nile, will take this matter of Hepatitis B as a serious issue because as we talk, Arua Regional Referral Hospital, which serves the whole of West Nile and DR Congo which you are talking about, does not have the drugs to treat patients of Hepatitis B. 

Just yesterday –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating?

MR ATIKU: No. I am giving him the information because he is talking about the West Nile region. (Laughter) So, hon. Minister, you really have to take interest because the drugs are not there in most of the regional referral hospitals. Patients from Arua are being referred to Mulago, which is costing more than half a million. You need to take interest and that is the information I wanted to give you. I thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you hon. Member for the information and I agree with you that the minister should take the matter seriously. At some other date, I could educate you on “endemic and epidemic” because there is no time for that now, but I thank you for the information.

The other point that I wanted to raise for clarification is on page 2. The minister reports that there is early screening and the ministry is promoting the screening for Hepatitis B and C, I presume in the whole country. Could you probably shed more light on the capacity that the ministry has to do this screening in all parts of the country? Up-to what level? Are you doing it in regional referral hospitals, up-to health centre IVs, or even health centres IIIs, so that we can rest assured that within our constituencies, this kind of screening is taking place? At least in my constituency, I do not think that screening is really occurring at community level. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the 30 minutes are over. I will ask the hon. Minister to respond.

3.23
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Mr Speaker, through you, I would like to thank the honourable members for the concerns that have been raised. I want to also thank the Member of Parliament, Betty Anywar, and for her applaud. It is true that the northern part of the country has been most affected and we have truly concentrated, especially in Kitgum and Lamwo, and we are still doing more. As I talk now, we are assembling some of our technical people to go and re-assess the situation on the ground. For the whole country, we are re-assessing the situation, and as I said over all, about 10 percent of Ugandans are affected, but this varies from region to region.

It is true that we do not have designated treatment for Hepatitis B, and we are currently using anti-retroviral drugs; the medicines that are used for treating HIV/AIDS. And already, trials are going on in Mulago Regional Referral Hospital for which of the available anti-retroviral medicines are best for treating Hepatitis B. These trials will help us set a policy as to which of the anti-retroviral medicines we should set aside for treating Hepatitis B. But at the moment, when we get patients who are infected and need treatment, that is what we use –(Interruption)
 
MR KATOTO: I thank you for giving way. Hon. Minister, when are we going to stop having things put on paper, and coming up when disaster strikes instead of preventing it? They say prevention is better than cure. Actually, there are things that are costing us and are killing Ugandans like such diseases, which could be prevented early enough. For example, Yellow Fever; we have not gone out to educate people to go to hospital and get immunized. So, when are we going to stop just waiting for a disaster to strike and then we act instead of preventing it? I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Uuumh!! (Laughter)

DR ONDOA: As I reported earlier, health promotion and health education about Hepatitis B is ongoing. Even recently, we did celebrate the World Hepatitis Day and during that time, we disseminated information on prevention and treatment of Hepatitis B. So, information is ongoing and since 2002, we have incorporated the Hepatitis B vaccine in our National Immunisation Programme. So, we now have a pentavalent vaccine, including viral vaccines, that we use to immunise all children under one year for Hepatitis B, and that is a step forward. We also have a programme to immunize all health workers against Hepatitis B. We are targeting health workers first because this is a two-pronged approach. 

Hepatitis B, as I earlier communicated, is transmitted sexually and also through needles - needle pricks and also blood fluids. So, health workers handle so many patients and if we prevent Hepatitis amongst them, then the cascade effect to the other patients are prevented.

The third programme we are having is to have a whole programme for the country, but that has budgetary implications, and that is what we are working on now. So, we have already passed two stages as far as the Hepatitis B vaccine is concerned –

MS BAKO: I thank you, hon. Minister. On page 3, you have clearly stated that safe sex practices would also help to prevent the situation, and you again go to say that minimising sexual contact would prevent Hepatitis. I do not know whether you are meaning Hepatitis E or B. But in which case, if Hepatitis is as dangerous as HIV, would it be no sex at all or it is minimising the contact. What is the information you want me to go with here –(Laughter)- because it is one thing to say minimise the sexual contact, and it is another thing to say do not do it at all because this is a viral infection? So, what is the issue here? Is it minimising the contact or having no sex at all when you are infected? 

MR KATUNTU: I think that for the purposes of the record, you will need to re-write the bullet on safe sex practices because I do not think you intended to mean what is written here. You say, “The ministry, in addition, advocates for safe sex practices, including minimising the number of sexual contacts and use of condoms.” What this actually means is that, you are also minimising the use of condoms and what I would advise is that you redraft it to read, “The ministry, in addition, advocates for safer sex practices including use of condoms and minimising the number of sexual contacts”. Otherwise, here, it is like you are minimising the use of condoms.

DR ONDOA: Mr Speaker, I want to emphasise that Hepatitis B is more infectious than HIV/AIDS. So, for us to prevent that, we need to have as few sexual contacts as possible. Zero-grazing is the word; keep the zip up. (Laughter) I beg to continue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. Let the minister wind up.

DR ONDOA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to emphasise that the Ministry of Health is doing much more to combat Hepatitis B and we need the support of the honourable Members of Parliament, especially in sensitising the community on the prevention of this disease. 

Dr Baryomunsi also requested us to do a lot more on regional and cross-border interventions, and that is precisely what we are doing right now, especially infectious diseases and diseases that affect the cross-borders. Currently, we are having the East African Community health programmes so that we work together in minimising and in preventing many of the diseases that affect the people in the common borders.

I think this all that I can report for now concerning the issues that were raised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Alpha and Omega Primary School represented in this Parliament by hon. Chemutai Phyllis, Woman Member of Parliament, Kapchorwa. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I have two sets of announcements:

“Invitation to the Workplace Leadership Forum at Parliament 

All Members of Parliament are invited to the Workplace Leadership Forum at Parliament on Thursday, 22 September 2011, starting at 4.30 p.m. 

Topics to be covered:
1.	How to win the next generation and not just the next election.
2.	Integrity in leadership.

Guest speakers will be Dr Steve Ogan and Rt Rev Dr Joel Obetia.” 

Please endeavour to attend. Invitation cards have been delivered to your pigeonholes.

Secondly, hon. Members, a reminder of the notice to Members that was sent the other day.

“This is to inform you that Parliament is organising the 13th National Prayer Breakfast which will take place on Saturday, 8 October 2011 at Hotel Africana, Nile Hall at 7.30a.m. 

His Excellency, Salva Kiir, the President of South Sudan, will be the chief guest and the chief host will be His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; the host is Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga. 

The guest speaker will be Ambassador Dr Inonge Mbikusita, Zambia’s ambassador to Belgium.” 

Please arrange to attend the function. Cards will be put in the pigeonholes next week and the organising committee will keep you updated on the details.

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking your guidance. In the presentation by the honourable minister, she had two parts: One, she responded to my query on Hepatitis B, but she had also given us in her report about the outbreak of other diseases. I am wondering when Members will have the privilege to respond to that, because some of us still had other outbreaks like nodding disease in Kitgum, among children. At what moment shall we pronounce ourselves on her second part of the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be when she is next listed on the Order Paper.

COMMITTEE OF THE SUPPLY

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you will recall that yesterday, we stood over some votes both in recurrent and development expenditure for this financial year. I am reliably informed that consultations were held as I directed yesterday, and there have been positions that have been harmonised. So, we will be able to proceed with the votes that were stood over. We will start with recurrent expenditure.

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 52,169,156,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

Hon. Minister, can you read what you agreed upon.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I note that when you are proceeding particularly on this item, we ought to be having the Chairperson of the Budget Committee in liaison with the minister and apparently, I thought if it could be for your indulgence, we could have the two to harmonise and guide the debate. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have the Chairman of Finance. They all attended the meeting.

Hon. Members, can we again stand over Vote 008 briefly.

Vote 010 – Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 21,295,069,000 under Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Chairman, I seek guidance on how the procedural matter raised has been resolved.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We stood over that vote, hon. Member.

Vote 011 – Ministry of Local Government

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,977,133,000 under Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 018 – Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 19,389,897,000 under Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012 -

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move that Shs 2,290,000,000 from Vote 008 moves to Vote 018 – Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What would the total be then?

MR OMACH: It would be the same figure: 2,290,000 –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, what is the new total that you are proposing? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I am agreeing that a total of Shs 2,290,000,000 moves from Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as you have just read (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment by the hon. Minister that Vote 018 be added a sum of Shs 2,290,000,000 from Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 19,389,897,000 under Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 119 – Uganda Registration Services Bureau 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,758,344,000 under Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 121 – Dairy Development Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,260,000,000 under Vote 121 - Dairy Development Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 122 – Kampala Capital City Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 31,548,455,000 under Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012 -

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification as to whether this money includes the money for working on Kampala Capital City Roads, because under the law – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That one is under development expenditure, not recurrent. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 31,548,455,000 under Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 140 – Uganda Management Institute

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 425,449,000 under Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012 -

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, pardon me please, unless the document I have is wrong; Uganda Management Institute Vote 140 - recurrent is Shs 7 billion.

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think hon. Ekanya is talking about development, which is controversial, and when we get to it, we will explain to the House.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I think I have the wrong document.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 425,449,000, under Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 143 – Uganda Bureau of Statistics

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 27,513,597,000 under Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147 – Local Government Finance Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,122,098,000 under Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 153 – PDDA

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,937,406,000 under Vote 153 - PPDA, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. Yes, minister.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the House that we did not agree on this particular vote because it is to stay within Ministry of Finance. So, we stay it.

MR TIM LWANGA: Mr Chairman, on that one, we reduced the recurrent expenditure by Shs 1,340,000,000. It now reads Shs 6,697,406,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, is that the figure you are agreeable to?

MR OMACH: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,697,406,000, under Vote 153 - PPDA, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development:

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. There is Vote 148 for Judicial Service Commission, which was stood over; we seem to have skipped it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Judicial Service Commission?

Vote 132 – Education Service Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,941,859,000 under Vote 132 - Education Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133 – Directorate of Public Prosecution

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,664,708,000 under Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecution, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 134 – Health Service Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,630,026,000 under Vote 134 - Health Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 148 – Judicial Service Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,166,658,000 under Vote 148 - Judicial Service Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 156 – Uganda Land Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 543,877,000 under Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 52,169,156,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 52,169,156,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure - Vote 001

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 15,379,570,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, chairperson. This morning, we did consult with the committee and we agreed that Shs 1 billion be put back on this Vote. So, the total is Shs 16,379,570,000. 

MR LWANGA: We agree, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the figure then?

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, the figure is Shs 16,379,570,000.

MR EKANYA: The chairperson of this committee, hon. Tinkasiimire, objected.  

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, this happened to be the last item we handled in the meeting this morning and the hon. Shadow Minister of Finance had left the meeting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 16,379,570,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 164,947,045,000 under Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. 

I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 4,972,735,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, during the meeting this morning, we had a problem over this and we could not decide. It was decided by the committee that we bring it back to the House for it to decide. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I appreciate the predicament in which the committee found itself. We have many times observed the anomaly in the allocation of the $ 8 million for the Civil Service College under Public Service and I beg to bring evidence. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, what are we doing now? Can you detail for us what we are going to deal with, Mr Chairman?

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am wondering what I was being informed about because we did not know the problem we had. The amount of Shs 7,747,120,000 is as a result of the money which is supposed to be building a Public Service Enhancement Centre. From the records that we have looked at, this started in 2008 and this House duly passed a resolution allowing Government to borrow $ 23 million for the project, but eventually, this same House reversed that decision, asking it to go to UMI. (Interjections) Let me finish. Those are the documents we looked at. [Mr Epetait: “I just want to make a correction.”] You will make the correction. I will give you a chance. 

So, during the meeting this morning, the Minister of Public Service made a presentation. She presented the agreement and the agreement is very clear that the implementing agency was supposed to be Ministry of Public Service, and the resolution which was made was for Public Service. 

The Committee on Social Services had convinced the Budget Committee that this project be implemented by the Ministry of Education through UMI. So, that is where we are. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, the Eighth Parliament resolved that matter. When Government came with a loan request of $70 million for the Public Service Enhancement Project, we debated at length and reduced the loan amount to $ 23 million. An issue came up as to the breakdown of the $ 23 million. May I quote the Hansard of Thursday, 14 August 2008, page 5782, where we were considering that matter. 

The Prime Minister, then Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi said, “Madam Speaker, last time we deferred this issue because there were a number of controversial matters which had to be resolved. We have since interfaced with various people and those matters have been addressed. Let me be specific…” 

On the issue of the Civil Service College, the Prime Minister said, “There was another issue of a Civil Service College and the view was that we should not have a Civil Service College, but this matter should be handled by the Uganda Management Institute (UMI). We agreed that UMI should take charge of this matter…”

The Minister of Finance, hon. Suruma, was then requested to make a clarification and this is what he had to say, “As reported by the Committee on National Economy, the amounts have been reduced to $ 23 million and out of this, there is a breakdown indicating that $ 15 million is for the Public Service improvement, the IPPS and record centre, and so forth, and the balance is for the Civil Service College, which will now fall under UMI, and then capacity building as indicated.”

I do not see any reason why somebody should turn around and try to amend what Parliament resolved then. It is a unilateral decision and from that time, we have been having battles year in, year out with Ministry of Public Service. Please, give us a break and let this project continue under UMI. We cannot be taken for a ride.

MR OKUPA: The ruling of the Speaker on that was that she thought the money was going to UMI. That was the ruling of the Speaker in the House. 

I have a letter here written on 30 October 2009. The honourable Minister of State for Public Service, Mrs Sezi Mbaguta, on behalf of H.E. the vice President opened the School of Civil Service at UMI and it was named Public Administration and Governance. 

This was the climax of the celebrations to mark the 40th Anniversary of the institute. If the minister went there to open, what did she open? This is a matter that was settled long ago. We should not be wasting our time.
 
MRS SEZI: I was delegated to go and celebrate the 40 years of UMI and that is why I went there. That is all I went to do.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I do not know the procedural implication of what was discussed in the last Parliament, but to go with what we discussed today in the Budget Committee, the argument was that UMI is simply going to change its content to accommodate the requirements of a service college, but it is actually not the service college.
 
The committee accepted that Public Service was to build a fully-fledged service college. I get lost with the procedural point about what the last Parliament had decided on. On what we discussed this morning, the idea was towards the direction of a Public Service college.

MS ALASO: I think it is important for Parliament and specifically committees, not to attempt to rewrite so many things that have happened in the past, because it will be a recipe for chaos. What we were dealing with was a loan request; a resolution that was sought from this House on 14 August 2008. Specific conditions were discussed; the Hansard is here as my colleagues have already presented.
 
The specific conditions for the loan request were discussed and what was agreed upon was that this college would be under UMI. Unless the House tonight wants to reconsider the loan request - if it is not, then Government needs to come out here -(Interjections)- Mr Chairperson, I need a bit of protection; the House is too noisy; I do not know what to do because I want to speak.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, order please. 

MS ALASO: Mr Chairperson, I want to ask the Prime Minister whether he would not want to stand with the commitments made by the same Government. The Prime Minister then and Dr Suruma, spoke here representing the Government of Uganda, making a commitment to the Parliament of Uganda. Do they now want to disown the commitments made by these people who represented Government? We should also remind ourselves of the committee report of the Social Services DCommittee. On page 23, the committee said that the project of the Civil Service College has implementation challenges. The college does not have ownership over the land it purports to have in Jinja. If our own committee has told us there were problems since 2008, what good, will we be doing to the children of this country who will pay this loan 10 to 20 years from now? We are already paying commitment fees on this loan since 2008. How can you pay those monies for redundant funds; you borrow money to keep in a handbag. It is not fair to this country; this Civil Service College must be implemented. I think it should go to where Government policy had said training institutions should be.
 
It is the policy of the NRM that all training institutions whether in health or any other, are housed under Education. This should not be an exception.

MR MAGYEZI: I thank you, Mr Chairman, I appreciate that this matter was discussed by the last Parliament. I would like to agree with hon. Alaso that this Civil Service College must be implemented. 

On the 25th of August, I presented the committee report on Public Service and Local Government. The committee report was discussed and approved with amendments. The amendment on this particular matter is in the Hansard. This House resolved that this matter be discussed by a tripartite committee composed of committees on Social Services, Public Service, and Local Government and Infrastructure. 

I took steps and met the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services, hon. Lyomoki, and together, we agreed to meet the chairperson of the Committee on Infrastructure so that we could convene a tripartite meeting of the three committees to discuss this matter.
 
I was surprised when I found that the Budget Committee had gone ahead to move funds from Ministry of Public Service to Ministry of Education under UMI, without consulting us, and without waiting for this tripartite meeting. 

The position of the Public Service and Local Government Committee on this matter is very clear and we would like to request that the funds - Shs 7.4 billion, be reverted to the Ministry of Public Service, to implement the Civil Service College with the following reasons. I beg the honourable members to listen to the arguments so that you can take a decision, guided by your own committee - (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I need your guidance. This matter was discussed and a decision was taken by the House. We now have a committee trying to reverse the decision of the entire House. Procedurally, is it correct for the committee –(Ms Kabakumba Masiko rose_)- hon. Kabakumba Masiko, you are not the chairperson, please. I am seeking your guidance to whether a committee can reverse the decision of the Parliament of Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, it does seem that this matter has not been resolved. I was sitting in the chair when the Committee on Public Service presented its report and the recommendations they made to this House generated a lot of debate, where Hansards were quoted. I remember we even asked the Chairman of the Committee on Social Services to make a comment on what had been said and he said his report also touches on the same subject. I remember the House I presided over took a decision that in order to finally resolve this matter, a tripartite committee on Public Service, Social Services and Infrastructure sit together to finally decide.

When the Budget Committee sat and reported to this Parliament, the same chairman of the Public Service committee rose and asked how this got there because the recommendation and decision of the House was that the matter must be resolved by a tripartite committee and this committee has not yet sat. How has the Budget Committee come up with this recommendation? That is what I remember. These are some of the dicey issues that remain unresolved. So, the House pronounced itself, but there was a caveat on the pronouncement, which was also recorded on the same Hansard. 

The matter was again, when the vote was stood over yesterday, referred for a discussion and consultation between the committee and the ministers, and now it has come up again. Hon. Members, these are issues that we cannot just sweep away because a decision has been made. For as long as it remains being an issue, we need to take a decision on it. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Deliberations on this issue show that there is more than meets the eye in the struggle for the domestication of the Public Service College, and as Parliament, we cannot be abused, Mr Chairman. There was a commitment on the Floor of this House by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda assuring this House on how this matter was going to be handled, and it was on this basis that this House made a decision. When did the matter change again for this to become controversial? At what point did it change and for what reasons, so that this House can move consciously knowing why a Prime Minister stands on the Floor of this House and gives an assurance, the Minister of Finance, gives an assurance, and the House makes an informed decision, and then this issue becomes a controversy. 

What is the intention? Can the Prime Minister please guide this House and inform us during what period this issue changed and why it changed? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I have sat here absolutely amazed by the levels of agitation in the discussion on this matter, and I am still trying to comprehend it. (Laughter) To the best of my knowledge, I will go and study what the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance in the last Parliament did -[Hon. Members: “The Hansard is here.”]- I am happy to inform you that without reference to the Hansard, I am here now. 

This UMI is a government institution under the Ministry of Education. The Public Service College is a public institution under the Ministry of Public Service, and there is no contradiction. To the best of my knowledge, this loan was given after negotiations between Government and the World Bank, and the World Bank gave the loan in order to fund the project under the Ministry of Public Service. I do not understand why we should even risk that because we want to move it to the Ministry of Education. What is it? (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for giving way and I want to really take note very seriously that you are there now as Prime Minister and I am assuming that it is not your intention, as the Prime Minister now, to cause this House to reconsider everything that was done before you became the Prime Minister. The information I would like to give you is that during the consideration of the loan on Thursday, 14 August 2008 in this Parliament, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Dr Ezra Suruma, said this to the House; “As reported by the Committee on National Economy, the amounts have been reduced to $23 million and of this, there is a breakdown indicating that $15 million is for the Public Service improvement, the IPPS and record centre and so forth, and the balance is for the Civil Service College, which will now fall under the Uganda Management Institute…” that is what the then Minister of Finance told the House, and it was on the basis of that information that the House approved the loan. Mr Chairman, if you read this Hansard in detail, you will see this.

This is the second time it was coming to the House, but there was initial reluctance even to give Public Service money because the other part of the money was to clear ghosts. I personally argued that day that we created ghosts and we can remove them without a loan. That was my argument. But when the minister and the Prime Minister convinced us, we knew there was need for the Public Service College. They defined the place which would house that Public Service College, the UMI. 

So, what we are asking is still a vital question. At what point did you change the decision of Parliament to shift who would house the Public Service College? Once you convince us - because even now you have the money, but you are not using it. Since 2008, this country is paying. For how long do you want to keep this money and we pay interest? Moreover you lied to us. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I had not closed -(Interruptions)

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise on a point of procedure based on Rule 73. On that day, 14 August 2008, two important persons made their decisions. One was the Prime Minister who said, “Last time, we deferred this issue because there were a number of controversial matters which had to be resolved,” and he goes on and on and he concluded by saying, “… and the view was that we should not have a Civil Service College, but this matter should be handled by the Uganda Management Institute.” We agreed that UMI should take charge of this matter, but it would have two different centres: A school for Public Service management and a centre for productivity and competitiveness. It would be restructured. That was the Prime Minister. Then the debate continued and the Speaker ruled. The Speaker said, as hon. Sseninde was submitting, “No, hon. Members. I think we have moved away from that institution. I think the money is going to UMI. Is that not what the Prime Minister said? There is no other institution.” 

The procedural matter I want to raise is that Rule 73 reads: “Decision of the Speaker or the Chairperson: The Speaker or the Chairperson of the committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or committee and his or her decision upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.” 

I would like to know whether the Committee on Public Service or the Budget Committee, or any other person, has brought a motion to review and reverse this decision which was ruled on and which was actually submitted by the Prime Minister and ruled on by the Speaker, and was unanimously approved by this House in the last Parliament. I want to know whether procedurally, we are really on the right track to try and revive what we cannot revive, and in any case, if we want to, we should move according to Rule 73. Mr Chairman, thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. This is my guidance on the procedural matter raised. Rule 73 is very clear just like you have cited it. Rule 73 was exercised by the Speaker of the Eighth Parliament based on the issues that she was confronted with, and made that ruling based on the issue that was before the chair that time. That Parliament has lapsed. 

The Ninth Parliament has been confronted with another issue, which has brought that same issue to debate. (Applause)  And this matter we are debating is based on a motion moved by Government - by the President of this country, on the budget. If no motion can be more substantial than the one we are discussing now, then I do not know of any other substantive motion. 

Therefore, the whole issue under this Parliament is under review. We cannot, therefore, be held back by a decision that was taken in the past. (Applause) The whole matter has been revised afresh and, therefore, is for decision now. And that is my guidance on the procedural point you have raised. 

Hon. Prime Minister, please finish before we allow the chairman. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The point I was making -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I was listening attentively to the proceedings about the money, whether it is to go to UMI and another college under Public Service. But the gist of my procedural question is, if the Eighth Parliament was confronted by a matter, and as it turns out it is the same matter, I do not want this Parliament to set a very serious precedent. Indeed, if like some of the Members who have known that this is the Ninth Parliament - but it is not the first Parliament; there was the Eighth Parliament, the Seventh Parliament and the Sixth Parliament among others. 

Once we set this as a trend, are we about to reconsider all the loans passed by the Eighth Parliament and all the decisions and resolutions of the past parliaments? Is this the right way to proceed, Mr Chairman, when you know that it is just the changing now, but the issues remain substantially the same? They were determined by the chair of this competent House and agreed upon. Why are we having a matter now splitting Parliament and casting us in bad light as if Parliament has just started with us now? 

Are we procedurally right, to proceed when these matters are the same and we ourselves, the Ninth Parliament, are again transgressing the same and revisiting the same? How can we put a stop to this, Mr Chairman?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I thought I tried to speak in precise English about this matter. If it were fixed that once Parliament has pronounced itself on a matter, it cannot do it again, we would not amend laws. (Applause) What I am saying is that this matter, yes, was discussed and decided upon by the Eighth Parliament. This same matter has again been presented to this Parliament through the budget, and the issues are different, because at the time when you were making that decision, the issues were different. At the time when we are making this decision, the issues have been presented differently through the budget. So, are we going to say that we do not pronounce ourselves on it? So, we just let it pass?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, you have made a clear ruling on this matter. Is it in order, therefore, that Members persistently, in defiance of your ruling and without conforming - is it in order for Members to continuously act in defiance of your ruling in contravention of the Rules of Procedure? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, this issue was not raised by me as Speaker. This issue was raised by three committees of this House. What do we fear about taking a decision on it? If it was resolved, why is it here? Why is the chairman of the Committee on Public Service saying something else? Why is the Chairman of the Committee on Social Services saying something else, if this matter had been completely resolved? What I am saying is, this matter has come up again and we need to take a decision on it. Can I put the question to this vote?

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I have attentively listened to the various arguments about this motion and your decision. Your ruling is very right that a decision by a previous Parliament cannot prevent debate by another Parliament. This is in concurrence with the interpretation of the Chief Justice at the time we attempted to make new Rules of Procedure.

The Chief Justice did cite that Parliament is Parliament and that the rules of Parliament can never be made afresh every new Parliament. So, Parliament is Parliament, whether it is the First, Second, Seventh or Eighth Parliament.

So, the issue I wanted to seek guidance from you is that right now, the purpose of us sitting at Committee Stage is to supply money. We have a stalemate, which has come because one, there was a decision of Parliament, which was taken, but we have not been informed how that decision was changed. So, even the minister’s motion for supply, which was moved by Ministry of Finance, was taken as contravening that initial decision.

Under the circumstances, this issue would warrant an investigation so that we find out what is at the bottom of it. In which case, therefore, I would propose that we appropriate money for the said Public Service College and put it in the escrow account under Bank of Uganda, and we proceed so that when the tripartite committees that you have set up have made a decision and recommendation, a decision will be made and the funds will be appropriated.

That would help us get out of this stalemate. I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I had already indicated that I do not fight to get the reasons for the heat because to me, the matter is straightforward and clear. This Hansard, which my honourable friend, hon. Alice Alaso sent me, and in which she read what the Minister of Finance said, is the Hansard of decisions of Parliament of Thursday, 14 August 2008.

I have a copy of the financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the International Development Association, which is dated September 15, 2008 and it is signed by that same minister, hon. Dr Ezra Suruma. This agreement is clear in many respects; I do not have to read all of them. I can only read one, implementing agencies, which is paragraph 3 of Schedule - it is signed and that is how we got the money. Schedule 2 reads as follows: “Implementing agencies…” and it says in 3(a), “Without limitation upon the provisions of parts (a)(1) and (a) (2) of this section, the recipient -(Mr Okupa rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Okupa, can we listen to this?

MR OKUPA: Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to read for us unsigned agreements?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He has just said it was signed by the then minister.

MR OKUPA: Can we have a look at that, Mr Chairman? What he was reading is not signed -(Mr Lwanga rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lwanga, on what point do you rise? Let us proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman –(Interjections)- this is signed and dated September 15, 2008. I heard someone say that this is the amended one; amended one means it is the latest. (Laughter) The amended one means it is the most current. So, Mr Chairman, this agreement reads as follows - you must be having something to hide in trying to stop me from making this presentation. (Interjections) Do you have something to hide? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we have some order, please.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I am bringing up this matter, not to undermine the Prime Minister, but to help the House. There are two agreements; one is not signed and the other is signed. What I saw the Prime Minister trying to read is the unsigned one. There is an amended agreement with a red cover and it is the signed one. That is the one we would like the Prime Minister to read. Is he in order to proceed while hiding the revised agreement?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I move that usually when a loan request is presented before Parliament, before it is endorsed by Parliament, it is not valid even when it is signed. Even after being passed by this Parliament and it is later signed, it must capture the spirit and the decision of this House. Even then, if it has a purported signature, once the signed document is different from what was agreed upon here, it calls for deeper investigation to see how a loan or a contract or an agreement passed by this Parliament can be changed and something else is signed. 

Therefore, those are the issues we wanted laid on the Table to be clarified by the House and then we see how to proceed. Short of that, you are having a difficult situation, Mr Chairman. People are trying to get around it and it will be your firm decision and stand on this matter that will take this country forward. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, this is a Committee of Supply; I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 4 billion - 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move a motion that we stand over this matter and move onto others while the Prime Minister, the committee chairperson, hon. Dombo, and the Leader of the Opposition go for consultations.

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, the circumstances under which we are moving – even when the Prime Minister came up with an agreement, it even made it more relevant that this matter should be investigated. Under the spirit, now that we have resolved to be here to supply, I wish to amend hon. Ekanya’s motion by deleting it and substituting it with this one: That this House, sitting as a Committee of Supply, we supply the money meant for the Civil Service College and put it under the Bank of Uganda, and ring-fence it, pending the recommendations of the tripartite committee, which was a decision of this House, and we resolve on it, then the implementation can go ahead according to the decision of the day. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Members, let me explain the implications before we take a decision. The question I was proposing of Shs 4 billion does not include the Civil Service College money. This is because the committee, in its wisdom, had moved away this money from the Ministry of Public Service to UMI under Ministry of Education. So, the Shs 4.9 billion does not have the Civil Service College money in it. So, what I am reading is what had been proposed by the committee and agreed to.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification. When we get to Vote 140, we will then make a contra and take away that money from that Vote and keep it away somewhere. Is that what we are going to do? If we leave it –(Interjections)– I am speaking to the chairman because I want clarification from him. The clarification I am seeking is; if we pass the Shs 4.9 billion as you say, when we get to Vote 140, we should then take away that money and keep it somewhere. Is that our understanding? In other words, we are not going to allocate this money on any vote. I suggest that the best place to keep it is a floating account in the Ministry of Finance.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I am very keen to know what is causing all this excitement and would, therefore, support the motion because to me it is an obvious case and have no doubt at all in my head where this money should be. What the agreement says, which they have stopped me from reading, in order for me to get to the root of this excitement - I support the motion by hon. Dombo. -(Interjections)- I think the motion by hon. Dombo totally negates the motion by hon. Ekanya –(Interjections)- you do not have to concede. (Interjections) For a motion to negate yours, you do not have to concede and we can vote on it - because we will vote on his first by our rules. So, if it has votes, then yours is negated. 

I was just asking whether we can supply and keep this money not on any vote –(Interjections)- if that is technically possible –(Interjections)– if it is not possible, then the Treasury is the right home for this money, but a reminder that we will re-visit it as to how it is going to be used when disbursement comes. Therefore, I want to really support the motion by hon. Dombo with an amendment that this money be supplied and be held until disbursement is decided upon by this House – by the Minister of Finance –(Interjections)– I so move.

MS ALASO: I thank you Mr Chairman. I thought it would be - the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has continuously referred to that agreement and I thought it would be procedurally right that the signed agreement is also laid on Table for purposes of the committees to use in the future. So, if you could lay it on Table, it could help us in the processes that follow. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Rt hon. Prime Minister, do you have a copy that can be laid before the House – of the agreement?  [Mr Okupa: “A signed copy.])

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: But how can you prevent me by forces commandeered by my good friend, hon. Okupa, of all people - (Laughter)- even to read one paragraph. I am telling you that we must discover what is behind all this -[Hon. Members: “Yes.”]- (Applause) I have a copy here dated 15 September, 2008 and signed by -[Mr Okupa: “You.”]- (Laughter) So, may I? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I understand – can I now try to sum up from what I have understood from the different propositions that this particular money – I do not know how much it is -[Hon. Members: “Shs 7 billion.”]– this Shs 7 billion which was meant for the Civil Service College – we supply and send it to Vote 008 -[Hon. Members: “Yes.”]– is that correct? Whereby it would be sent to the Treasury and – which will be the proper vote?

MR EKANYA: I seek the indulgence of the Members. Under Bank of Uganda, we have a vote called Treasury Operations, and here there is zero – really no money - and that is where we should put that money. (Interjections) It is Vote 130 - the Treasury under Bank of Uganda, and that is where we should put the money. Mr Chairperson, Finance has Treasury Operation accountability sector under the Accountant-General, but Treasury Vote 130 is here in the document.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can the Minister of Finance help us with this Vote. Which Vote was it?

MR EKANYA: 130 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 130.

MR LWANGA: I would like to inform and I am sure that my very good friend, the Leader of the Opposition, will agree with me that the Treasury’s operation account is an operations account. This money we are talking about is development money and so our best bet is to put it on an account and specify it.  (Interjections) We can go into 008 but specify it –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Lwanga, if it is supplied with instructions that it should be kept, will they spend it? Please guide us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think we need to help each other. Treasury Operations is a new account which has been opened up to deal with payment of our external debt. So, since it is dealing with debt payment, then it is the same that can hold our money. What my finance minister has suggested is the right place to put it for now. 

I want to teach you –(Interjections)– relax -(Laughter)– yes, what you know, you know. What happens is that Treasury Operations is a new Vote that was opened recently in the Ministry of Finance and is about two or three years old. It is the one that deals with repayments of our external debts and this one is also a debt. So, what we would propose is that it is just going to hold the money - we want to tell you that 008 is the Ministry of Finance operation account for day-to-day operations and also gets money from the Treasury – from the Consolidated Fund - to run its functions. The only better type of account is Vote 130

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Pardon?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Vote 130.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the final position seems to be that that particular money, Shs 7 billion, which was meant for the Civil Service College be moved from Vote 140  -

MR EKANYA: From Vote 140 to Vote 130 Treasury Operations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where is the money right now? Hon. Minister?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman and colleagues, Vote 130 is under the Ministry of Finance and is operated by the Accountant-General. It is purely for operations and so we cannot put this money into this account. 

The second one, with all due respect, Rt hon. Prime Minister, when we signed this loan agreement, our development partners 
expected us to follow the conditions to the letter, and this position - we made it clear this morning to the committee that when this loan was signed, it was strictly to be administered by the Ministry of Public Service so -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, you are taking us back. What I seem to be reading is that we should find where to keep this money until the tripartite committee determines where it should go. So, where we can hold this money is the issue.

MR OMACH: The holding, Mr Chairman, would be under Ministry of Public Service because -

HON MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, why don’t you help us?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman and hon. Colleagues, whereas I agree with hon. Omach, we all have this document. There is a treasury operation accountability sector that is managed by the Accountant-General and there is money for it, but there is Treasury Operation - Vote 130 also. So, I beg to move an amendment that Shs 7,476,000,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, be moved to Vote 130 - Treasury Operations. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want you to look at Table 4 at the back. Where is the Minister of Finance? Under Table 4, you will see Treasury Operations is about a trillion shillings. It is under statutory that is why I wanted to come and advise. Look at it so that I explain what I am saying.

When you talk about day-to-day operations of the Office of the Accountant-General, it has very minimal amounts of money, but if you look at Shs 1 trillion, it is signifying that these are the monies which we are budgeting to pay our external debts. Where do most of our external debts come from? They are from these multinationals – Table 4; Vote 130. Are you seeing it? The last table.

If Finance is uncomfortable with the money being under Treasury Operations, where they even have a say, then the next place where the money can stay and be ring-fenced is where you have transferred it. You can put the money under Uganda Management Institute, but you ring-fence it until - but if you cannot do that, the best place is under Treasury Operations.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman and Colleagues, like the Prime Minister, I am also very excited by the vigour and the strength that people have expressed on this matter. Now, let me give you this information so that when we take the decision, it is rational. 

The money is physically not here yet. The money is still with the World Bank. The money comes to Uganda after we have requested for that money, and we send it to the spending agency. So, whether we take a decision about where the money will go or not, I will suggest this; that the committees which we have agreed upon, deliberate on this matter as quickly as possible and we take a decision -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. What are we trying to cure? You have already taken a decision, but what is important is where the money can go and be ring-fenced. If you ring-fence that money, it will not be used, and if it is the discretion of this Parliament that that money can be supplied and ring-fenced, there is nobody who can touch it until a decision of the other local government - committees is taken. Parliament can take a decision, they ring-fence the money after the process of Parliament, and that is when they can use that money, and it can even be put on a suspense account in Bank of Uganda.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I beg the indulgence of the Members. We are now receiving new information from the honourable minister who was on the Floor that actually, we supplied air.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have not supplied.

MS KOMUHANGI: There is no money. What are you now going to ring-fence if there is no money yet? I need a clarification.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Hon. Colleagues, the information I want to give this House is in support of ring-fencing this money. Last year, at the same stage of the budget process, we failed to ring-fence this money because of the hegemony between not just what is now appearing as the two committees of Social Services, and Public Service and Local Government, but between the two ministries. Parliament is now suffering with a problem coming from Cabinet. The Ministry of Education was convinced that this is a training function. In Uganda, by policy, it is a function of Ministry of Education and Sports and, therefore, under UMI. Public Service now believes they are of age, without changing the policy, to do a Public Service College.

Between last year, when we lost this motion on the Floor, and now, money has been expended by Public Service for consultancy, but it is duplication. Close to $2 million has been expended. Whereas the project has not taken off after four years, money is being expended and this is why I would want to support the Ninth Parliament while dealing with an inherited three-year old matter that should actually not only ring-fence the money but investigate its use. Remember, this was a loan which was restructured. The original request was $72 million. Parliament passed $23 million with conditions. The agreement which is being talked about is after parliamentary approval. At what stage did Ministry of Finance or Public Service come back to Parliament to report that what Parliament had decided was not adhered to? So, what we are discussing here is contempt of Parliament and hegemony of activities and resources within line ministries. What we need to resolve here by policy is who holds training. 

We, as the Committee on National Economy, are aware that when dealing with training of health – health wants back their function of training. Are we setting a precedent now, that tomorrow, every ministry can take back their training function? These are policy matters. These matters can even be resolved in Cabinet and you come here with a fine-tuned decision.

Last year, our last position with the then Prime Minister and the two line ministers was that they would agree to resolve this matter at Cabinet level. We are surprised that after one year, it is still hegemony. It is now becoming a parliamentary hegemony between Social Services and Local Government committees. Money has been lost and yet this matter could be resolved once and for all. So, I thought I should give this information so that whatever decision is made - even the tripartite committee, which is put in place should be mindful of this leakage; the loss of money and the duplication which is about to happen. When one government has to organise competing for the same budget, then it is not efficient. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, the point is made. We have to move forward. The vote we are dealing with right now, Ministry of Public Service, does not contain the Shs 7,400,000,000 – 

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, I am sorry to interrupt you, but if we supply Public Service before we decide where we should supply this money, we might have to recommit ourselves. 

There is something funny about this money. When Parliament passed the loan, it was on 14 September. By coincidence, today is 14 September –(Laughter)– but let me say this; when supplying here, we supply our money; the money we have borrowed and I think even the grants we have been given. So, when the agreement was signed on 15 September, 2008, the person who signed seems to have forgotten that he committed this Parliament to –(Interjections)– the question now is where to supply this money. 

I think what Parliament can do is to stop the Ministry of Public Service from doing anything until the tripartite committee has reported back to this Parliament. But for purposes of today’s supply, there is no problem supplying this money under the same vote of Public Service. This is my view –(Interjections)– it doesn’t matter; the money is already under the vote of Public Service anyway, and part of it has already been used. 

But as long as Parliament orders Public Service not to do anything – this money is still in Washington. When the work is done, they will put in certificates and the money will then come in from Washington. You are not ring-fencing this money because it is not here. So, my proposal is that we supply Public Service and order them not to do anything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have had many procedures without proceeding; please resume your seats. (Laughter)

Hon. Members, we stand over Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service; we stand over Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development –(Interjections)– hon. Dombo, would you like to resume your seat? So, Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is stood over.

Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESRON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 92,782,529,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2011/2012 –(Interjections)- we stood over it, hon. Mafabi.

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, we stood over this matter because the development component was supposed to move from the headquarters to National Citizens Immigration Control Board and this was agreed upon in the committee – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What was it; can you state it again? Please use the microphone. 

MR MULONGO: Under Vote 009, the Shs 89,632,529,000 –(Interjections)– the chairman can help.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, there is a figure of Shs 89,632,529,000 which is shown under Internal Affairs. But we agreed that this rightly belongs to National Citizenship and Immigration Control - Vote 120.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if they agreed that it should go there, development has a corresponding figure of the taxes. You have to move the entire amount and not only that portion leaving the taxes; what then would the taxes be for. If you are moving, move everything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman for Internal Affairs.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, this amount is meant to offset the contractual obligation. So, it is not with taxes; it is just a repayment for the equipment that was procured for the National Identity Card Programme, which is rightfully supposed to be under Immigration.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if it is true that it is only Shs 89.6 billion, then the Shs 3.135 million does not exist because they have said –(Interjections)– no, they said that Shs 89.6 billion is the only amount needed. So, the Shs 3.1 billion does not exist because there is no development and hence no taxes to be paid under Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, in the committee, the amount agreed to be transferred was Shs 89,632,529,000 leaving Shs 3,150,000,000 on the other account. So, we should be supplying Shs 3,150,000,000 to Internal Affairs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPESRON: Hon. Minister, what is the development expenditure that is worth Shs 3 billion in that ministry?

MR JAMES BABA: The amount, Mr Chairman, under Vote 009 is meant to meet contractual obligations in the purchase of the equipment for the ID Project. When this vote was created, the vote for National Citizenship and Immigration Control had not yet been established. Now that it is in place, it is actually right to transfer this amount to Vote 120.

Furthermore, Mr Chairman, the equipment has arrived; we have 5.5 million people registered following the last general elections, but with no operational fund. Fortunately, I have had discussions with the Ministry of Finance officials who allowed us to introduce a supplementary to help operationalise the ID project immediately. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The position, as of now, is that the entire Shs 92 billion be moved away from this vote - not so? In other words, we don’t have to say anything about this vote and we are not supplying anything to it?
 
MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I request the Minister of Finance to help us understand this properly. I am saying this because the item the minister is talking about is in respect of National Security Information System. And hon. Rose Akol will recall that when we were supplying supplementaries in April, we supplied money for the ID project under the National Security Information System. So, the Citizenship and Immigration vote is different. We need to reconcile with the draft estimates.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we cannot supply on this – there is nothing to stand over because there is nothing to supply on this particular vote.
 
MR JAMES BABA: We can supply zero and we transfer this money to Vote 120 because the Ministry of Internal Affairs was not given funds for the development budget in this financial year. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, good. So, we don’t have to pronounce ourselves on this.
Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 108,938,636,000, under Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 188,416,129,000, under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,305,210,000 under Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,539,130,930,000 under Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 3,789,357,000 under Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,227,800,000 under Vote 107 - Uganda Aids Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, there was a reversal of Shs 1 billion to the Office of the President. So, the right amount under that vote is Shs 227,800,000.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 227,800,000 – 

NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, just a simple clarification. We have Shs 1.227 billion. When did it change to Shs 227 million?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, at the time we passed Vote 001 - Office of the President, an amount of Shs 1 billion was transferred to it by the relevant committees from the vote for Uganda Human Rights Commission. That means the balance on that vote should be Shs 227 million.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chair. I thought it would have been the committee chair because these are committee reports we are working on. I do not know whether it would be helpful for the ministers to be the ones adjusting for us –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, the chairman reported earlier on the Vote 001 and it is the same situation. The minister was just confirming. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 227,800,000 under Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 109 - Law Development Centre

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,300,000,000 under Vote 109 - Law Development Centre, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 54,753,499,000 under Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute

MR LWANGA: I was just pointing out –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I propose the question then you have a basis on which to propose to anything.

I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 8,976,000,000 under Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, you told us to stay over this - the Shs 7,476,000,000. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, some background. Before Uganda Management Institute became Uganda Management Institute, it used to be called Institute of Public Administration and it was for training public servants. I can say I am one of those who were trained there when it was still the Institute of Public Administration. That clearly signifies that public servants who are under Public Service are supposed to go to IPA, now Uganda Management Institute.  

MR OBOTH: With due respect to the Leader of the Opposition, I have an Act of Parliament, which under Section 131(7), provides that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What Act is that?

MR OBOTH: The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. Sub-section 7 provides that, “In so far as they conduct courses leading to awards of certificates, diplomas or degrees of Makerere University, the following institutions shall, until they attain a university status, be deemed to be affiliated to Makerere University for purposes of those awards.” One has already been a university; Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo (ITEK); Uganda National Institute of Special Education; and the Uganda Management Institute. That brings the question as to whether the proposed Public Service institute will be awarding certificates, diplomas or degrees. If not, then it may not qualify to be an institute under Ministry of Education. And I thought somebody would raise this. 

What Uganda Management Institute is right now is an academic institution and that is why it falls under Ministry of Education. I thought I would give that humble opinion.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is right. At the time we went there, we were being awarded diplomas, but they were of Makerere University. 

Mr Chairman, if Public Service allowed UMI to come in to handle public servants, then it should be the one –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Chairman, the money in contention, the Shs 7.4 billion, was subject to your earlier ruling under Public Service, which was to the effect that we stood over this matter. I am wondering now whether we have actually opened the discussion on this matter and, therefore, whether we should revert to the earlier motion proposed by hon. Dombo. I need your guidance on this matter. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let’s stand over Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute. 

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 24,751,755,000 under Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, we did not supply Vote 120, and this is the vote where we transferred the funds from Internal Affairs. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What was that vote called?

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, 009. We transferred the amount of –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. What is the vote that is not –

MR LWANGA: Vote 120.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we had already – 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Chairman, I request that we stand over this -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is nothing to stand over on this one. 

MR JAMES BABA: Let me explain. I have just discovered a big error for which I want to apologise. On page 182 of the MTEF, there is a provision for development expenditure in Ministry of Internal Affairs. It is Vote 008, which the committee did not include in this appropriation now before us, and I request that we stand over this so that we can reconcile the development fund for the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is Shs 21.6 billion.
 
MR LWANGA: The minister initially asked us to transfer Shs 63.259 billion which we did. Eventually, we were advised to transfer everything including the taxes, and he said that was what should have been done. This House actually agreed. Now he is thinking differently and I want to propose that we leave Shs 1,000 on the account to keep the vote going. 

MR JAMES BABA: I would like to plead with you again, Sir, that we stand over this so that we can reconcile votes 120 and 009.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that money part of the Shs 92 billion. The Shs 21 billion is entirely separate and I think the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs can explain why he did not include it in the development for Ministry of Internal Affairs.

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, in the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the sum being referred to was not captured. We did not capture it in our discussions with the ministry. We are referring to our notes; what we captured for this financial year was simply the Shs 89.633 billion plus the taxes of Shs 3.150 billion which we have moved to the appropriate vote. We do not have that information.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: The moment the ministry does not capture the money, Parliament does not know that there is money. In any case, what we are appropriating is what we have known. If they come with another request, we shall deal with it at supplementary level, but for now, we have to appropriate zero. For purposes of helping them, we put Shs 1,000 in column to keep the vote. 

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, we looked in those books of estimates, there is no development budget for Internal Affairs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 92,782,529,000 under Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control, be provided as development expenditure for financial year 2011/2012. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I think the proposition that we put a nominal figure in order to keep that vote open and active for the possibility of a supplementary is important because if we have zero, then it will be closed for the whole year. That is why there was a proposal that from that Shs 92,782,529,000, we take off a nominal figure to keep the vote under 009. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2011/12. 

MR EPETAIT: I have risen to seek clarification. The Minister of State for Internal Affairs was reading some figures here. We would like to know where he got those figures from because we are now going to give you Shs 1,000 for development expenditure in Ministry of Internal Affairs whose problems you know in detail. Without development expenditure, Police and Prisons will be suffering. I would like to know where you hid those figures.

MR JAMES BABA: I quoted this figure from the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure for 2011/2012, page 182 where under development estimates, the ministry was provided Shs 2,116,762,900 billion not Shs 21 billion. I apologise again. Could we put this money under this vote now? This is my humble request to you.

MR EKANYA: I want to plead with honourable colleagues, it is me who looked at that and I realised that the Ministry of Internal Affairs had money for development. I stood to give information, but the minister insisted that I had nothing. I had to pass the book to him. He has given it to the Ministry of Finance people and they have confirmed that they have the money. May I beg that the money be passed under development expenditure?

MR LWANGA: In the morning, we had a total of Shs 92 billion on this account and then the minister came and told us that this money is on the wrong account, “We want all of it to be down there,” he said. If he has now apologised that he made a mistake, then we can reduce from down there and put it up there and balance our budget. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where will the money be coming from? Anybody who has the calculation can come and anybody with words is not permitted. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. This figure here is supposed to be for headquarters development. The Shs 89 billion is supposed to be for Citizenship and Immigration, and that is the Shs 120 billion. It is supposed to go the other side. Then the Shs 2,167,629,000 is supposed to be here for development. So, I want to appeal to Members that the policy statement that we banked on did not capture this. That is why we are saying it is a true record; bear with us; we shall go through it, but for now, we can’t take Shs 1,000; it can’t take us anywhere. That is my prayer, that as the minister has requested, you also agree with the position of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what is the figure for Vote 120? 

MR MUWUMA: Shs 89 billion is for contractual obligation – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, get it and read the actual thing. Hon. Members, while we are still thinking about these two votes - Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs and Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control, we have votes 005, 008 and 140 - Uganda Management Institute, still to take decisions on. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, these votes under the Uganda Management Institute, we are praying that we do not supply for the institutes the Shs 7.476 billion and, therefore – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Give me the actual figure.

MR OMACH: It is Shs 7,476,000,000. So, we should not supply this and, therefore, the amount that will now have to be supplied under the Uganda Management Institute will be Shs 1.5 billion and – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can we finish with this Vote 140 because we agreed that the money would not go to the Uganda Management Institute and would be going to a separate account. So, what we are doing now is to remove that money from this Uganda Management Institute - you may want to resume your seat - and then we supply the Shs 1.5 billion which is initially for the Uganda Management Institute, and then we can move forward. Can I put the question on this first?

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, the Chairperson of the Local Government Committee did ask a question and he was seeking your guidance; that in order to resolve this issue, the two votes for Public Service and the Uganda Management Institute should be handled concurrently so that a firm decision is taken, and he did ask that does this vote on this particular vote, therefore, reopen the matter which you had closed. That way, we can resolve the motion which I moved and was seconded, and the Prime Minister conceded to it? That motion was moved and the future Hansard readers will wonder on our proceedings if we proceed this way and this matter is not fairly concluded, because that motion is still standing. So, if we vote and remove that money from the Uganda Management Institute which I strongly support, does it mean, therefore, that we should support the other motion that this money be placed under the Bank of Uganda pending the investigation of the tripartite committees of Parliament, so that a decision is taken and in future that money is disbursed?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can we take it step by step? Can we agree to first remove this money from the Uganda Management Institute; we vote on the Shs 1.5 billion, and on the Shs 4.9 billion of the Ministry of Public Service, so that then the motion can be moved on where to place this money that is remaining? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is agreed, we cannot start from UMI. You know this government is tricky; let us begin from Public Service and go down to UMI.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No problem. Hon Members, I now put the question that a total of Shs 4,972,735,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total of Shs 1,500,000,000 under Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the motion moved by hon. Ekanya and amended by hon. Dombo that the money, conceded to by you –(Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, I amended and he agreed with my amendment because his motion was that the money should be put on some account in Bank of Uganda, but we were told that the Bank of Uganda is not a vote holder. So, I amended it and said it should be in the Treasury but ring-fenced until a decision has been made by Parliament on how it would be -(Interjections)- and he agreed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we need to - because we now have the initial motion proposed by hon. Ekanya amended by hon. Dombo and a second amendment by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. No amendment is permissible beyond that point. It would need us to first resolve the other amendments then the slot will be there for you to propose another amendment. 

So, I now ask the hon. Ekanya whether he is still holding on to his motion or he wants to withdraw it so that we can move forward. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I accept hon. Dombo’s amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, that now gives you opportunity to move your amendment.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to move an amendment to the motion moved by hon. Dombo by inserting a timeframe for the meeting of the tripartite committee. Reason being –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We were not voting on the committee issue. We are voting on the money. This is the Committee of Supply.

Hon. Dombo, would you like to concede to this amendment? 

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, what the Rt hon. Prime Minister has stated is factual; that Bank of Uganda is not a vote holder and we must put this money on a vote and ring-fence it and only touch it when a decision has been arrived at by this Parliament. I concede to that one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Members, the amendment now is –(Mr Omach rose_)- hon. Minister, on what point do you rise?

MR OMACH: I want some clarification, Mr Chairman. The import of removing this from the two votes was so that we just do not supply it, so that when the time comes when the tripartite agreement is reached, then this issue will come up and we would handle it under supplementary.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it can only come under supplementary if it had not been proposed because now they can go and spend the money –(Interjections)- no they may not add the three percent and they will come and just report. 

So, what we will have to do is to have our money supplied and ring-fenced. Even if you took it to Ministry of Health and ring-fenced it there, I would have no problem. Even if you took it to Works and ring-fenced it there - I have no problem as long as it is ring-fenced. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the motion is now that the Shs 7,476,000,000 be moved from - we have already moved it from Vote 130 - and should go to Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance and be ring-fenced. Vote 130 or 008?

MR EKANYA: Vote 130 as stated by the Prime Minister. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, there are two issues here. Do we take it to Vote 008 or Vote 130? So, the motion from the Prime Minister is that this money be moved to Vote 008 and the motion which is now substantially an amendment is that it be moved to Vote 130. 

I will put the question - 

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I think the intention of either movers of the motion is to ensure one, that the money is supplied and ring-fenced under an account that is going to be supervised; and two, that that money should not be touched until Parliament has made a specific resolution of this matter after the investigations by the tripartite committee. If that is okay and is captured in that gist, I think where the money is put is not the issue, provided those conditions are specifically put in the motion so that we can have a way forward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, that means we can go on with Vote 008.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Ring-fence it there?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 264,485,204,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, even if the figures do not add up properly to this 264, I think we - 

MR TUMWEBAZE: I do not know what we have just said yes to; is the money for the service college that we have transferred to Finance? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. Ring-fenced.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Only. Without the development component of the ministry which we stood over? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is now combined.

MR TUMWEBAZE: But what is the development component of the ministry, because the figure we have here is different - Shs 252,009,204,000 was recurrent.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, the figure we have for development is Shs 257,009,204,000. If we add on Shs 7,476 -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Wait, where do you get 257? I do not have that. It is Shs 252,009,204,000. That is what I have.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, as we have gone on adding and subtracting, the end figure you get is Shs 257,009,204,000. That is the end figure. On that, you add Shs 7,476,000,000 and ring- fence. That gives you the figure that the chairman has given us. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you remember when we removed some monies, which caused us to stand over the issue of the development Vote for Ministry of Finance, and there were some adjustments and pronouncements made on some other votes. The effect of those they had agreed on makes the figure come to Shs 257,009,204,000; on that they add the Shs 7,476,000,000.

We have not passed any figure on Finance. I have been following the adjustments and I do not really remember where we got an additional Shs 5 billion to go to Finance development budget. I am yet to be convinced because the figure that we have here has really not been adjusted upwards since we started.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where did the Banana Initiative money go? That is the Shs 5.2 billion. Let us understand this. The Shs 5.2 billion was removed from the Ministry of Finance budget and sent to the Ministry of Agriculture by the committees and the Budget Committee. When they went back, the Shs 5.2 billion, which was for the Banana Initiative was returned to Ministry of Finance. That is what put the figure at this, and those are the negotiations they presented earlier in the other votes. Is it clear now? That means that the figure that we have pronounced ourselves on is correct, okay?

Vote 009 - Internal Affairs

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,167,629,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Board

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 90,614,900,000 under Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control, be provided for as development expenditure for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund, financial year 2011/2012

Vote 001 - Office of the President
Vote 005 - Public Service Pensions Compensation
Vote 007 - Justice
Vote 018 - President Industrial Courts
Vote 101 - Judiciary
Vote 102 - Electoral Commission
Vote 103 - Inspector General of Government
Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission
Vote 105 - Law Reform Commission
Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission
Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission
Vote 108 - National Planning Authority
Vote 130 - Treasury operations
Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor General
Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecution
Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force, Inspector and Deputy Inspector Generals
Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Services, Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner 

Mr Chairman, these are the votes.

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, I have not clearly heard those totals. Would you like to repeat so that we can – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, this is a statutory vote; we do not have to pronounce ourselves on it and so it is just for information. But the Information I have been given is that of this total statutory expenditure, Shs 1 billion has been moved to the Parliamentary Commission to facilitate the audit process of the Office of the Auditor General. The total is Shs 1,478,060,546. 

MR DOMBO: Mr Chairman, the figures that I have – may I request for your indulgence so that we can consult briefly on them in order to have the exact figure for the purposes of the Hansard. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, would you like to consult with hon. Dombo and the committee chairperson? Hon. Members, yesterday we finished with Supplementary Schedule III. Now, it is required that we supply so that the issue of the Bill can be properly handled. This is in relation to the Supplementary Schedule III. I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1,608,916 under Vote 002 – State House, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 201,519,240 under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 002 – State House

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 12,391,084,000 under Vote 002 – State House be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I understand there was some consultation going on and moving a motion that the House resume would mean that the consultation is being stood over and, therefore, elapses. I propose that you allow, with your indulgence, the team, five more minutes or we keep within Parliament until the Minister returns together with the commissioners, then we can proceed.

But Mr Chairman, I thought of a clarification –(Laughter)– that as a Committee of Supply, we look – and indeed we looked at the figures meticulously – and once there are new amendments brought to the items and figures again, how would we handle such an amendment at this point in time? Is it allowed for Parliament sitting as a Committee of Supply to introduce new figures, or we proceed by those supplied by the Budget Committee chairperson?

Secondly, there were many other items that had been stood over. I appreciate the fact that the committee together with the whole House brought up such issues, and indeed in one way or the other, we have reached a compromise. In such circumstances, should we have another opportunity to re-open debate on those items already agreed upon or, with your indulgence, we continue from where we stopped. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: I first entered this House in 2001 and all these years we have gone through budget processes I have noticed one thing this time round, that there is a lot of disorganisation arising out of the Frontbench opposite me. If we are to really proceed better next time, my view is that the Frontbench should clean up its act. They seem to be very disorganised with their figures and it had to take the hard work of the Shadow Minister for Finance –(Interjections)- to continually remind them –(Interjections)– okay order.

MS KABAALE: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Is it in order for the honourable learned brother and also Shadow Attorney-General to insinuate in this august House that the Committee on Finance or the Frontbench is disorganised and has tasked the Shadow Minister for Finance, and yet during the process, the Shadow Minister was a Member of that committee, meaning that he is part of the problem? Is he in order? I thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I have ruled on this subject and I am now going to have to instruct the Clerk to extract all the rulings that I have on this same subject. For the avoidance of doubt, these last three or four days, I have been doing nothing else but ruling on this very matter. I ruled hon. Ekanya, many times out of order –(Applause)- once I ruled the Rt hon. Prime Minister out of order –(Laughter)- I ruled hon. Rusoke out of order, even before she spoke –(Laughter)- because I knew.  Hon. Members, this subject, therefore, has been sufficiently covered with my rulings and now the honourable member is still raising the same order. The honourable member from Iganga is completely out of order –(Laughter)- (Applause) Proceed.

MR KATUNTU: As I was saying; I was really raising these issues in good faith to make sure that for us who are in Government, we improve on our performance next time and that is for both sides of the House. I never raised this issue in bad faith. You realise that this process should have come to an end naturally a few weeks ago, but we are still around working up to midnight to make sure that we fulfil our constitutional obligation. 

If we act better next time, I am sure that by the end of August next year, we will have passed the budget. It is really in the interest of all of us that we do improve on our act, either at committee level or at this crucial time.

I note with concern, Mr Chairman, that in matters like this, we need to have the substantive Minister for Finance around because it does help us – not that I am saying that the state ministers for Finance here are incompetent, but I think it will be better, especially knowing that our colleague, the substantive Minister for Finance is even an ex-officio Member of this House –(Interjection)- I will take the information.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I have two pieces of information for my honourable colleague, and I thank him for yielding the ground for that. The first is that the Minister for Finance has led Uganda’s delegation to the Annual Meeting of the Bretton Woods Institutions in Washington DC, and that happily, she is the current chair of the African Region and, therefore, she has to sit in the executive deliberations on behalf of the entire continent. (Applause) That is point number one. 

Point number two of information is that, I am here! (Laughter) (Applause)

MR KASAIJA: Further information hon. Katuntu. Hon. Katuntu and colleagues, in the Ministry of Finance, we work as a team and share information from sector to sector, and so, irrespective of who is here, it does not matter. We are all competent, knowledgeable and able to deliver as you may wish. (Applause) (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members –

MR NASASIRA: The further information I wanted to give is that this side is not familiar with Shadow Ministers of State; they only know a Shadow Minister and that is all, because by the time they finished their appointments, they had run out of candidates to appoint as Shadow Ministers of State -(Laughter)- but normally, our ministers of state are very effective.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon., please wind up and we –

MR KATUNTU: Well, I will thank the colleagues for the pieces of information. I will congratulate the Minister for Finance for the position she assumed recently. Next time, I think the Leader of Government should really have the courtesy to let this House know where his substantive ministers are if we are dealing with crucial issues like this. It does help because we would not be raising this issue if we knew where she was. 

As to what my colleague, the Chief Whip said, yes, this side believes in a lean government -(Applause)- and that is why we do not have this huge Government that may be wasteful in terms of public expenditure, and now that we are dealing with appropriation of money, I am sure you will realise that if we had a lean Government, you would have saved more –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you, Mr Chairman. (Laughter) 

The total Statutory Charges on the Consolidated Fund for the financial year 2011/2012 is Shs 1,968,101,546,000

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, as I said earlier, this vote, the summation of which has been made, is for information and does not require our approval. The amount, therefore, for the statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund for the financial year 2011/2012 stands at Shs 1,968,101,546,000. Thank you.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman and hon. Colleagues, for Vote 008 - recurrent expenditure, I just want to remind the House that we did not pronounce ourselves on the final figures. I would like to make a recommittal. The figure should be reading shs 55,300,156,000. I am making a recommittal of the figure for the recurrent budget, Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the honourable minister finish.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I am rising on a matter of procedure. We are now in the Committee of supply; I thought after we have approved the schedules then the Speaker would resume his seat. You have to move a motion to call back the Speaker to the chair. I think he is doing the recommittal at a wrong time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Sometimes it is healthy to indicate that you will be requiring a recomittal of a particular thing that you would require to be recommitted but -


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman and Colleagues, I beg to move a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and Colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposals for financial year, 2011/2012 and has supplied it with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and hon. Colleagues, I beg to move that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report be adopted. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that we do recommit the supplies because Vote 008, recurrent - we beg that it be recommitted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Justify.

MR OMACH: The reason is that the amount that was supplied is Shs 52 billion and yet when we met with the committee, we agreed and the appropriate amount that should be supplied is Shs 55,300,156,000.

6.56
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Mr Speaker, I really want to request hon. Omach, the Minister of Finance, that there is a neater way out of this situation. There are certain things I do not want to say here on record. So, I want to encourage you that you withdraw your motion. In case you exhaust your budget, you can have a supplementary, because if you insist on it, you may make me do certain things here on record.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I am trying to understand how the figure comes to Shs 55 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you giving information?

MR TUMWEBAZE: I am giving information, Mr Speaker. Very privileged information. In our meeting today, the figures for Ministry of Finance part II, and which we gave in was Shs 5.2 billion for PIBID. That is why when it came to recurrent, it was added onto the shs 252,009,204,000 and it came to Shs 257,009,204,000. That is what was supplied for recurrent after adding on Shs 5.2 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, then -

MR TUMWEBAZE: That was development. So, the other cuts that we proposed before today - we agreed on NPART, Custodian Board, I do not see the other Shs 3 billion now that it has become Shs 55 billion. I want to know; where did you save it from?

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We had a figure of Shs 6.75 billion in the Auditor’s office. We reduced it to Shs 4 billion, that leaves a balance of Shs 2.7 billion; add it on and then of course balance it and it comes to this; and I agree with the figure.(Interjections) I agree with the Shs 55,300,156,000.

6.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi):Mr Speaker, I think we have done a good job so far and this is not the end of the world because we are here; Uganda is here; Parliament is here -[Mrs Osegge: “The Rt hon Prime Minister is here’”]- exactly -(Laughter)- I have suggested to the Minister of Finance that it is not absolutely necessary to reopen this. We can go with what we have, because when we need more, we will come back. (Applause) There is no problem at all.

MR LWANGA: Hon. Members of Parliament -(Interjections)- please listen to me. This budget, if we do not make that adjustment, it will not balance. The choice is yours.

THE SPEAKER: Let me take the guidance point from hon. Ekanya, but the information I would like him to give us is on the money that was given to the –(Interjections)– no, the banana one went to development; we finished that. Now, we are trying to find out why the figure changed from 52 to 55, and there was money which was moved by the committee from Finance and taken out to the Auditor General. Now, when you took the decision on the Auditor General’s budget, this money was not reflected there, was it? 

MR TUMWEBAZE: The position we had today in the Budget Committee – they were actually two positions. One position was that the Auditor General is statutory; it is an office of Parliament. It is Parliament that reviews his budget and that knows his activities. It is, therefore, Parliament that passes his money, which is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund as the National Audit Act says. 

So, we told the minister that since you are taking back your money, take it back. But in the wisdom of the committee and that of Parliament, let us appropriate for the Auditor General. That was the position.

Hon. Omach said they would give Shs 1 billion. We asked, “Since when did the Ministry of Finance have power to control the budget of the Auditor General; where is his independence; and why did we have to pass the National Audit Act?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what have we given to the Office of the Auditor General?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Shs 1 billion for the Office of the Auditor General has been transferred to the Parliamentary Commission. That reduces his budget by Shs 1 billion. If there is an error, it should be corrected because you said it wisely that since Parliament is the one that appoints the auditor, it should have the money to pay the auditor. So, the mistake maybe which was made, was to include the fees of auditing the Auditor General’s Office in his budget. So, with your wise ruling and guidance, the money has been brought to Parliament, since it is the one to appoint the auditor to audit the Auditor General. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, what about money which was for the Auditor General?

MR TUMWEBAZE: You reduce it by Shs 1 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Where is that money now; that is what I am asking? Have you returned it to Finance or you passed it under the Office of the Auditor General?

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, in the report we made as the Budget Committee, we had allocated Shs 6.75 billion under Office of the Auditor General. This morning, they were ready to give us Shs 1 billion. You remember we negotiated with the minister and we said, “Add on another 3”. He said, okay, I will add on 2; we said 3 – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have got the information. We have taken a decision on the Office of the Auditor General; that is finished. The Prime Minister has guided that that matter shall be handled separately. Move to the next issues.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE – GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the report from the committee of supply be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion that the report of the committee of supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and congratulations, hon. Ministers, Chairperson and all of the Members who have worked very hard to make this thing come through; of course not forgetting hon. Ekanya, the Shadow Minister for Finance, who has been very helpful in this matter; and the Prime Minister for doing the final stroke that has brought this thing to a close. (Applause)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATIONS BILL, 2011

7.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE – GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011 be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for a supplementary appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund under Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 of a sum of Shs 1,993,779,284,000 only to meet additional expenditure for the financial year 2010/2011. I beg to move.

7.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011. The Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development presented to this House a Supplementary Appropriations Bill, 2011 in accordance with Article 156(3) of the Constitution which provides that: “Where, in respect of any financial year, a supplementary estimate or supplementary estimates have been approved by Parliament in accordance with Clause (2) of this article, a Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament in the  financial year next following that financial year to which the estimates relate, providing for the appropriation of the sums so approved for the purpose specified in those estimates”. 

The Bill was referred to the Committee on Budget for scrutiny and it is my pleasure to present that committee’s report. 

Methodology

The Budget Committee met to scrutinise the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011. It scrutinised the supplementary expenditure schedules No.1, No.2 and No.3 to establish if the figures as indicated in the Bill were those that were supplied to the spending agency. 

Below are the observations that arose from the discussions held: 

Objective of the Bill

The Bill is to provide for supplementary appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund under Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 of a sum of Shs 1,993,779,284,000 only to meet additional expenditure for the financial year 2010/2011.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee ascertained that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011 is consistent with the approved supplementary schedules No.1, No.2 and No.3, save for Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, where only Shs 201,519,240 was approved by Parliament.

Mr Speaker, you may recall that the Budget Committee in its report on Schedule No.3 recommended that only the amount of Shs 201,519,240 already spent on the arbitration between Heritage Gas Ltd v. the Attorney General under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs be approved. The balance of Shs 11,740,764,666 held on an account in Bank of Uganda titled Heritage Arbitration, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, should be appropriated through the normal budget process. Government was, therefore, advised to reverse the entries.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011” be passed into law subject to the following amendments; the amendment is that Shs 201 million –

THE SPEAKER: The amendment will come in at another stage.

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, I beg to report.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. The matters in here are clear. If there are any details, we deal with them at committee stage.  I put the question to the motion that a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2011

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Schedule – 

MR TIM LWANGA: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment to the Schedule. Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, substitute for Shs 11,942,284 with a figure 201,519,214. 

The justification is that Parliament has only approved Shs 201,519,240 of the proposed Shs 11,942,284 under Supplementary Schedule III.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put a question that the Schedule, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put a question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole of House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I now put a question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted by this House. I now put a question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2011

7.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and Colleagues, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I put the question that a Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011” be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE SUPPLEMENTARY ACT,2011.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, hon. Minister, the Chairman of the Budget Committee, hon. Members and the Frontbench of the Opposition. Thank you very much for this perseverance.

Hon. Members, I have been forced by circumstances to do almost the impossible; to resort to the provisions of the Budget Act to extend – I think I will go down in history as the Speaker who has extended the provisions of this law most times. I am told people do it once and that is it. 

Anyway, the circumstances we are dealing with are very different. This is a new Parliament, we are handling a transition, and we are dealing with a budget that we were not part of at the beginning. We are only handling the tail end of the budget process and as you know, tail ends are difficult to handle. You may not know what went into it, but they give it to you at the end to finish it. Finishing a race even to those who run, the way the Rt hon. Prime Minister used to, is not an easy job. (Laughter) We took on the race and by the time we got to the last person, the way we are doing now, all the other runners were infront. So, we had to work doubly hard to catch up with the timeframe that is provided for by the law. But I am happy we have done very well. So, congratulations to you honourable members. (Applause)

So, it is now my sincere prayer that the Appropriation Bill will be completed tonight so that it can be tabled tomorrow for us to conclude this process. We have done the entire process, but all what we have done will come to zero if we do not appropriate. And the actual appropriation is done by the Appropriation Bill that is still to be printed because even the last figures we just supplied have to also get into it. I hope that the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation is going to work overnight to ensure the Bill is ready.

For avoidance of any difficulties, we will not be able to meet in the morning – we need to have the Bill before we take any decision to move on. Under Section 21 of the Budget Act - and I am quoting the section from the Revised Edition of the Laws of Uganda, 2000 – as the Speaker, I have the prerogative to extend any term limited by the Act to accommodate situations that arise in the course of the deliberations. By that prerogative, therefore, I am extending the period provided for under the Act of 31 August to Friday, 16 September 2011, but our focus is to finish this tomorrow. Let us be on standby. Let us all be here on time tomorrow so that we can finish this business. As you are aware, when this is done, we will be announcing a programme of an adjournment of the House so that we can go and visit our constituents. Some of us have not been there in a long while. This period will give Members time to do some constituency work. This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.23 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 15 September 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

