Tuesday, 15 September 2009

Parliament met at 03.35 p.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall, Kampala.

NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

DELIVERY OF AN ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, General Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of Republic of Uganda; Your Excellency, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda; Rt. Hon. Professor Nsibambi, Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Ministers; Hon. Ministers; the Leader of the Opposition; Hon. Members of Parliament; Members of the Diplomatic Corps; the former Vice-President, Dr Speciosa Wandera Kazibwe; ladies and gentlemen.

Your Excellency, it is my great pleasure and honour to welcome you to this special sitting of Parliament. In the same vein, let me use this opportunity to welcome and thank honourable members for attending this meeting. You are aware that Clause 2 of Article 101 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that, “The President may in consultation with the Speaker address Parliament from time to time on any matter of national importance.”

This requirement of the Constitution has been met by His Excellency the President, where His Excellency the President did consult me seeking for an opportunity to address Parliament, which I gladly accepted on your behalf. We are, therefore, gathered here this afternoon for the said purpose.

The procedure to be followed will be that I will invite His Excellency the President to address Parliament and thereafter the House will be adjourned. At an appropriate time, when copies of his address are available, I will give opportunity to the honourable members to debate it like any other business of Parliament.

For this paragraph, which I have just read, I will draw your attention to rule 9(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, and for your benefit I would like to read it. “The President, while occupying the Chair of State –
    a) May make Presidential statements, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question…” (Laughter)

Hon. Members, it is now my pleasure and singular honour to invite Your Excellency the President to discharge your constitutional duty of delivering to Parliament an address in accordance with Article 101(2) of the Constitution. (Applause)

3.44
HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): The Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Excellency the Vice-President, His Lordship the Chief Justice, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, Hon. Ministers, Hon. Members of Parliament, Ladies and Gentlemen. I greet you all. I would like to use this occasion to extend my condolences to the Ugandan families who lost their loved ones on account of the riots fermented by reactionaries who have learnt nothing from our tragic history.

I also extend my sympathies to those who were injured in those riots and those who lost their properties. With the permission of the Speaker, I would want to ask his indulgence to allow us to stand and observe a moment of silence

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

MR MUSEVENI: This is the third time these elements are causing riots, killing Ugandans and damaging property. In 2006, Dr Besigye caused riots and destroyed property. Other riots were caused by hon. Beatrice Anywar over the Lugazi Sugar Project. In 2006 we did not lose people, but property was damaged. But in the riots of Beatrice Anywar, we lost both property and people. These riots have been caused by the same Opposition opportunistic elements using the Mengo Kingdom. These have resulted into the death of 15 Ugandans, destruction of property, disruption of business and disturbing our peace.

The security forces always contain those criminal actions. Those who think that Uganda is a banana republic and think that they can change leadership by riots are wasting their time. (Applause) I will say more about that a little later.

The security forces always contain those criminal actions. In 2006, the rioters were blackmailing us because we were going to host the CHOGM conference; and once you are working with the Europeans – you know the Europeans have their own way of doing things. They tend to think the worst about Africa; they are always looking for pretexts.

So in 2006, because I had committed myself to host CHOGM here, we had to suffer the arrogance of some of those elements because we did not want to upset CHOGM knowing that the Europeans were looking for a pretext not to bring CHOGM here and yet we had already promised our people. So we had to lie down and be trampled over by all sorts of unreasonable groups so that CHOGM would not be disrupted.
We are now here by ourselves; we do not have any international obligation –(Interjections)– I would like to appeal to the judicial arm of the state to give priority to the trial of the criminals that had been engaged in these actions. It is not correct to give bail to this type of people.

Why does a political leader like Dr Besigye or any other leader promote riots? There are other legal ways available in the Constitution to deal with any eventuality. If, for instance, Mengo Kingdom thought that our stand on stopping the Kabaka or the Katikkiro from going to Kayunga was wrong, they should have gone to court to present their grievances instead of promoting criminality.

I visited Natete this morning and saw the damage that was caused by the rioters. I extend my sympathies again to those families who lost their dear ones and property. The government will compensate those who lost their vehicles and other property. (Applause) And we will also assist those who lost their dear ones.

On the afternoon of Thursday, 10 September 2009, when the riots started, the Police was slow in reaching the suburbs of Kampala. This was on account of insufficient vehicles. We are going to solve this problem of mobility of the police forces in a decisive way. I would like to assure the country on this. (Applause)

The Police was quickly reinforced by UPDF units from upcountry and the rioting was stopped. Over 160 rioters have been arrested and are being produced in the courts of law. I trust the courts will give them deterrent sentences.

Meanwhile, those who have been using this blackmail of riots should be informed that we have scrutinised the police anti-riot procedures and the following will be the rules of engagement:

The security forces when dealing with civilian demonstrations are informed to use minimum non lethal force. Be informed that any rioter found attacking other civilians will be shot. (Applause) The ones who threaten the lives of the security personnel will also be handled according to the Police procedures of anti-riot and the UN principles. 

The Uganda Police Force, under our guidance, does not always use lethal force against illegal assemblies. However, when an illegal assembly is riotous, those who organise these assemblies and participate in them should know that not only the law of Uganda but also international practices say - provision 9 of the UN principles on this issue says as follows - in a document entitled, Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials: “Law enforcement officials shall not use firearms against persons except in self defence or defence of others against the imminent threat of death or serious injury, to prevent the perpetration of a particularly serious crime involving grave threat to life, to arrest a person presenting such a danger and resisting their authority, or to prevent his or her escape, and only when less extreme means are insufficient to achieve these objectives. In any event, intentional lethal use of firearms may only be made when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.” 

So, those who are playing around with riots should know that they are playing around. You know, for us we never bothered to drill our people in all these type of things. This is because we know that Uganda is a peaceful country. We do not even think about riots because it is not necessary. However, because there are some people who think this is a method, we have now been forced to study it in detail. 

In fact, I had never read these rules until recently, to see how they would be managed. Therefore, all those involved should know that according to international practice, when somebody is threatening the lives of others, or of the security personnel, they can be shot; not to kill, but to ensure that he or she is disabled and does not cause any trouble. 

So, those who are in the habit of this very fascist type of method - this is what Hitler used to do in the 1920s riots and so on. These were Hitler’s methods. But this is not a Weimar Republic; we are not the government that was removed by Hitler. So, those who are in that game had better re-assess their plans. 

The recent stand-off between the government and Opposition political parties using Mengo -(Applause)- was not just about Kayunga or Buruli tensions. These are recent developments. The real issue is whether we should have political kings or kings wielding political authority. This concept has been totally rejected by the NRM because it is anti-democracy. (Applause) The king is not elected; so, if he wields his political power, how shall he be accountable for his mistakes - if he makes them? How will he be accountable for them? 

A political leader, since he or she is elected every five years, will be voted out of office if he or she makes mistakes. What do we do with a traditional leader who is not elected, but has made mistakes? That is why we made it clear to those who were agitating for kingdoms that those traditional leaders had to be only cultural, in order to deal with our languages and customs that are not well addressed by the modern institutions. 

Working with some academicians, I am about to publish a Runyankole dictionary and a thesaurus of Runyankole. I am now editing the drafts. Actually, I forgot to bring my voluminous drafts here. 

The traditional leaders have a lot of work to do in the area of traditional morals; for example, not marrying our kith and kin contrary to the respective customs as one of the traditional chiefs of Busoga said recently. Therefore, the traditional leaders are not lacking what to do. (Laughter) When you find children smoking marijuana - these are our children - or going naked; or doing all those terrible things which children are learning from other cultures, like homosexuality. This is a challenge for the whole society, especially for the traditional leaders. That was actually one of the reasons why I supported them.

I could see that legislation is addressed by Parliament; executive issues by the government ministers; and judiciary by the judges; but the morals –(Interjection)– Okay, the religious leaders try to address the morals, but their way of handling them is sometimes slightly different from the traditional ones. How about those who are not religious; who caters for them? 

That was why I was so enthusiastic about the traditional institutions. I wanted them to deal with the morals and the languages because I am a very big fan - a very big believer in the African languages.  They are much richer than these European languages we are speaking, and I do not want them to fade out. This was the reason I supported and spearheaded the return of kingdoms. 

Our support for kings was not intended to revive ancient undemocratic governance. It was aimed at finding a way of retaining elements of our culture and languages that are compatible with the modern way of life. Incidentally, when I opened the first Lukiiko – Mr Speaker, allow me to digress a bit and refer to my speech to the Lukiiko on 2 August 1993. I will not read the whole thing –(Interjections)– I will give you copies. This is what I said in parts: “The National Resistance Movement has no difficulty in supporting cultural revival because reviving cultural institutions would address the following very important points: First of all, it is a symbolic recognition of the achievements of our ancestors in the struggle to set up centralised administration, a pre-requisite for better organisation of production and welfare of society.” 
So, I elaborated that point, which would take me too much time. I do not want to –(Laughter)– because that one point took a long time to elaborate. All these pages were on one point. (Laughter) 

Secondly, the traditional leaders would help us preserve our languages and cultures, which are under serious assault from external forces. Some of our people have already become black Europeans. When you see a black man who does not speak an African language, who is he? When you see a black man who does not speak one African language, what do you call him? (Interjections) No, Obama has got his roots because he is what we would call in Luganda, “obukojja”, a phrase used to refer to someone who grows up at their maternal uncle’s place. We have it in Uganda; there are people who can grow from the bukojja side. But if you see a black man like Museveni who does not speak a single African Language, what is he? This is the point I cited. 

Although we do not have one national language yet, our vernaculars must be preserved because they are rich and unique. There is nobody currently well placed to preserve the languages. Who is looking after the numerous customs regarding marriage, etiquette and others? Who is marshalling the rich social philosophy encapsulated in the proverbs in vernaculars? That was the second reason.

Thirdly, we need people with vested interests that look after the traditional sites such as the palaces, burial sites and others. Right now, they are in a disgraceful state, having been abused or neglected by the Ministry of Culture. These could be very useful tourist as well as pedagogic centres.

Fourth, the traditional leaders can mobilise communities for development and spearhead community-based development schemes and so on. 

There was some other point that I would not want to go into –(Interjections)– You will read it by yourselves. (Laughter) 

I ended with something on building a modern society, where I said you need a big internal market, a wide raw material base, a skilled labour force and a system of free enterprise. However, in order to have these four, especially the first two, you must be an integrationist and not a parochialist. 

If you are a genuine traditionalist, you will have no problem with being an integrationist. Failure to see this or do the needful would be to betray an imperial Africa again. Failure to draw the necessary and appropriate conclusions from the efforts of our ancestors, who were clear integrationists, is to weaken Africa in the face of renewed threats to our sovereignty from outside. In this case, tradition will have been falsified to serve Africa’s enemies as happened during the era of colonialism. So, this is what I told these people on 2 August 1993 when I was opening the first Lukiiko.

Some people like Gen. Otafiire have blamed me for having been the one that went on my knees and begged for the return of the kingdoms when I addressed the Army Council in Gulu to authorise the vacating of the Lubiri Barracks. That is true – (Interjections)– I did not kneel –(Laughter)– because I do not kneel for other human beings; I only kneel for God. But I can say that I persuaded them –(Applause)– because many of the Army Council members did not support the idea. I, however, insisted on persuading them because I wanted to cater for the interests of Ugandans who cherish monarchies. (Applause) 

You know, what I do not want in my life is to have anybody under my care –(Applause)– feeling unhappy with the common arrangement for a good reason. If he is not happy for bad reasons, then we of course ignore her or him. Otherwise – (Interjections)– We shall talk about that, and it is good that we are talking about these things.
I do not care about monarchies; Ankole is thriving without a monarchy. (Laughter) You go there, there is no monarchy but Ankole is thriving. Our view was that those who want the monarchy could have it as long as they followed the Constitution. The people who supported the monarchy would have been very disappointed if we had not catered for their interests.

Although while in the bush we had not promised the restoration of monarchies, we felt that it was part of the human rights of those who wanted them to get them. If some people misuse them, that will be their problem, not mine. Therefore, I plead not guilty to Otafiire’s charge that I am responsible for the misbehaviour of the traditional institutions, if they are misbehaving. It was done that way because also politically, the ones who wanted these monarchies would have gone on nagging us for denying them something they cherish. It was better to arrange it the way we did it.

The other day I made a national broadcast to the people of Uganda when I was addressing the Buganda Caucus. I do not want to repeat what I said then, although the speech is available here. It should be distributed to all of you because it was addressing the same subject, though from a different angle. As I said, I do not want to repeat what I said then about the sad history of monarchies trying to meddle in the politics in Uganda. This was the problem in 1953 when the British colonialists were still here. It was also the problem in 1966; although the late Obote also made his own mistakes of not following the Constitution as it was then, in resolving that problem. 

We are totally against the kings being involved in politics. (Applause) The kings failed to defend the sovereignty of Africa. That is why we were colonised. The colonisation of Africa was a vote of no confidence -(Laughter)– in tribalism and the pre-colonial kings. Africa failed to defend herself because of tribalism and the tribal-political organisation. 

Modern Africa must transcend and discard tribal organisation. Yes, we were the first to recognise the cultural rights of the people, but those should never translate into tribal organisation and a mentality to obstruct greater integration. All modern organisations should be constructed around legitimate interests of the respective peoples.
As I mentioned at the peace conference of the religious leaders recently, those legitimate interests are – when you are dealing with any situation, according to the NRM time-tested philosophy, you should ask yourself what the legitimate interests of the different players are. That is important because the interests you push for must be legitimate. If you push for illegitimate interests, then you are at fault.

The colonialists came here to rule us and said they had interests in Africa – that a Briton had interests in Africa! So, are those interests legitimate or illegitimate? Of course when a thief wants to go into a house to steal, he must have interests; but the owner of the house also has interests. So, much as the thief has got illegitimate interests in taking what is not his, the owner of the house has legitimate interests in defending what is his. 

So, in each situation, we should determine the interests we are dealing with. That is why we should not handle issues in very haphazard ways. For us we deal with issues in a scientific way. We always fight just wars; we cannot fight unjust wars. We cannot fight to colonise others; what is your interest there? Why are you killing people? When I fight to defend what is mine, then my interests are legitimate.

As I mentioned at the peace conference of the religious leaders recently, those legitimate interests are peace – we are entitled to peace and it is my legitimate interest to have peace; you have no right to disturb my peace; nobody has the right to disturb my peace; and it is everybody’s legitimate interest to have security, health and education. That is why we immunise all our children so that they do not get sick from the diseases we can avoid, and we introduced education for all; both in primary and secondary schools. 

Employment – the right to have a job. A government system like this one should be geared towards attracting as many jobs as possible for the people.

Access to the local, regional, African and international markets so that we can sell the products of our sweat. If I sit at Rwakitura, look after my cows and produce my milk, it is my legitimate interest to see that this milk is transported peacefully from Rwakitura to Kampala, and sold so that I get money and get richer. It is better if that milk can be taken to Nairobi or anywhere in East Africa and is sold there; or to Juba. These are our legitimate rights; because we want to lead a better life. But in order to lead a better life, we must isolate those rights that can help us to do so, not illusions or illegitimate interests.

The freedom of voting and other political rights - those are freedoms; they are legitimate interests. The freedom of worship is a legitimate interest. The freedom to my culture - your government is not interfering with my culture. I am now writing a dictionary of Runyankole and nobody has come to interfere with me; and I am very happy.

The freedom of culture; the security of property and so on. Those are the legitimate rights –(Interjections)– freedom of movement -(Interjections)- yes, but your movement must not be at the expense of others. (Laughter)

Therefore, our modern organisation must be built around these legitimate interests. If you structure the issue of politics that way, you will be able to handle it. If you structure it haphazardly, you will not be able to manage it. 

Intimidation and manipulations are not part of those legitimate rights. You have got no right to intimidate me. Those are pollutants of these rights. Some people have wondered why I agreed to talk to the monarchists who are not in politics about issues that are political in nature, such as the status of Kampala, the Land Bill, Federo and so on. Why did I not only deal with the elected leaders of Buganda, for instance? Because some people also accused me; they said that I ignored the elected leaders and spent all my time with the traditional ones. 

This is a good point; it is correct to work with hundreds of the elected leaders of Buganda like members of parliament, LC V chairpersons, LC III chairpersons and so on. That is exactly what we did when we were promulgating the 1995 Constitution and the constitutional amendments of 2005 that brought in Article 178. We caucused all the time on all these issues, with the elected leaders in Parliament. Then we would take them to the bigger Parliament only to find smaller numbers, which always made us just flip through. (Laughter)

We caucused before going to the districts to get council resolutions, since the requirements on some of the Articles required two thirds majority in some of the districts. You remember, we had got resolutions also from the district councils. Therefore, those who say I usually forget the elected leaders and spend more time with the cultural leaders, are not correct, because the final destination of whatever we discuss is Parliament. It is Parliament that is supposed to turn whatever we talk about, into law or into the Constitution. The discussions with the cultural leaders were preparatory before we came to the actual centre of decision-making.

However, it was true that we always consulted the kings or their emissaries. Was I wrong to do so? Was I involving the kings into politics by doing so? 

This reminds me of the example of modern Ugandan marriages. In Uganda, legal marriage is the union between a man and his wife; they are the legal partners. I do not think that we have a law in Uganda, which says that a girl or boy must consult their parents before they get married. I do not think there is a law of that kind. There is no law that says that before a girl or boy is married, they must consult –(Laughter)– customary law, but is it –(Interjections)– yes; there is no law. 

For instance, if a girl got married to a boy without consulting the father, will the union be illegal? Maybe under the Sharia Law because I do not know much about that one. (Laughter) However, girls and the boys always consult their parents. I was looking at the issue of kings in a somewhat similar manner. It is not the duty of kings to decide on the land law, federal government, foreign affairs, etcetera. It is the duty of the Executive, Parliament, the district councils etcetera. However, I thought there was no harm in informing the kings and getting their agreement. That was my reason; and that is how I looked at it. 

Some of the kings have been acting contrary to our original agreement; giving an incomplete view of our history. 

I am myself, what they call Sewava in Buganda - a son of a princess, because my mother and even my grandmother, were from the royal clans. (Laughter) Besides, my clan, the Basiita, were very active in the histories of Bunyoro, Toro, Ankole, Mpororo, Karagwe in Tanzania, etcetera. I am, therefore, quite familiar with the history of Uganda and the surrounding regions. 

Before the emergence of the present dynasties, the Kabakas, the Babiito, etcetera, Uganda had become one kingdom, when Ruyonga and Ishaza formed an alliance through the marriage of the former’s daughter, Nyamate, to the latter. Ishaza and Nyamate produced Isimbwa called Ssimbwa among the Baganda. Isimbwa succeeded Ruyonga and his capital was in Bigobyamugyenyi in the present day Sembabule. Isimbwa eventually went to Bunyoro and produced a boy child with Nyinamwiru, Bukuku’s daughter. The boy was the famous Ndahura what they call Ndawula in Buganda. Somebody told me that the same person is called Odur in Acholi. (Laughter)  

By this time, Ankole, Buganda, Bunyoro, Bukiri - Bukiri is what we call Lango and Acholi –(Interjections)- that is what we call it, I am telling you. (Laughter) Bukiri; even among the Basoga - recently, when I was campaigning against Salaamu Musumba, the Bakiga of Kidera were calling the other side, Bukedi, Bukiri; but definitely, the real name of Lango and Acholi among us is Bukiri -(Interjections)- I am informing you; this is not a subject of debate. 

At this time, Ankole, Buganda, Bunyoro and Bukiri were one kingdom under Ndahura. One of the Bachwezi, Kyomya, had children with a Mukiri woman. A Mukiri woman would either be Langi or Acholi. The woman was called Nyatworo -(Interjections)- yes. This is the name in Runyankole. I am pronouncing it in Runyankole. (Laughter) Kyomya had a child with Nyatworo, as we call it in Runyankole, and this Nyatworo was a daughter of Labong. The children -(Interjections)- you listen, wonderful people. You listen if you are interested. The children of Kyomya and Nyatworo were the following: Nyarwa, Isingoma, Mpuga Rukidi, Kato Kimera, Kintu and Kiiza. These legends may not be exact in terms of details; you know things which are not written. They may meander around, but around some truth. And if you want to confirm this, you go to the Kabaka’s palace and ask them of a place called Wankaaki. Is Wankaaki a Luganda word? It is not. It is a Luo word. So, from the language you can do forensic investigation.(Applause) Go backwards and get the truth. How did Wankaaki come to the Lubiri? It is a Luo word. When I went to Gulu, I asked people and they told me what it is. It means a gate. 

But the scholarship we have here is just rotating around colonialism. They do not want to find out anything about themselves. They are busy just cramming what other people are telling them. These legends may not be exact in terms of details; they, however, give a general outline. What I am telling you here is the version written in a book, Abagabe ba Ankole - “the Kings of Ankole”, written by Erasaro Kamugungunu and Katate. These are the legends among the Banyankole and this is the history they know. Any Munyankole who is a historian knows these facts -(Interjection)- it was written in the 1950s. I could have brought a copy; it is in my house but it is in Runyankole. I do not know how my daughter there would read Runyankole. (Laughter)

The shared Bachwezi names say it all: Isimbwa, if you go to places like Toro and so forth, you will find such names. You come to Buganda, they call him, Ssimbwa. When you go to Congo, they call him Ndahura; there is a Bishop in Congo called Ndahura. In Tanzania, Karagwe, you will find Ndahura, Ndawula, Kagoro and Mukasa. What they call Mukasa in Luganda is what we call Mugasha in Runyankole, Runyoro, Rutoro and Ruhaya. 

When you ask Banyankole what happened to Mugasha; the Banyankole say, Mugasha went to Sese Islands and became a fisherman. And when you go to Sese Islands, they will tell you that Mukasa is lubale w’enyanja. He is the god of the waters. Kyomya, Wamala, Mugyenyi and so forth; archaeology confirms this history. I am now telling you from the names, words and from the legends. 

Let us go to archaeology. The excavations at Bigo and Ntuuki in Sembabule District confirm that there were huge settlements on those sites by 1350 AD and 900 AD respectively. Those who want to confirm these sites can go and read the book by Prof. Posnanski; if you go to the library you may get those pamphlets there. And also Dr Sutton; in fact Sutton was one of my teachers at the University of Dar-es-Salaam. Go to the library and read those documents regarding the archaeology at Ntuuki and Bigo. 

Ntuuki is older because the people there lived in 900 AD; Bigo is a little bit later, 1350 AD. There were huge cities there called Endembo. Who were the kings there? Who were the kings in that place? Were they the kings of Buganda? Were they the kings of Bunyoro? Were they the kings of Ankole? Who were they? (Interjection) Oh, they may have been Banyala. (Laughter) That is what somebody is saying. 

When I went to London in 1981, I was at Prof. Lule’s house and that is where I met Prince Mutebi. At that time he was in London studying. So, Prof. Lule brought him to me -(Interjections)- of course I knew him because I used to see him in pictures when he was a young man. He introduced him to me. I did not have time so I said, “He should come to the hotel where I was staying and we discuss”. He came to the hotel and we discussed these very points. 

I said, “I support the monarchies if they are going to discover our real history but not to come and promote chauvinism; to discover the linkages of the African people”. This is what I wanted because this history is there. That is what I discussed with Prince Mutebi in my hotel when he came to see me in London. 

When we restored the kings, it was our expectation that the cultural institutions would delve into these obvious linkages among our peoples instead of promoting chauvinism. Chauvinism is when one group thinks it is better or the best. Down with chauvinism! (Applause) We did not want chauvinism; we want to discover our real heritage because it is there. 

You go to Toro and Bunyoro, you will find Olimi, Owinyi, Oyo, these are Luo names -(Interjection)- Labwoni - (Laughter) - Okwir (Laughter) Wamala is Omara. Yeah! My support for kingdoms was because I have got great understanding of the history of Uganda, but also of other people. I have told you that we called Langis and Acholis, Bukiri. We called Congo, Bulega. So, when you hear Kabalega, that means either the mother or father was from Congo. So, this was the culture I was hoping for, not self glorification and just running around and all these. (Laughter) I wanted to help the people of Africa know each other more. 

In the national objectives in the Constitution of Uganda, it says, “All organs of State and people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability.” (Applause) It further says, “Every effort shall be made to integrate all the peoples of Uganda while at the same time recognising the existence of their ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversity.” (Applause) It is in the Constitution; not chauvinism. To go there and all that is in your programme is chauvinism, chauvinism, chauvinism, morning and evening. 

What value are you adding? We are talking of value addition now. We no longer want raw materials, we want value addition. So, what value are you adding culturally if you are just going about recycling old stories? And if you are not adding any value then what are you for? Just recycling prejudices, lack of information, getting ignorant people and putting – that is not what we are looking for. It is, therefore, clear that all national assets should be used to promote unity instead of promoting chauvinism. The cultural institutions should teach the holistic history of pre-colonial Uganda instead of just teaching in parts. 

What is the way forward? We need to do the following: Strictly enforce the principle of separating cultural institutions from politics. (Applause) In order to do that we are going to expeditiously bring a law that will operationalise Article 246 in greater detail so that demarcation of roles is clear. (Applause)

In order to guard our sovereignty so that kings and traditional institutions are not used as foreign agents or agents of local business groups, we need to provide in that law that any gifts exceeding a certain magnitude should be declared to the relevant government institution -(Applause)- for example, the Inspectorate of Government or whatever place you want to put it. Failure to do so should attract penalties. 

In order to stop the Kabaka and the Buganda officials from meddling in politics, there should be a meeting of all political leaders in Buganda, the religious leaders, the clan leaders and the royal clan members, to give their contribution on the way forward. This meeting could be called Tabamiruka. Tabamiruka is what our Acholi people call kacoke madit. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, the NRM Government will implement the idea of the regional tier governments next financial year without fail. (Applause) We have waited for too long on this issue and we shall wait no longer. 

In order not to incur extra costs of electing regional chairmen, we could have a transitional arrangement where the present councillors in the respective regions could elect the regional chairmen for the next one and a half years until the time of the general elections when they will be elected by universal adult suffrage. (Applause) And you remember those regions which said they wanted to be deemed to have united, they are there, Article 178(3) of the Constitution, Buganda, Bunyoro and Busoga. I do now know which one else –(Interjection)- okay. 

This is Article 178(3), “Subject to clause (1) and to the provisions of this Constitution, the districts of the regions of Buganda, Bunyoro, Busoga, Acholi and Lango, specified in the First Schedule to this Constitution, shall be deemed to have agreed to form regional governments for the purposes of this Article.” (Applause) (Interjection) Banyala are already deemed (Laughter) Banyala are deemed within.

The Mengo radio, CBS, was closed because as a radio of a traditional institution, it was meddling in politics, fomenting sectarianism, promoting hate, lawlessness and violence with impunity. 

Another reason why CBS was closed was because of the intimidation campaign it was carrying out. The Mengo officials have been trying to intimidate the political class in Buganda not to think freely. Anybody who gives frank and realistic opinions is branded anti-Buganda and anti-Kabaka. Then this group proclaims, Kabaka tebamuddamu; you cannot answer the Kabaka back or Kabaka tasobya; the Kabaka cannot make mistakes. This type of mentality makes the Kabaka to take certain positions that are wrong, like his public position against our position on the Land (Amendment) Bill. Then any Muganda political leader who does not agree with such wrong positions is branded anti-Muganda and anti-Kabaka. This was the same problem exactly in 1961; intimidation, cutting down people’s coffee trees, boycotts and the results were catastrophic. This was without the radios that time. Now with radios, it is worse. 

Therefore, we could not allow this because I have talked to those radio people several times. I called them and tried to talk to them. The last time I gave them a dinner -(Laughter)- all of them from about 200 radio stations and I quoted for them a passage in the Bible. There was this king who was dining and writing appeared above his head, which said, “You have been weighed and found wanting”. I don’t know whether there is a priest who can come and tell us the way it is written. Mene mene Tekel Upharsin. 

I told those people that, “The freedom we gave you has been misused and we are going to take our own independent action”. This is because Uganda is not a play thing. You cannot come and play about with Uganda especially the far that we have gone. 

When Moses was grazing his father-in-law’s sheep, he saw a bush burning. When he got near, the voice of God told him, “Remove your shoes because this is holy ground.” Don’t just play around with shoes here. Because of what Uganda went through, we don’t want people to play around and there has been too much playing around. (Applause)

In the Bible, it says, “Rend ye not your clothes but your hearts”. What we need are your hearts and not the shoes. This is just symbolism. Nti mwenyamizzenga emitima gyamwe so si byambalo byamwe. That is when the Jews used to tear their clothes whenever they were mourning to show that they were unhappy. But Jesus said, “You should feel the pain inside not just tearing clothes”.


I was amazed recently, during this standoff that the clan leaders are not members of the Lukiiko. I didn’t know this. These were our partners in restoring the monarchy, and of course are more legitimate in terms of culture. Certainly more legitimate than those aspiring for political positions using Mengo. The NRM is too experienced to be fooled by such transparent schemes. We mean what we say and say what we mean. It is advisable that everybody checks himself and sticks to the Constitution. That is what was agreed upon and that is how Uganda will be run. 

Since Saturday, 12 September 2009 at 20:00 hours, I have been trying to ring His Highness the Kabaka without success. The key for these issues are with him. On our side, we are determined this time to ensure that the Constitution is observed by all, kings inclusive. There are a number of other steps and measures that the government will take to ensure that these problems are resolved expeditiously. 

We have got more important challenges affecting our country. We cannot be here talking about kings only when there are issues affecting the majority of the people. On this occasion, I will mention only three: unemployment of the youth, the Land Act and corruption. My young sister Anywar is making a positive contribution this time –(Laughter)- she said poverty. That is a very good point. 

The youth are yearning for employment and the NRM is now in a position to address this problem. The NRM long ago told you of its point No.5 of the Ten Point Programme: Building an Independent, Integrated, Self-sustaining National Economy. Some of the actors have not been active on this yet it holds the future for modernisation. 

We have Prosperity-for-All. However, some of the youth cannot be absorbed in PFA because they have no land. The answer to their problem is therefore artisanship, cottage industries and small and medium enterprises. Work for some time has been done on some of these - such as wine making. There have been some groups, which we have assisted in wine making, cheese making, juice extraction, rice hulling, milk processing - I am not including waragi - silk worm rearing and weaving, handloom weaving, bread baking, floor milling, fruit drying, woodwork, welding, poultry, tailoring, spice processing, pottery, etc. Recently, chalk making and curving articles out of horns have been added. 
These unemployed-landless youth are a blessing in disguise; they are the beginning of a proletariat and a lower middle class group. This is how societies change because these are children who are no longer living in the villages and are now in these trading centres. So, we should find them there and give them what they can do instead of trying to send them to the villages. (Applause)  

We should ensure that each trading centre in Uganda has some of these activities and the respective youth groups benefit from these efforts. I have appointed a special advisor for these activities. She is an industrialist herself - Gudo. She has got a big factory in Mbarara and she has been working with me for a long time on spices and so on. I have given her the long list of all these enterprises which I came across at the trade shows. When you go to the trade shows, you will find a lot of those efforts by people trying to process something in their own way. So, I have given her the whole list and I want her to analyse it and recommend to us which ones we should support and how. So, if you have got your own lists, send them to her because it will be very good. Her name is Gudo and she will be working in my office. 

We should ensure that money for this programme is not a problem. You know, some of the people talk of money yet the money we are spending on NAADS this year is Shs 134.2 billion –(Interjections)- tear gas is part of the investment. (Laughter) Tear gas is just simple counselling so that you go back; it is not even beating you. Has this money, the Shs 134 billion, been well used? This is not to mention the other monies for Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PDRP) etc. Can we fail to get Shs 30 billion from some of these monies to support these cottage industries of the youth? I do not think so. 

This is the beginning of the industrialisation, and I have already directed the Minister of Industry to ensure that everything produced in the agricultural sector and is not eaten fresh, should be processed. (Applause) I have already written to hon. Otafiire that anything produced but not eaten fresh must be processed and preserved and these youth will help us to do some of those things. The youth can be very active in this sector. 

However, we must not continue to think about this effort in disjointed ways; some of the cottage industries only rely on manual labour. Others need electricity, hence the importance of electrifying the whole country –(Applause)- so that we can have cheap electricity; otherwise all SMEs that need electricity will fail. 

On the issue of electricity, hon. D’Ujanga will soon be inviting me to open some of these factories – hon. Onek is here. The other day I was with D’Ujanga and he was telling me about the - which are the power stations that are almost ready? Bugoye and Buseruka. Is it Buseruka? These are almost ready now. (Applause) 

What happened to the 22 industrial estates which we agreed on? This is for the Minister of Finance to come and explain later – how far have we gone on those estates? Ideologically, the youth need to know that their enemies are those who delay those projects, for example, Lugazi -(Laughter)- and Amuru sugar factories; the milk project from Thailand, Karuma power project, etc. The youth need to fight those forces politically - (Laughter) - I am trying to be peaceful; so, I do not want to name them. 

Parliament needs to pass the Land (Amendment) Act –(Applause)- so that the friction between the bibanja owners and the landlords is stopped. Of recent, the bibanja owners have started taking the law in their hands by killing landlords. This is in part caused by those, including CBS, that caused the delay of the passing of the Land Bill. I condemn that violence of the bibanja owners taking the law into their own hands and killing the landlords. However, the bibanja owners have been emboldened by our mobilisation and the formation of the Bibanja Owners Association. I am appealing to Parliament to expedite the law as soon as possible. 

I am also looking at even better long-term options. In recent times, I have been in touch with some landlords who rather than being in permanent tension with the bibanja owners would like to sell the mailo land titles to the government such that the government gives the land titles - Obwanannyini - to the legal bibanja owners. I have already used this system in Ankole in the Ishaka area to solve the problem decisively in a win-win way. The landlord gets very good money and the bibanja owners get land titles. In Ankole, the person who would have been king there – Prince John Barigye – had a huge piece of land in Ishaka, Bushenyi, but there were very many tenants on the land. So, he approached me and he said, “I do not want to quarrel with those people who have settled there for more than 50 years. Why don’t you pay me and I give the land to your people?” So, we paid him a very good amount of money and the people got land titles. They got what in Luganda we call obwanannyini.

If there is still vacant land not occupied by bibanja owners -(Interjection)- which fund? I used my presidential fund which you gave me. (Laughter) If there is still vacant land not occupied by bibanja owners, then the mailo land owner can use the money to develop it. If there are any mailo land owners who are interested in this solution, they should contact the Ministry of Lands. It is better for the mailo land owners to sell to the government than to sell to private developers who try to evict people. However, these better long-term solutions need the stability that will be put in place by the proposed amendment. 

On the issue of corruption, I am glad to tell you that the NRM was able to repair the economy of Uganda, attract new investments, repair the old ones and, therefore, started collecting more taxes. Therefore, we send a lot of money to the districts. Unfortunately, quite a lot of this money is stolen by the corrupt officials. Fortunately, I have now identified some of these thieves who steal money, fuel, drugs, overprice contracts, etc. Very soon, you will hear of the casualties. [Hon. Members: “Temangalo.”]On Temangalo, unfortunately, I am not Pontius Pilate. When the Jews falsely accused Jesus, they said that He must be hanged but Pontius Pilate said, “But I don’t see anything wrong with this man.” They said, “No, He must be hanged.” Then, although Pontius Pilate was not convinced, he washed his hands as he said, “Let His blood be on your heads.” Now, I defended Mbabazi because I am not Pontius Pilate. If Mbabazi had been found guilty, I would have joined you in crucifying him but we were not convinced. That is how Mbabazi is still walking around.
 
I have appointed a judicial commission of inquiry into the alleged corruption in the education sector, and also created a drug theft inspection unit in my office. Very soon, you will hear of casualties in many of these areas. I will also create a road inspection unit soon. The head of that unit is a High Court judge. It will be announced; you will see. 

In order to mobilise our people all over the country to understand this confusing situation, I am directing the Minister in charge of the Presidency, through Government channels, to buy bicycles for all the LC I chairpersons. (Applause) We have already equipped – this side – (the Opposition) - does not want mobilisation. We have already equipped all LC III chairpersons and Gombolola chiefs with pikipikis -(Applause)- even those of your group got. Where there are disputes over which LC I chairperson to equip, whether new or old, it may be better to give both because that problem may arise because we did not hold elections. There were the old LC I chairpersons and the new ones, so there may be a problem. The Ministry of Information should also intensify sensitisations. 

In conclusion, this time we shall involve the elected leaders of Buganda in resolving quickly any contentious political matter, and they will be the vanguard of dealing with any unclear issues. We shall encourage the involvement of the religious leaders as well as the clan leaders. I also await a response from Kabaka Mutebi so that we move forward.

Security is assured now; enough units have arrived in Kampala to ensure that security is guaranteed. (Applause) I thank you so much for listening to me. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, on behalf of the entire Parliament, I wish to thank you for your time and appropriate address on issues that have for the last six days negatively affected the political and security environment, especially in Kampala. Parliament will have an opportunity to deliberate on the contents of the address, a debate which I am sure will be aimed at finding a lasting solution to those problems and ensure the protection of all institutions created by the Constitution.

Once again, Your Excellency, I thank you for the address. (Applause)

With this, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to deal with the Appropriation Bill.

The National Anthem

(Two verses)

(The House rose at 5.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 September 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)



