Wednesday, 13 September 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in the Parliamentary House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Comas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TRAFFIC AND ROAD SAFETY BILL, 1995

MINISTER OF TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr Kirunda Kivejjinja): Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I beg to move that, the Traffic and Road Safety Bill, 1995 be read the First Time. (Applause)

MOTION

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, yesterday when the House adjourned abruptly, the Minister of Finance was trying to answer some queries; and we expected him to continue today. As you can see, I have been in Cabinet and I have not been informed that, he will not be around.  However, I only wish to draw the attention of hon. Members that, in light of this same thing, queries and comments and suggestions regarding the different votes.  A summary of Code Gender numbers from one to five, to the 1995/96 Budget, has been circulated to cover the recurrent vote 001 - Office of the President; this is, one; to skip programme 07 - Security Services, as details in the Code Gender Number two, which was circulated to you.  Two; Internal Security Organisation; 1.87 billion additional.  Three; External Security Organisation 0.65 billion, additional.  And four; Programme 03, Item 30; 303 - Presidential and Parliamentary elections, 5 billion that is also additional.  Five; Programme 05 - Ministry of State for Security is .22 billion; this is detailed break down under Code Gender Number two; for details.  Vote 002  - State House, Programme 01, Item 80, 30 that provide 1.36 billion to cover the next arrears under State House.  The under Vote 030 - Gender and Community Development, Programme 05 Statutory Programmes 05, 611,991,000/; the details are provided for in Code Number one.  Vote 34 - Mass Mobilisation; Programme 02, item 6120 - Participation in other programmes to provide 1.2 billion a National Honours Award.  Vote 038 - Police; Programme 08 - New Item and Anti Stock Safety Unites, sub-programme 30; Item 3030  - National Supplies to provided 1,000 shillings; to provide all Ugandan Shillings; two; to provide peoples’ two billion for salaries of Local Defence Unites.  

Then on the development Code; Vote 108 - Finance and Economic Planning, project code PC 378 - Entandikwa Scheme 6 billion, amounts 6 billion, Uganda Planning shillings.  Head 108 - Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning; Project name, Private Sector Development Stock Foundation.  This is to provide 1, 000; that is an item to enable what has been circulated under the credendum.  Head 108 - Financial and Economic Planning, Financial Clear Reforms Shs.12 billion.  Head 317; Civil Aviation Authority - Entebbe International Airport, should be transferred from Head 317 - Civil Aviation Authority, to Head 116 - Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication and Finance.  Vote 121 - Defence.  Defence Equipment Project 5.2 billion shillings.  And Head Vote 138 - Police.  This is assistance to Uganda Police Forces; additional 1. billion shillings, the purchase of 30 vehicles. Mr Chairman, if some of these votes have been passed; what is going to be done is that, the House shall have to approve it, so that they appear in the Appropriation Bill for this Financial Year.  Now, Sir, I give way to the Minister of Finance.

MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr Mayanja Nkangi):  Thank you Sir.  Mr Chairman, it was yesterday when we adjourned and I was replying it shortly when some of the comments have been made, by the hon. Member on behalf of the Sectoral Committee, and the Ministry of Finance and also hon. Members who have made some contributions but now I have got to continue.  Now an hon. Member has raised the issue on the UCB, he thought that, I say the privatisation of UCB would be legal.  That it would be illegal, I just want to know  because I have to say that, according to section 31, on the Public Enterprise Reform Logistic Statute 1993; UCB is scheduled as all the country has that schedule too.  A schedule in a country must be privatised also.  The allegation that privatisation is illegal is, I think misplaced.  

Now, concerning this whole area.  The Committee, Sir, made some contributions concerning the Uganda Revenue Authority.  Now, this is what the committee felt; Members to recommend the URA to be a large effort, like a Corporate Body in line with Statute that set it up in 1991.  Instead the Statute also requires URA to retain a percentage with a revenue collection to enable it go interrupted.  In fact, I want to make this reveal that, this is not an entire move the large URA, there is the Ten Farm Organisational Cost.  The Statute is quite clear.  It is permissive.  This is section - the Uganda Revenue Authority Statute 1991; this is quite clear.  The Statute well reads as follows: “All revenue collected on due and payable to the Authority, and that is the Statute; shall be deposited and payable to the Consolidated Fund provided that the Minister may from time to time, also has the Authority in writing, to retain a percentage of Revenue Collected by the Authority, as may be determined by the Minister in order to enable the Authority to meet excess fee.”  So, when the Committee said of Code, it must be allowed. It must have a chance that enables  - the Statute says, the Minister may commit to this authority from time to time.  It does not mean he is not all the time, but he must be all the time.  Why? Because, I think appropriately that Section 3, sub-section (2); clearly states that the authority acts as an agency of government, for collection of revenue.  It is, therefore, an agency of government neutrally. The are the government. So, this is part of the corporation.  It is quite distinct to the normal type of corporation like the industry principle. Not the same thing, this is just an agency of government and it is also connected so much with Government Freedom Squire Fund.  Now, the Committee also recommended that URA should have - should start giving the URA the ability to do that reserve.  In her own with a focus plan and activities will provide for depreciation allowance.  

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like a clarification from the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning.  Because in the last meeting we had with him, if Members of my committee who are here can remember, the minister did say that, on this question of funding the URA, he had already written them a letter about a month ago so that they can deduct money excess for their funding.  Now, I am wondering why we still have 18 billion in the Recurrent Budget of the Minister of Finance.  As money earmarked to fund the activities of URA.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Thank you Mr Chairman.  Indeed hon. Luwum said, he was hungry. I too was wondering yesterday, why?  When I give this information to him, they now give me divorce, he never mentioned this.  He never said that, I had already told them in the Committee, that in fact I have already written to authorise the authority to keep some funds.  Now, it is coming out now.  It looks as if we are there stopping them, putting there more fund. It was a position. So, what I have now felt is this, when I do this, I do this in accordance with this section it was a project, new service, the authority as a matter of Code by the statute must have its standing and a ministry’s award.  This is a point I am making now.  

The other point was again report of sales.  That URA should be reserved in line with a focus plan and activities to provide for depreciation allowance.  I also want to remark that this agency, collecting funds is like for instance, a manufacturing company. Provide depreciation allowance, the building responsibility, I do not see a stop; I would like to suggest this with respect that, i think that some of these recommendations are a bit misplaced. Then, here it was also said, that we should give them - they should be able to work on contract basis.  Now, I want to inform the House here that, every year the goods have been a target, until the year ends.

I think he said I want to sell on the URA.  On every country on the payments, to former East African Community staff members. Do you want me to repeat what I have just been saying? All right, let me repeat it.

MR KAHERU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Minister that, at this end we are not getting him, may be he could use the microphone.  He could as well use a microphone, thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that microphone is a bit fault.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Hallo, do you hear me now?  All right, hon. Members, let me repeat shortly.  Yesterday, hon. Luwum on behalf of the Select Committee, he made the point concerning URA. That the URA must keep funds for its operation.  And I did point out that, under section 14, of the Uganda Revenue Authority Statute, under that section, it is permissive on the part of the Minister of Finance to make available to the URA from time to time in the words operated in the Statute itself.  From time to time, the minister may make provisions for certain fund. The committee reported as which the Minister has to.  Then saying, the Statute says, the minister may - Secondly, I also made a point; the committee was talking about the URA building up reserves and say for depreciation allowance.  Like saying that, unlike say a manufacturer in a company corporation.  I think very little we need for the URA to keep reserve, making provisions to depreciation account.  This is all I wanted to say on that one.  

Now regarding -(Interruption)

MR LUWUM: Mr Chairman, thank you.  The point the committee raised with regard to assets of URA was in respect of carrying up with a collect post of collecting of Revenue. Because if we do not take into account the ware and tie of assets of URA, you cannot establish the actual cost that URA incurs in collection of taxes.  And in the committee we felt that, the cost of collection of revenue as given today is understated.  And one of the causes for this understatement is the fact that, the assets used by Uganda Revenue Authority, the ware and tie of these assets are not taken into account.  So, this is the point I wanted to inform the minister -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the Committee looked at the statute which established the Uganda Revenue Authority and its operation today.  It was agreed that, the Uganda Revenue Authority should be a separate from the Ministry of Finance.  But as it is today, Uganda Revenue Authority is being run as if it is department of the Ministry of Finance. Now we said as a committee that, we should be capitalised other than be part of the Ministry of Finance where the money given to it is not keep down with current expenditure of the ministry.  Which is wrong.  And that is what we said look, the Ministry of Finance should value all the assets which were transferred to the Uganda Revenue Authority, so that we know how much has been given to Uganda Revenue Authority as our own capital - if we one day look at how much we have invested in the Uganda Revenue Authority, as our own capital contribution.  At the moment, I think I wish to tell the Minister if he knows how much assets the Uganda Revenue Authority has taken from the Government.  Because it doe not have that information.  He is running it as if it is a department of the Ministry of Finance, which is wrong and against the statute.  I think the minister can - since he has a copy; he can read and see that we are legislating that it will be a separate entity from the Ministry of Finance. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KASAIJA: Point of information.  I wish also to add on the information which has been given by hon. Mwondha and hon. Nkalubo.  It is true the Ministry of Finance is running the Uganda Revenue Authority as a department; which is contrary to the law which we passed here in 1991.  This thing has actually affected the performance of URA.  It has been envisaged by the committee that, if URA had been given the autonomy as stated in the statute, the performance could have been better than it has.  And I support this.  Because as of now, URA is facing a lot of problems, first of all, there are no assets.  The assets which you said will be taken over by this authority in coming into force of this parastatal.  Ministry of Finance has been clinging on them.  

For example, accommodation.  URA staff have been operating in the Ministry of Finance; now it was at the beginning of this year that we got a letter from the SP and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, sending away, in fact giving us notice to vacate the building.  And yet the Ministry of Finance had not been giving money to build accommodation.  Now, that one goes to support what the chairman of this committee says that URA should be given some money in support of focused activities or in support of building up facilities that we facilitated to work better.  Now, how is it going to operate without accommodation?  URA has had to be forced to hire two buildings at a higher price.  One at Impala House, another one at UDC, and this money was not budgeted for.  So, if it was budgeted for, definitely this would be one of the ways in which this recommendation will be coming to address.  I think the minister should be clear and say that there has been a delay in putting into force the URA Statute.  But not to say that the minister had a distortion.  But does he want the Authority to operate? Does the want it to work so that, it collects revenue for this country or not?  I think let him make it clear to this nation.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, I am actually surprised by some of the statements being made.  There is no time, since I went to Finance in 1992; there is no time have I been asked for providing funds for constructing accommodation.  The hon. Member is a member of the board of the URA.  So if the question is, whether or not, the URA.  So, if the question is, whether or not, the URA should be funded to have accommodation; then of course they should be funded.  Yesterday I was told, the Minister of Finance should make sure the money is there, make sure there is a building there, we should occupy it, should be rehabilitated. My own office, someone was there today, you find a whole ceiling, a big hole there.  For about two years, my own office had a hole in the floor.  And I was covering that with some files.  Reason, let everybody know why this is so.  Although I am the keeper of the Public funds, I must also be aware that, I am also - if anybody is going to be the first to suffer it must be me - my office.  Because, when you do not have the money, then we vote; until other funds have been provided for. The principle I am making is there, it is right; of the Ministry of Finance and other departments should be funded.  If all the funds did not allow the provision of funds at a particular time then we have to wait. I have no problem with funding URA, to make it worse.  The reason why I am making it this afternoon was that, it was reported as if giving money to them is a mandatory under the act.  It is not mandatory under the act.  So, I can go on Sir, and make another point on the East African Community Fund.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, the Minister may think it is a small point.  But you see, it is very important to minimize the cost of collection of revenue as much as possible.  And I think the cost as given today is not unrealistic, is understated.  And this is one of the reasons which were mentioned in our report and the minister has not reacted.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, can I answer that question?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: I do indeed agree that the cost of any operation at all, must be truly reflected.  To me, it is an accounting problem.  It is an accounting problem, it cannot be blamed if there is blame at all, on the Ministry of Finance.  Those running operation must truly reflect the cost of their operations.  If it is depreciation of vehicles of whatever, as a cost of carrying out the operation, this must reflect as part of the operations.  So, really the issue should be addressed to URA to undertake to do so.  That depreciation must be truly part of the operations of collection revenue.

MR WANENDEYA:  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  In connection with the Uganda Revenue Authority, I want the Minister to clarify to the nation as to whether he trusts the people at Busia - that is the border; at Malaba, that is the border and at Rwakhaka?  The point over here, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members is that, there is a road block at Busitema which is only 10 kilo meters away from our border.  Has the Minister ever seen anywhere in the world, revenue people right inside to really harass people?  Take their goods.  So, what is the use of the border?  May the minister clarify to us.  Not only that, in Budadiri of all places, right inside the country?  They come and harass people.  So, what is the use of the border and why have Revenue posts at the border?  They should be shifted right inside the country and may be we should surrender that part of the border for the country; to Kenyans or whatever nationality.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, I think I am about to ask for protection, from you.  This debate I am supposed to answer questions raised before I was to answer.  But the hon. Members now are making the debate interminable.  I think really, this is not the way, if I may say so, you should conduct this debate.  But from our oblige, I agree with you.  Our collection of revenue should be inside our own country.  There is no problem about that.  

Now, payments to the former East African Community staff members.  I will read, from the report of the committee - Sectoral Committee.  It says this; there is no doubt that the whole amount of the full terminal benefits and pensions to the former staff of East African Community is their right. I say yes. Then, it goes on.  It is surprising to see that, government has refused to see this.  The government has not at any time, refused to recognise this right.  The government about a year ago, made payments to members of East African Community.  Because we knew that, they had a right, of that right was determined according to certain agreements. So, it is not right to say - correct to say that, the government has refused to recognise this right.  Secondly, so the recommendation comes, the Ministry of Finance must accept the full amount of benefits and pensions owned by government. 

Let me say this again.  Every entitlement proved to be an entitlement will be paid.  But I do not want to do really the work of Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister.  Pensions, I am just a paying master.  Pensions come on the Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister.  He himself comes up or forward with a correct report always.  But what I want to say is that, you should not be giving an impression of being given.  That the government refuses, for this is the right of these people - the government does not refuse.  All that I want to say is that, as a minister of finance, a public officer, it involves us not to pay one shilling more than is due.  And not one shilling lost because that will be inevitable.  All that I am saying Sir, we are going to pay when the Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister - Minister of Public Service has ascertained the amounts to be paid. Mr Chairman, let me say this  -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much.  Last year I raised this issue of the plight of the workers of the East African Community - the former East African Community, and government promised to pay them quickly.  Today the minister is telling us that they are in the process of paying them.  I have got people in my constituency who worked with Uganda Railway Corporation by then, East African Railways Corporation.  Up to now, they have not got even a single cent, and yet they were workers genuinely and I know them that they do exist.  There is no action being taken.  Now, they tell me that the Public Service is busy scrutinizing.   How long does it take to scrutinize those who are supposed to get the money and those who are not supposed to get the money? Some of us we can do these things within two days. (Laughter)

Why does he say the government?  So, I am saying why should we be deceived from time to time that they are paying these people? People are bound, some of these people stopped work, and they cannot pay school fees for their children.  Some of them are dying leaving this money unpaid. These people worked for this money.  Kenya and Tanzania have paid this money, why should Uganda be the exception? I am very much concerned why our Uganda people should suffer? Why? They worked for it and they should get that remuneration.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR ADRIKO: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Hon. Members when I took office in the ministry of public service, one of the issues, which confronted me, was the issue of the former East African Community workers.  By the time I took office government had recognised and indeed continued to recognise the right of all entitled people to receive payments.  In pursuance of that, government made a payment to over 3,400 people, about 7.2 billion shillings in the last financial year.  When that payment was made, the list of the entitled people was not quite comprehensive.  Subsequently that, other climates come up and this is the exercise, which is ongoing exercise.  We in conjunction with the office of the Auditor General, are compiling this list and these people will be paid in due time; not long ago, I issued a true statement whereby the minister of finance or the government rather had released 600 million shillings towards fulfilling the residual obligations.  But hon. Members should please bear with government in the same sort. 

This generation is shouldering the responsibility, which should have been shouldered by previous governments. The community passed away in 1977 and payments should have been started then, now to the expect.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr Chairman, for the Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister to tell us that, the present generation is what is sheltering the past East African Workers.  Now, we know and unless the Second Deputy Prime Minister can clarify otherwise.  Crown Agency paid money to our government.  Is it, therefore, in order Mr Chairman, for him to say that, the present generation is trying to shoulder this problem? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister was trying to give you the sequence of a tenth by this government to solve different problems which were left by the previous regimes.  He was trying to give the sequence of a tenth, and he had not concluded.

MR ADRIKO: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I was trying to develop a point that this government inherited an obligation - a liability arising from the period of the community, it recognised it, it took the first positive stops towards fulfilling those obligations.  It paid us 7.2 billion; recently, it released another 600 million shillings.  And we are saying that, continuing, I have to establish the list.  Because these lists are not obtained.  So, the criteria for accessing who is entitled or who is not entitled is tiresome.  It is a long going on.  And this country is being protected through the office of the Auditor General in establishing that list.  This is what I am saying. 

Secondly, in reply to the hon. Member who has just taken the Floor, we can talk about the figures, I have the figures of the Crown Agency.  They paid to us about 1.2 billion shillings.  So, if we were to pay on the basis of the farms which are accruing of the Crown Agency, we would not even at the age of today be paying out what government was already paying.  But I think I should say in conclusion, that the obligation is a capital obligation, it is not a recurrent one.  And this capital obligation is so big; it must be phased. And we have to be realistic about it.  Otherwise, the budget may not be able to sustain it.  And other services may not run.  But we have accepted that, this will be fulfilled.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GAD GASATURA: Point of clarification. I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I just want a clarification from the Minister of Finance as well as from the Rt. Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister; to assure this House and mention that, first the government recognising the right of entitlement to the former employees of the East African Community.  

Secondly, that they set up a task force within a reasonable time not exceeding 6 months establish the views of the former employees of the East African Community on their own accord has established the numbers of the East African Community.  We are fairly convinced that, the members of the East African Community on their own accord has established the numbers of the employees, the amount due and of course this very government and acknowledgeable receipt from the former East African Community through Crown Agency, unless corrected otherwise.  And those funds were invested if not used otherwise.  

The clarification I seek is that, within reasonable time, not exceeding 6 months, the minister shall establish the amount due and pay it out.  If this budget cannot accommodate all that they owe, the former employees have no objection with the scheduling in.  Maybe, it is not this budget and next years budget.  And probably i.o.u notes from government to guarantee that, those former employees or their estates shall be entitled to the same payment.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, thank you.  First as a minister for finance; I said, before I do not want, in fact I dare not take over the work of the Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister.  The determination of what is due in many terms - I was talking to him a day before yesterday, he is actively consulting the ministry of Justice and attorney and he is asking for about 6 months; I think it will not take all that time to be able to determine the amounts payable.  And all that, I want to say is that, the right to be paid and the amount to be paid a distinct phase.  This one I have to follow the East African Community.  I think no one should ever say that, us as a government is not concerned.  It should be remembered that, the community died in 1977.  Since that time, nobody raised a claim to be paid at that time.  I understand I no longer knew, maybe, I would not accept to ban it.  Then Obote two comes - five years. General Lutwa comes, then the NRM comes in 1987; the NRM starts now - 1986 sorry.  The NRM starts doing something about the said problems; it looks as if nobody seems to appreciate this; so much so that, I must say it.  Some people have even gone to the extent of blackmailing the NRM; saying, we give you that, if you do not do so by a certain date, we shall de-campaign you.  I am sorry.  I think really, we should appreciate something being done by a government that came to put things right.  Now, another point which I want to comment on Sir, is the question of corruption.  The hon. Luwum quoted correctly said that, corruption is endemic.  But one thing I would like to say to section is this, he said that, in the Civil Service, the security in the Civil Service is a resultant corruption, it is blameless.  I want to make this progress that, we should not appear to be condemning corruption to say, because people are not getting enough, therefore, they are being corrupt.  It is on remand experience.  The poorest people are usually the most upright.  So, we must not connect corruption; indeed I know of causes of corruption where some of the best people paid in this country with the revised revenues and revised salaries, they can be corrupt.

So, although I appreciate that we should be able to work together as a government, to move towards a living wage in the Civil Service at the same time. Not saying they are corrupt because they do not pay them well. I think we should really condemn corruption, but still move towards payment of a living wage.  And the Minister again, Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister using his portfolio, he can tell you more about it. And now the project is coming up; may I say that, as I have loved hon. Luwum in behalf of Sectoral Committee to have at least indicated that the position was that he had submitted some documents but without the - Otherwise, these documents was to be proved up afterwards.  You know, this question I think was given to ask the ministry of finance for any document, nothing was given, as if really the whole thing was blank.

What the question means, their documents that the Attorney General has got yet to look at them to indicate their validity otherwise.  You know, this is two weeks time, until we shall come back to this august House.  

Payment for renovation of Entebbe Airport.  Mr Chairman, hon. Members, on this one, there is a company.  Company, which is a Spanish company.  And now, there will be an agreement made between the Government of Uganda implemented by the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication; it was made on 20th November 1991.  This agreement, the Ministry of Finance secures funds; but an implementing ministry even in this particular case, the ministry of works itself, is responsible for saying this is what should be done, this is what should be paid for, this work has been properly done?  It is at that stage, therefore, I think finance should not be blamed for whatever may appear to be a bit amiss; if it is a miss.  Secondly, the report said this government contracted this company to rehabilitate Entebbe Airport at a cost of 24 million dollars.  This company also sub-contracted ROKO Construction Company to do the job for 2 million dollars.  I wish the committee had contacted the ministry of works always.  Because then they will have had a full report and the work which has been contracted to be done at Entebbe Airport.  Because I am privileged; it has been given to me, it is being given to you.  And therefore, the ministry of works would have given the information the committee wanted.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the committee on Parastatal Accounts wrote to the minister for finance to get information on this matter.  Because the committee got concerned by the value of 2 million dollars; was not being charged to Uganda Civil Aviation as 24 million dollars.  But the ministry of finance has not responded to that letter.  If it was the ministry of works to answer, I think the ministry of  finance would have said, they do not have the information, they  should contact the ministry of finance.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, this House with all its wisdom, constituted Sectoral Committees to ease the work on the Floor; especially as regards the Budget.  It is appearing now that, either the Sectoral Committee on Finance was working independently outside ministry’s staff.  And therefore, causing this conflict itching a cross border.  Is it in order therefore, Mr Chairman, that will accept as we did the report of the Sectoral Committee on Finance and at the same time allow this time the minister who must not have cooperated with his team, to begin debating outside what he has. For example, this very report should have been handed and given to him by the Auditor General, were denied the people.  Is it in order therefore, that, we give this audience to the minister who have not cooperated with the people? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think, from being the minister he should have cooperated with the officials before he came here.  And in fact, some of his officials are here gathered.  But as far as some points are concerned and being raised here, well we can allow ministers to answer to certain queries that may arise, from today.  It is just in order.  It is in order; completely in order.

DR LUYOMBYA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification on the method of work of government.  Because when I hear the minister of finance putting the blame into the ministry of works, and -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Dr Luyombya, I think you are out of order to accuse the minister who made the blame into him.  He just added badly, it would have been more proper to contact the colleague.  But he did not blame him.

DR LUYOMBYA: Mr Chairman, I will seek clarification on the method of work with government.  I would have expected some consultation within ministries especially where agreements are concerned.  The Attorney and the minister of justice should have been consulted into these agreements.  Could the minister clarify to me exactly which ministries were involved in this matter?  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  He will do that but before I call upon the Minister I think there is the hon. chairman of the Sectoral Committee on finance.

MR OLUM: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I want to request hon. Members of this House not to blame our committee for this because really what happened, the reason why we are putting this thing in this report is that we noted the discrepancy on this Entebbe Airport Project and after noting the discrepancy we did have a meeting with the Minister for Finance but still we were not satisfied with the answers that the Minister for Finance gave us and therefore, that is why we decided to include this in our report and if you read at the end of the report, we rightly conclude that the committee recommends that the Minister should account for the application of the money to 24 million US dollars and why it is again necessary to spend another 20.5 billion shillings on the same Airport Project.  I think we were right to bring this thing up.  All that this house wants is clarification; that is all.  I think that is what we are waiting for now from the hon. Minister.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, as the Minister has mentioned and a statement which appears to be very erroneous because the House needs to know the true facts of the work that was done at the airport.  From thee records - and I can even call on hon. Nassasira who was particularly in charge of that programme, the House can easily be explained how this thing was done and luckily he is now here but I can inform you that what is in that statement is incorrect because the two millions you are referring to which was given to Roko was not to do the whole job for which the 24 million was contracted.  But it was a sub-contract just as making - So this was for civil work.  So, Mr Chairman, with your permission, I want you to get authentic information from an hon. Member who was in charge of the project and he is here.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much Mr Chairman. Let me say that I am very disappointed with this paragraph 8.5, that it should have reached a stage where it came as a report of the Sectoral Committee and this clarification should not have been brought then.  Because when the report comes to this House with such an error of 24 million dollars, it might give wrong impression to the public, first of all to the House and to the public. I cannot understand why it should have reached this stage without clarification being given.  

Let me now give the clarification.  I think the hon. Minister of Works, Transport and Communication has started well by explaining. Fist of all, the statement says sub-contraction.  The moment you are subcontracting, it means you are not doing the whole contract.  Therefore, the percentage of what you are paid is proportional to the amount of work you.  Now what did Roko was hired to do what we call civil works to provide labour and to do the painting and brick work and so on and so forth for two million dollars.  But what was supposed to be done for the whole building because terminal building was not just labour.  The terminal building started from the roof, to remove the whole roof and repair it, to change the whole graphs, furnish it, to install new telephone system, to install new water system, to install a new security system, to rehabilitate the Presidential lounge, the VIP lounge.  I can go on and on and all these items have got what we call bills of quantities and they are costed.  So one would have gone through these because it is a whole book in the sectoral committee and find out what Roko did.  The 20.5 they are talking about, as I talked about the airport is not doing only labour.  The airport is not only terminal building.  This 20.5 referred to is now the work that is going on to rehabilitate the runway, to rehabilitate the taxi way, to work on storage facilities.  

I thank you Mr Chairman; that is the information I wanted to give. I do not want the House and the public to have the impression that money went somewhere.  Thank you.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of procedure.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Given the way the debate is going, I think I wish to propose that information of this nature cannot be provided for in the forum of this nature and be easily understood because it needs looking at all the bills of quantities considering them and see what was done and what was not done.  However, since the Ministry did not give the information at the right time, I propose therefore, that there be another meeting of the sectoral committee and they provide the programme information, details and accounting for the money rather than have the whole afternoon discussing this when I see the Minister does not seem to have all the detailed information in statistical form.

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU:  Mr Chairman, I want to give information.  I was the Chairman of the Ministry of Works Transport and Communication referred to and Minister and there were all sorts of rumours about preparing this airport including the World Bank, which came in and saw that the scope was too big.  It had to be reduced.  Our committee received all this information and the committee was very through and we still have this information on our file.  That is the committee on Works.  This is not the first time this thing is coming up.  It came up two years ago, it came up in the Civil Aviation Authority also.  But I want to give information that this information has already been provided.  However, I do not disagree with the Members who might want it developed again but the Committee on Works, Transport and Communication has got this information.  Thank you very much.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: I am so grateful to the two hon. Ministers, in fact, for the information they have given because the question which has been given to the committee, possibly understandably was very damaging.  Now lastly, I want to reply to a query raised by hon. Dr Luyombya. In this particular case, this contract, the following institutions were involved with regard to contract agreement being reached.  The Ministry of Works which is line Ministry, the Ministry of Justice for the legal part, the Central Tender Board for awarding the tenders, the Ministry of Finance, Uganda Airlines Corporation, the Bank of Uganda and a number of local consultants to design and related matters.  So this is what I would like to give to hon. Members.  As said, I will have to comment on the report of the sectoral committee sometime.  Thank you.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

CONSIDERATION OF RECURRENT ESTIMATES

VOTE 008 - MINISTRY OF FINANCE

Programme 01

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, on that Programme 01 item 6120 - participation in other programmes, we were advised by the Minister that this is the money earmarked for the Uganda Revenue Authority.  Now that the Minister has assured us that Uganda Revenue Authority is going to operate as a separate entity, I am proposing that this amount should be removed from the recurrent expenditure of the Ministry and be directly under the capital development for the Uganda Revenue Authority.  We should not have it as part and parcel of the accounts of the Ministry of Finance.  Mr Chairman, I am proposing that we delete this amount and provide it under the capital development.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, this arrangement has just come abruptly.  Whatever the committee proposed earlier on we had really answered to.  Now that the Minister is reading to this, I think it can be done administratively so that we do not change these figures right now so that it is accompanied with appropriate papers.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: If the proposal by hon. Wasswa Nkalubo Mr Chairman, is accepted as supported and if it is also accepted by the Minister, what we need is this parliament now to pass that we have transferred it and then the administrative part will come later in the re-writing of the recurrent expenditure rather than that it will be done when we have not actually passed it formally here.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  My problem now is that under this programme, it could not be only Uganda Revenue Authority and therefore, I cannot tell exactly right now how much of this is for Uganda Revenue Authority.  So it is agreed in principle, it will be taken care of other than us transferring the whole amount.

MR DRATRATRU ROMANO:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I will not like this House to be confused.  We are working on principles.  We are budgeting for a right Vote and the right Vote must belong to the right place.  We are saying we agree that amount of money must be spent but it is in a wrong place.  What is difficult for the Minister responsible to say yes and transfer it to the right place?  Why does he want to stick to the money, which does not belong to his house? Thank you very much.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I am getting a bit confused because all these budgets which are contained in this book here are normally earmarked for a purpose.  If you transfer this money, the capital budget of the Ministry of Finance earmarked for the Revenue Authority, what is it going to do to the Revenue Authority?  Are there any projects which somebody has told us are going to be done using that money? I rightly agree with you hon. Wasswa Nkalubo that in view of the fact that the Minister for Finance has said a month ago, he wrote to the URA to start deducting money for its operational expense, it should no longer appear in the recurrent budget of the Ministry of Finance. But at the same time, I think this money now should be used for other purposes other than capitalising the URA.  Thank you.

MR SIBO: Thank you Mr Chairman.  Earlier on, we said that Uganda Revenue Authority is supposed to be capitalised and which money that we are giving to Uganda Revenue Authority, we are not following to find out how it is going to be used.  It will be used both in capital and recurrent expenditure.  We are not able to decide whether it should be used in capital or recurrent.  Secondly, we believe that this Authority should be really free from the Ministry in its operations.  It should not be interfered with because if it does, it may be unable to collect the revenue we expect it to collect and to that extent, actually that was the reason why we set up a special law for it.  So I believe it is wrong to continue for this Authority to continue depending on the Ministry every year.  It should be independent and to that extent, I strongly agree with hon. Nkalubo that it should be independent and to that extent, I strongly agree with hon. Nkalubo that it should raise money, it should be listed out of this and given to Uganda Revenue Authority as capital so that it does not come back every year.  It only depends on the percentage it receives from its collections.  That percentage should serve for its daily operations. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I fully agree with hon. Sibo. Mr Chairman, this money should be separated and I would like hon. Members to know that whenever we prepare the budget and get it printed in books like this, there are no comparative figures which are usually printed across each item as a way guiding hon. Members in approving these estimates.  Mr Chairman, if you look at Roman five in these books, you find that you have 1995/96 estimates -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of order. Mr Chairman, I am a bit worried that the procedure we are adopting that it is for the government to provide what should be in recurrent budget and what should be in development budget.  When the figures come here, we either approve or reject both, but I wonder whether this House is in order to start switching from an item from recurrent to development budget.  When the figures come here, we either approve or reject both but I wonder whether this House, is in order to start switching from an item from recurrent to development. Are we not usurping the powers for the executive -(Interjection) 

Yes, Mr Chairman, I still maintain we have no right to seek or to provide for recurrent and lift it to development.  These two concepts are very important when we are budgeting for development.  And for recurrent, it means recurrent.  You cannot interchange them.  I still maintain that are we in order to adopt this exercise?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members the issue hon. Butagira is trying to raise are both legislative and administrative.  You as the legislators here have a right to make recommendations on the budget.  But the same time, the line ministers also have the right to administratively assure you here that such things as you have recommended shall be done rather than bogging ourselves to details.  In this respect, I would ask the Minister for Finance to respond to the proposal made by hon. Wasswa Nkalubo.

MR KISAMBA-MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, there are technical problems that even the clerk at the desk right now would not be able to calculate so that the Chairman reads out the correct amount.  The recommendation is noted and it will be administratively undertaken with the exchange of a late communication from the Clerk to the National Assembly as a minute.  This is possible and I assure you this that it can be done.  Let us approve this amount of money.  Now the amount 18.4 billion will be transferred. What is important is to transfer this money other than being in the Treasury regulations.  I think this is the only difference.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I am sorry just to state that the Minister is trying to draw - this matter was brought in the committee. We asked the same Minister what this amount was for an he categorically stated that it was for Uganda Revenue Authority, that it was the provision.  Now if he is going to tell this full House that there were other projects involved, let him tell us what other beneficiaries there are on this but as far as the Member of the committee, he has said this 18.4 billion is for Uganda Revenue Authority.  We have the Chairman and he can testify to that.  Now when he says he cannot I do not know who is the other beneficiary under this?

CAPT. GAD GASATURA: Mr Chairman, this afternoon one of our committees was with some big officers from Ministry of Finance who informed us that there is a computer programme across the board in government departments; because they changed the computer programme made by an accounting officer or an officer in the Ministry may no longer transfer an item say 1040 to 1050 because the computer would reject that and that is exactly why it is necessary that this programme be changed on the Floor of this House so that the computer -(Interruption)- and I do not see a problem since all the three Ministers of Finance here with their heads have in principle agreed. There is only one programme; it says participation in another programme, not programmes and we have agreed that  -(Interruption)- I am on the Floor Mr Kisamba. And they have agreed that this 18,401 million belongs to URA. All that is needed is the formality of using it to be transferred to the URA Vote.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, this House is not mandated to increase whatever is appearing in the budget.  But it is free to change and although my mathematics is limited to arithmetic, which is the old time arithmetic, this is a matter of just saying we are taking 18.4 billion to belong to what it should be. Earlier on it was reported here that Revenue Authority is being marginalised in making it a department of the Ministry of Finance and we had the Minister quoting from the Statute saying the Minister may transfer something to Revenue Authority.  So, in this case, we are trying to establish an Authority which must be autonomous and function properly and if the Minister does not see the value of having this money transferred to Revenue Authority and yet if anybody goes to the long room there of the Ministry and see how much it is looking, one will begin to think that this money is really needed.  We are not denying the Minister the use of this money.  We are only providing for it to go to the appropriate area for its function. 

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, let me make one last attempt to explain.  As far as the Ministry is concerned, we have no objection to the recommendation that 18.4 million be transferred to Uganda Revenue Authority.  In your submission, you were saying that this should be to capitalise Uganda Revenue Authority.  Now capitalization is different unless you create another item but the problem will be, where shall we get that money? Because when Uganda Revenue Authority is accounting for this money, it cannot account for it as capital money when it is recurrent, information fund and what have you.  That cannot be capital.  This is the only issue, otherwise what is now difficult which I appreciate is that if this money remains in the Treasury and you treat Uganda Revenue Authority as part of the Ministry, it is constrained by the Treasury operations.  So, now what we have to do is to transfer this money to Uganda Revenue Authority and use it as recurrent while next we prepare for capitalization of it and most important, to tell the practical part of it we do not have this money in the consolidated fund as such. What happens in that the Uganda Revenue Authority when it collects funds, it deducts from source what is for the ensuing period.  So, you are creating complications for the Clerk to read out the amount.  So on that ground, I beg that hon. Members accept to approve this money, we will take note of the issue, and we shall transfer this money as recommended.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: I am surprised that the Minister does not realise the difference between capital development and capitalization.  When we capitalise you, that amount is what we have contributed as shareholders but you can use it for anything, recurrent and development and that is what Uganda Revenue Authority is doing.  When we give it money under recurrent, they have been acquiring motor vehicles, new ones. Now they are using what is recurrent for development.  Let us capitalise them.  Now whether they spend it on recurrent or development is immaterial.  What is important is that we have capitalised it.  But if you think that you are giving them to meet their recurrent expenditure, then they will not be able to reconstruct houses where you have already thrown them out.  That is why I am saying it should be capitalization, not capital development, but will be capitalization of Uganda Revenue Authority.  As we have done and as we have already recommended that we capitalise Kakira, once we give Kakira capital amount, we do not go in to split whether they give it for tea, for sugar, for what; what is important is that, let us capitalise this amount, not recurrent but we capitalise it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, to save time, let us agree as follows to avoid this complication of computerisation, of these figures not agreeing and changing it here being impossible by saying we shall pass the budget of the Ministry changing it here being impossible by saying wee shall pass the budget of the Ministry and it should be recorded that out of the money, the total sum passed 18.401 billion will go for capitalising URA. That is one thing or else we pass the figure and then allow the Ministry to administratively transfer this money to URA.  this one will really save us the time.

MR WAPAKABULO: Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification. I do not know whether the Minister or hon. Nkalubo can answer this.  Is it being said that we give URA once and for all that amount of money as capitalization or are we saying that URA is a revenue collecting independent agency of the State that we may choose to give them some money to build certain structures but that their day to day cost in running that body is actually the cost of collection of the taxes? So that the arrangement should be that the Minister enters into an arrangement at the beginning of each year with the Revenue Authority and they say that in this year, it will cost us, we estimate so much to collect so much money for you.  Then you allow it to be recovered by them from their collections and remit the balance to the Treasury like they were doing in the days of the East African Community.  The cost of collection was recovered by this collecting body on an agreed basis.  Otherwise, if you say you pay them this once and for all, the collection of taxes is a continuous business.  So how are you going to make it run unless you adopt that sort of formula? Thank you.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, I beg hon. Members to realise that this Authority is slightly different from the normal corporations.  It was set up specifically under section 34 of the Statute as an agency of the government and shall be under the general supervision of the Ministry of Finance; that is one. Two; section 14, it is provided, all the revenues collected by and payable to the Authority under this Statute shall credited and payable to the consolidated fund which therefore, means this agency should collect funds and should keep no money at all.  It should all go to the consolidated fund, then we put up a proviso: provided that the Minister may from time to time authorise the Authority in writing to retain a percentage.  Then section 15 - the funds of the Authority shall consist of the following; one, money appropriated by the National Resistance Council for the purposes of the Authority.  

Two; loans or grants received by the Authority with the approval of the Minister.  Three; any other moneys as may with the approval of the Minister be received by and made available to the Authority for the purposes of performing its functions.  Now under section 16 - the estimates for any coming year are made by the management - that is commissioner general of URA, make the estimates, gives them or furnish them to the board of URA.  The board approves this, then after that, they must be submitted to the Ministry of Finance and this is what we require.  Under section 14, then the Minister proceeds to make a provision.  I think if you are going to say the URA should be independent, operate independently of the Ministry of Finance for collecting funds for the State, when it is meant to be an agency under the Statute, agency of government - of course the agency must have principles. I think it should be going in administratively and even legally for something in fact which was not intended by the Statute.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, if I could supplement what the Minister for Finance has said, now hon. Nkalubo was submitting that they, the URA have been using this money to procure vehicles and do other things and therefore, they have no administrative competence in using it.  Secondly, I have said that when they collect these funds, they submit a figure to the consolidated fund but in practical terms, they retain the proceeds of which the Minister of Finance has authorised them to retain for operational purposes.  They can use the money as they wish. So in that case, I think now it is cleared and it will not be necessary to transfer it.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of UShs 32,068,138,000 under Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

HEAD 108 - MINISTRY OF FINANCE

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to tell us what he intends to do with this money because the number of things for instance, building small scale industrial estates in selected areas or regions of Uganda and when you see a number of foreigners coming into our country and they are doing business and some of them are doing petty business like selling mandazi then you wonder as to whether this money will be put to good use for the developmental enterprises to assist Ugandans. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I would like to assure the hon. Member that the money will be put to use as the entrepreneurs solicit it for the projects which are viable.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I ask the Minister as to the necessity of having road block at Busitema and the Minister did not reply whereas we have the border. Because there is no country where you find a roadblock in side a country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. William Wanendeya, is what you are raising under the project?

MR WANENDEYA: Yes, it is under Uganda Revenue Authority. (Laughter)

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Minister maybe did not touch that question in his remarks.  But hon. Wanendeya as an hon. Member from the border area knows very well the nature of our border and the capacity of our customs and therefore, to have these check-points a few kilometres away from the customs will not be so careless to continue spending money on them if really they were not serving a purpose to capture those who have not gone through the official customs

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of order.  Is this answer relevant to what we are discussing Mr Chairman?  Because actually we are discussing a certain project.  Now you open up a different issue of smuggling.  Are we in order - is the hon. Member in order to derail us from what we have on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, the hon. Member would have benefited from my indirect way of telling him that he has almost out of order.

MR ONGOM ABDNEGO: Thank you Mr Chairman.  I am glad that Entandikwa is now getting yet another boost.  But my worry is that of allocation.  As of now, entandikwa money is being given equally to all the CA Constituencies which perhaps is going to be national constituencies as well.  But there is a lot of disparity in this allocation.  I am hoping that while we approve this fund, the Ministry concerned will review again the method of allocation. Mr Chairman, as of now you realise that there are some constituencies which are very large, with a population of over 100,000.  Some are only 40,000, some are 9,000 and they are getting the same amount of money.  So I am really appealing to the Minister that a different method of allocation should be adopted so that there is equitable distribution of the Entandikwa money to cover the whole country.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, the hon. member knows very well that Entandikwa Scheme was not a blue print type of project.  It has something which has been revolving as we get feed back and innovations and therefore the formula which was used to cut across so that there is no dispute, we had no machinery to know how many children would be born every night in each constituency and which constituency has more children than the other so that it picks up.  So the basis was to use the Ca Constituencies on the basis of counties.  So we allocate 30 million shillings per county times the number of constituencies assuming that the CA Constituencies were done according to population and taking into account the perimeters.  Otherwise, if that becomes a matter, it can be still put under consideration as we go on.  But I would like to use this opportunity to - when the Minister for Finance had not arrived, I took the opportunity to draw your attention to the corrigendum 1-5 which was summarised and the Entandikwa was 6 billion shillings.  We have a technicality that in respect of other Votes, we had already passed them but under our Rule 39, Parliament can open a business which has been closed in order to reconsider it.  It is in that spirit that I would like hon. Members to note all those votes which I read out before they came so that they will be taken as part of this budget so that they appear in the Appropriation Bill when we finally approve the budget.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the Minister with regard to the Entandikwa Fund.  If you look at the budget and even the appendix for the correction, there is no evidence that the Minister is providing any money, operational funds to enable officers to actually monitor the use of these loans and I fear that if no funds are provided, the money maybe, passed on and I think the officers may never leave Kampala to go and see what is happening in the country.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister.

MR KISAMBA-MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member may recall that I said that entandikwa was not a blue print.  We have been revolving a scheme and it is part of the administration of Finance.  So whoever are monitoring, the officials are taken care of under economic planning. This is a department under which Entandikwa falls.  As we go on, we shall manage to make it a project and then it may have such separate line items (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, the Minister of State for Finance in charge of entandikwa just read out these figures in corrigendum without necessarily moving for this House to adopt them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is going to move it.  His Minister was away, so he took that time to distribute the papers.

MR BUTAGIRA: Is he going to move? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He will move it, yes.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I wanted the Minister to explain to the House, in light of the fact that this project Entandikwa has become very, very popular and people in my constituency are very pleased with it and are looking forward to more injection of funds, capital this year.  In fact they are very anxious to know exactly when - I have been telling them maybe next month or so.  In light of this success of this project, are we likely to be getting money also borrowing from outside like we have been receiving money from IDA for other projects for this project so that we enhance the capitalization of this project? Or, is it only going to be Finance from our taxes? I would be very happy to know.

MR KISAMBA-MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, as I have been saying that Entandikwa obviously is fully funded by the government of Uganda and as we are evolving it into a project, if I refer you to paragraph 34 in the Minister’s budget, you can see that we are trying to put up a new way of disbursing rural finance.  Now if the Entandikwa could succeed to become a project and obviously you are disputing consultants here, we may need a consultant so that we present a viable project.  Because when you are getting very much money, you need to have these things properly lined up.  So we are in the process of involving rural credit in a manner including Entandikwa to see how best in future we can deliver rural credit.  

MR SIBO: Thank you Mr Chairman. I am asking a question under project: Financial Sector Adjustment Credit.  Yesterday, mentioned that some auditors who are coming to audit some banks here, I note that there is a provision of 2.9 million dollars and 328 million shillings on Uganda Government from donors and Uganda Government respectively.  Can the Minister tell us whether these auditors are going to be financed from this scheme?  And if so, can he tell us that he could not get any auditors here locally who could do the same job as these people are going to do?

MR MWANDHA: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, would the Minister tell us whether this money provided here is part of the money we are recommending in our report that it should not be spent as we have already reported in the report, that it should not be spent as we have already reported in the report, that it should not be spent on restructuring Uganda Commercial Bank if Uganda Commercial Bank is going to be privatised.  Because Chairman, the committee does not see really the rationale for spending two billion shillings to restructure or whatever the Uganda Commercial Bank when we are going to sell it, why do we not sell it as it is?  So, really I want assurance from the Minister whether this is part of the two billion shillings, which we recommend should not be spent on restructuring Uganda Commercial Bank.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: If I could refer to hon. Members on the policy statement which the Ministry used, capacity building, this involves democratisation of constitution making and law reform if it is the same, legal coordination and other legal reform activities, support of elections, building managerial and technical skills, fostering policy dialogue, strengthening institutional capacity, Investment Authority and Makerere Institute of Social Research.  So, it is on page 76.

MR LATIGO: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the Minister in order - we asked a question on project financial sector adjustment project.  He is talking about policy analysis capacity building.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know the Minister has a lot of figures in his mind, and so he was ahead.  Could you proceed hon. Minister?

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, I beg hon. Members not to belittle or to think the programme of putting together, examining this, how best it could be marketed is simple.  This is a very big Commercial Bank.  In fact, it accounts for between 50 and 60 percent of the total deposits in this country.  So it is a colossal bank.  So, we need to have the best economical way of having it privatised or part of it.  This why we need this sort of advice or technical consultancy.  So, no one is going to spend money for nothing. So trust that we as public service, we are doing our very best to make it look nice, look good so that it can best be sold off.

MR SIBO: Thank you Mr Chairman, but he has not answered by question. He answered hon. James Mwandha’s question not mine.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you repeat your question?

MR SIBO: Mr Chairman, I asked the Minister whether he can confirm that these auditors who are coming to audit banks here and exports are going to be paid from this scheme - from this project and if they are going to be paid from this project, can he confirm that there are no Ugandans here who could have done the job as well as those who are coming to do it?

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, as I said yesterday, all these jobs are tendered out and we keep our for them and we applied for them. These people were selected and, therefore, I think that is the answer.

MR OKELLO LUWUM:  Mr Chairman as THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN of this committee, I brought the request to the House about UCB still I think, up to this moment, as we sit here in this House, we are not yet convinced clearly what to do with U.C.B. Although the Minister wrote for us - read for us some laws, he read for us some laws; where he said, U.C.B. is included in the privatisation or the divestiture exercise, but I think if I am to speak for the majority in this House, we are not yet convinced that UCB should go that way.  In fact, I think, if it was possible, we should open - the law should be brought back; we should discuss again what to do with U.C.B. or whether really we should divest it that way.  (Applause)  

So, I am really standing before the House that this money here, if it is the money earmarked for the restructuring of U.C.B. we should suspend passing it; we should not pass it, until we have discussed - yes, unless we have discussed that point of law and decided what to do with U.C.B. Once we agree that it should be divested that way, and then we can bring the money back and use it.  But if we decide otherwise, then we should use this money for other purposes, which I suggested yesterday.  Thank you.

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, this House passed this Statute.  Beyond that, the Ministry has got to go on; for the time being, we are trying to find out the best way of doing this job.  So, if we do not vote these funds now, we shall not even know how best to do this job.  If the hon. Member is now saying, we do not want even to see it being privatised at all.  Yesterday, they were saying, let it be privatised.  But, one of the public companies, two Ugandans should buy the shares.  Now, all these are really methods of effecting a policy. So, give us time, give us the funds to be advised on how best to do this things.  Then because the policy is there, the Statute was debated, the policy was statute.  The hon. Member is saying now we should that is a different Motion.

CAPT. GAD GASATURA: Mr Chairman, THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN of the Sectoral Committee on Finance and Planning, together with his committee, is not satisfied with all the explanations from the various Ministers particularly in this item.  This House mandated the committee to raise all the possible questions under the Minister of Finance and Planning to answer them best as they can.  In the event, the Ministry has not satisfied the committee - the sectoral committee for Finance and Planning.  As a result, I find this House morally unable to pass this item.  When we are ourselves are less informed than the committee we mandated.  (Laughter) Therefore, I would move that this item not be passed until we have better information from -(Applause)- from the very people we have mandated to find out all the possible information.  Otherwise, any information given by the Ministers on this Floor cannot be properly analyzed; we cannot be properly informed on this Floor the best information can only be received, analyzed and processed for a proper judgement in the sectoral committee for Finance and Planning. Therefore, I move that we do not start this item, Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, i have a little difficulty, and I wanted to clear my mind so that I know exactly where and how we are proceeding. First, the Government is really saying, they want us to authorise money for them to empower themselves to go and study a situation in UCB; be empowered with recommendations, which they want to bring to this House for approval.  (Applause and Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR KARUHANGA: I am putting it the way I see and I want clarification and we are saying no; some of us are saying no.  Such money to empower you with the correct information to advise us is going to be availed to you until you advise us how you are going to do it and we are saying, we cannot advise you, unless you give us money to be empowered, to study the situation to advise you! This is the way I see it.  If this scenario is correct -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the information I want to give is this; let us be clear, there is a law we passed, which clearly gives the power to privatise UCB.  It is in the Schedule.  The question is, the method, how are you going to achieve that goal of privatisation?  And how is the Government going to do it arbitrary?  If it has not been given money to find out the best way of achieving that goal.  This is the information I want to give hon. Karuhanga that the law in place; it is now only the method of achieving that objective.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, just to my clarification made.  In light of what hon. Butagira has also added, it seems to us that the decision for privatisation was passed by this House.  As we passed this decision, Government is saying to us, UCB is a big animal, I do not have a specific and ready and informed decision to give this House.  What I am asking this House to do is to empower me with some money for analysis to see which option is best available; whether it should be by share holders, Ugandan shareholders or whether we leave it as it is or whether we privatise it by selling it to foreigners, or whether we sell it to half foreigners, half shareholders, half Government retention and they say, give us this power then we come to the House and then we say, no, we cannot do that! If we say, no, this means we are changing our policy on privatisation.  So, I wanted to know from the Minister, whether this is the line he is asking and whether this is the line some of us are trying to reject.  If it is the case, then, I do not see how we can reject it if the Minister says, that my understanding of the situation is correct, then I cannot see how we can say no.  But if he said, that I am asking you to be empowered to sell the way I want, then that raises the question and we have to say no, on that.  But if it is whether the former, then obviously, I think Gasatura’s position cannot be correct!  Thank you.  Can I get clarification from the Minister?

MR MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr Chairman, what hon. Elly has just said, we are seeking the best way to implement policy passed by this House and while we are proceeding that way, it would appear we want to be asked to stop.

Secondly, these funds are not only for UCB. There are other bodies under the financial sector Adjustment credit which is this one - they are the following:

The Uganda Development Bank, the Cooperatives Bank, restructuring also the Uganda Commercial Bank, the Bank of Uganda for capitalization, the Capital market development.  All these financial institutions are earning the same credit and the funds we are seeking are to do with these jobs - it is not just the Commercial Bank itself.  So, if the money is stopped, the Commercial Bank then of course, all these others are going to suffer.

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, all along, the decision of the committee on this item, starting from the time they discussed has based on the policy of the government to see how best they could alleviate rural poverty and render services to the people through the financial sector.  The committee was of the view that UCB is very essential for the independence of the Government, which is one of points in the Ten Point Programme. Now, the committee was saying, each Budget is the financial of Government policies and programmes.  How do we now divert away by relinquishing our independence totally? The committee was now suggesting to Government that this now be reduced so that we retain UCB as a Government asset.  This was the view of the committee. However, in line with the Minister’s explanation, I think we need to give time, because the Minister is saying, it is only UCB it also involves other financial institutions.  So, it has made to come up with a second thought that we give the Minister the money to do the study, but he should really - he should not sell, he should not use this permission to sell the bank as the people’s view is that, for Independence of our nation, we need this bank.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, let us not prolong this Debate.  The Minister has got the point we have raised and we must also know that there are other institutions involved in this money.  Now, if you block it, you are blocking not only UCB, but -(Interruption)- order, order.  I would like you -(Interjection)- If you are raising a point, could you also advise the Minister as to the best alternative to be taken without stifling other institutions?  Apart from UCB, you should enrich the Minister.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA:  We read a low here that allows government to privatise UCB.  If we no longer want Government to privatise UCB, we should amend the law.  Having said, that, in pursuance of the directive we gave to the Minister to sell UCB, he has come back to us and requested for some money, to study the situation further and to see how best he can undertake the task which we gave him.  Now, it is this money that he is asking us to give him to do the job.  But now, we have had some after thoughts, we are saying, that when government sells these parastatals, it does so through its committee.  But it does not do them through Parliament; the best this House can do, is to pass a resolution that before, Government goes ahead to sell UCB, let it come with the study produced by this money to this House for us to approve.  So, I wish to advise the House to come out with a proper resolution.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OBWANGOR: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  While we gave the government, through the law to exercise judicial judgement and process - how to dispose of these unwanted assets, we have also a second best thought; that is to say, in an asset like Uganda Commercial Bank, it is necessarily imperative that the utmost care must be exercised, not to seal our economic independence; which we run through Uganda Commercial Bank.  Therefore - (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I want to draw your attention to the Rules of Procedure of this House; when we are discussing the detailed estimates sitting in a committee; we are not sitting as a House to debate policies and in fact, the Rules afford us, to debate policies behind these figures except asking details concerning that particular vote.  Are we in order to proceed as if we are debating policy?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member has benefited from your intelligent advice and I think let us not dwell much on this.  Let us benefit from what was raised by hon. Francis Butagira.

MR OBWANGOR: My question is only relevancy of - to exercise that the judgement - how to go about it.  What I am saying, I am giving a caveat that exercise to sell UCB must not be done - nothing should be done again by law, a law must be made by this House, because the supreme authority to chair about money is this House and not the government.

MR PINTO: Mr Chairman, my Colleagues numbers - the report on the sectoral committee on Finance and Economic Planning is very clear on what we want to do with Uganda Commercial Bank, what the committee recommends and it recommends that the peoples own banks should be acquired by Ugandans through floatation of shares; and this should be done in the same way with Grain Milling Consolidated Properties, etcetera.  I understand from the presentation from the Minister that they are going to carry out a study, among other things to study how big is UCB, where are all its assets - no, indeed as he has said, to be able to bring it; so that public floatation shares can be presented to you and a report is made.  In addition, it is not only UCB, we are talking about the Cooperative Bank, we are talking about many other institutions.  But if we leave this room, having made such a recommendation to the Minister, and the Minister gives us an undertaking, that UCB’s matters, although already agreed to be sold, to be privatised, that decision has already been taken, UCB, was recommended to be privatised. How; is what my Colleague hon. Karuhanga and Dr Byaruhanga have tried to convince you Colleagues, and I stand here in good faith to ask hon. Gasatura who is presenting the Motion, that this money should not be approved; to appeal that we proceed to approve this money, with the Minister’s undertaking, that UCB as an entity which is going to be privatised, with a strong recommendation, this process will not be taken until a report is presented to this House, where you are going to subscribe to the methodology so that it could be privatised through the method we recommend of floatation of shares.

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  I thank  hon. Pinto for giving way.  Mr Chairman, this report was tabled yesterday; and this House approved it and among the things that we approved, were if we can read where hon. Pinto stopped.  I think everybody has it on page 4.  So, really, the House approves that if Government wants to privatise Uganda Commercial Bank, first of all, it must be through floatation of shares; so that people can buy shares directly including Ugandans.

Secondly, we approved yesterday this report that the Government should not spend 2 billion for anything less in order to study; because Mr Chairman, if you know, that Schedule which we put on the PERD Statute, gives the modality of how enterprises are going to privatised.  Some enterprises were in category (a), others in category (b), others in category (c), and so on.  Those in category (a) will know what is supposed to be done to them.  Therefore, the Minister cannot tell this House, that there is need for any further study in order to determine the method of privatising UCB; because the methods were clearly outlined in the Statute which we passed and in any case, we are wasting time to discuss this unless, another Motion comes to this House to change what we approved yesterday.

MR OPIO: Thank you Mr Chairman.  Our concern about the spending of $.2 million is also from what had happened in the past. We are aware of how much the Government spent in rehabilitating Lake Victoria, under the argument that we are preparing it for sale; we spend $.13 million and above and how much are we getting from it?  And many others - so what we are saying is that when we know that we want to sell, let us go ahead and sell instead of spending the tax payers money; so much that we shall not even realise what we are preparing for.  In any case, why should be begin re-organising when we are going to sell, as someone else will organise what he has bought.

MR NDEGE:  Mr Chairman, I think we are being unfair to the - not long ago we said, we should not put aside 50 billion shillings as bad debts from UCB; because this is going to cost the tax payer.  When we approved that Bill, the bad debts increased to UShs 100 and that is the money which we have put aside against, if this money is not paid, the tax payer is going to pay. In other words, we have put a guarantee that if these debts are not paid, the taxpayer will pay.  What the Minister is saying, among other institutions, in 2 billion shillings, I studied the state of affairs of UCB - and independent organisation which  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Members.

MR NDEGE:  So that, you know what you are selling.  Nobody will buy what he does not know.  You must know the state of affairs of an institution and as you are saying, that UCB is so important, honestly, about 1 billion shillings is spent; we know how viable this institution is, I think it is worth the cost. After all, we have already put 100 dollars away.  So, I think that we allow the Minister these 2 billion shillings to restructure and give correct information on UCB, UDB and other financial institutions.  So, I appeal to hon. Members, that may be while yesterday we could have -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please wind up.

MR KABUGO: Point of information. Mr Chairman, the hon. Member John Ndege is one of the committee members who was with us all along when we were discussing and deliberating on UCB and other institutions - since the member accepted my explanation as regards the Mulago Project money, I am sure that I will be able to convince him that we must have at that time, the explanation the Minister convinces us that that this money is not just for UCB, but other institutions, and with the interest of us; whether you are going to sell it to Ugandans or to non-Ugandans, that a proper study and recommendation is made about the fate of the Bank.  I beg to submit.

MR PINTO: Mr Chairman, and Colleagues, Members, I was still on the Floor when hon. Mwandha gave this information which subsequently led into information from hon. Ndege. I have heard very clearly that we are receiving foreign money here $.2.4 million and Uganda Shillings.328 million are required to do a whole range of things.  May I please be allowed Mr Chairman, my Colleague, John Kasajja - but there is going to be the capitalization of UCB, there is going to be the restructuring of UDB; that the development of the capital market, the same method we shall use, through floatation, to buy shares and for this to be put in place, the buying of shares, this capital market system is part of this money. So, really one of the issues that is very crucial to the minds of our Colleagues, is the sell of UCB and I think Members have agreed UCB shall be sold; the only problem is the method which I recommend with the Minister, that it should be through floatation of shares and the methodology needs to be funded.  So, I can sit down appealing to my Colleagues, that this system should be put in place - this money is required and I, therefore, appeal to you, focus to move giving the Minister the recommendations as they are in this report to be implemented, that we give him the money, with these recommendations, the Minister goes to undertake the study among which is UCB and that will be sold in accordance with your requirements.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.

MR ASIKU DRATRUTRU: Mr Chairman, it seems this House is divided in opinion; is divided in opinion because there are two reasons. If number one, which we know, unless it is revisiting do we as many of us have expressed, privatise UCB?  This is in light of many who said we should go back.  I know there is no market for gold; we did pass a law, that section 2, UCB belonging to section 2, stated very clearly that it will be privatised but Uganda Government will have majority shares. (Applause) That is what I know we passed; that majority shares will be taken by the Ugandan Government.  I am seeking clarification.  Now, with effort of privatising UCB, there is a possibility of foreigners coming, me I get lost, what is the capital, how many shares are there and how much is government going, as Uganda, as the law says, got to maintain; and what is that percentage of - the one which we shall privatise - either to Ugandans or to non-Ugandans?  This issue is not very clear to me. If it is made to be very clear and that somebody is seeking from us the 2 million dollars to study the method of doing it, then why preventing our right of having a right over this - being an institution of Uganda Government, we would be happy.  But my fear is, if you ask from those you will privatise, you will never come back to this House to tell us, that Ugandans got this percentage; we are tired of as if we are our property in such a way. Thank you.  (Laughter)

MR RUKIKAIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  It is only about two weeks ago when I laid before this House a report on privatisation and during that laying down of the report the number of questions are being raised now, were raised and were to the best of my ability answered.  The same questions are being raised again and if you can give me just two minutes, I will try and touch on some of them.

First of all, this 2.9 million from foreign donors for financial sector adjustment credit in one package which deals with the entire financial sector and which has been negotiated over a period of more than one year.  There is no way in which you can separate on component from another without going back to re-negotiate the whole package of the Financial Sector Adjustment Credit.  Not only that, but there may be some other related components in this Budget that will have to be re-examined because you have opened up a Ponderous box.  International Financial is not as simple as to say now, you take out the component of UCB, leave the rest of it to deal with other matters and let us go ahead; it is not as simple as that.  So, let me assure you that whatever decision you take, you take it with our eyes fully open, that if you re-open this one, then you will have to direct this Government to go back and re-negotiate the financial section adjustment credit a new process - a process which may take you a year or even longer and may affect some other components.  That is point number one. (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I want clarification from the Minister.  I think it is within our rights as Parliamentarians to demand that a certain sector be treated in a certain way, that is absolutely correct and it is in order.  In fact, if I can quote other Parliaments like Britain, they say, nobody should buy British Airways, and when the Americans come with their money, the British say, no, thank you very much; we are okay.  At the same time, they are selling British ways for one pound. Right now, they are selling British airways for one pound, anybody who wants to buy it for one pound, is welcome, as long as he meets whatever.  So, inn our way, even if we have negotiated the financial adjustment policy from international financiers, we still come give a recommendation and directive to Government; that Uganda Commercial Bank will be sold to Ugandans through shares on stock exchange.  That is absolutely in order as far as I am concerned.  The question which we are now addressing is, the 32 million provided for studies - this sector, the sector of financial adjustment, because when one of our biggest handicap in the country is that our financial sector has not been moving with the economic base of development and we need to streamline this sector and Government wants to study this sector and make recommendations to us.  

Therefore, I think  we would be involved in what we call a double jeopardy to our own disadvantage.  If we refused this vote of $.2 million on the ground that they may study other things than what we have recommended; we know what we have recommended; whatever they study, the Government will be satisfied that their area is not going to work, because we will not approve it.  So, in my view, I think there would be not problem in even in re-negotiating the terms with the donors.  What is important is that we approve the 2/= billion, to study the financial adjustment sector, so that they can come up with a proper and adequate arrangement; and I think it is also wrong for us now to turn this vote into a general debate; because we are really in a committee of supply.  We should be moving it on a vote may be four people speaking and then -(Interruption)

MR RUKIKAIRE: I will be very brief.  Secondly, I would like to enlighten Members on one further thing. What portion of this 2.9/= million that is going to be used for U.C.B do not think that money is exclusively for the merchant bank which is going to be hired. The merchant bank is going to have to engage Uganda Accountants, Ugandan Valuers, Ugandans what, what, that is how -(Applause and Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR RUKIKAIRE:  Mr Chairman, I can see around the House that some of the principal beneficiaries here, who have got firms of valuers and auditors and who have done work under the Programme of privatisation, are the ones who are now saying; ah, ah, I can see them here! So, lots of Ugandan firms are the ones - hon. Gasatura give a chance, I will come to your question.  They are the ones who will be benefiting from this amount of money that we are going to be approving.

Thirdly, here I want to address myself to the question raised by hon. Gasatura.  That hon. Members, you have got absolutely nothing to worry about and why -(Applause)- but why do you not give me a chance, because why you do not have anything to worry out  -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR RUKIKAIRE: The role -(Interruption)- Can you protect me Mr Chairman?  The role of the merchant bank will be exclusively to advise the government in the manner in which this bank is going to be privatised in the best way.  This is their term of reference, this is what they are expected to do, and therefore, when you ask government that how do you propose to do it, and therefore, when you ask government that how do you propose to do it, how are you going to do it, you are jumping the gun; because during the process of that advisory services, there is going to be opportunity for it to address the issue, there is going to be opportunity for the committees of this House to be consulted; there is going to be opportunity for many, many interested parties to be consulted; there is going to be opportunity for many, many interested parties to be consulted about how this exercise should be consulted.

Fourthly, UCB is not the only one. When I came here about four weeks ago, and I was asked questions about Uganda Posts and Telecommunications of which my Colleague, is the responsible Minister, I made it clear that we have already engaged IFC an International Company of Repute to help us with the process of privatising Uganda Posts and Telecommunications.  All these parastatals you see being privatised, have also go t Ugandan consultants in most cases; who are helping us with exercise of privatisation.  So, UCB is not the only one, only that in terms of size, it is the biggest, in terms of needs to have the highest professional services, it is the most important and therefore, we need to spend some money and sometime to get the best advisory services to carry out this exercise.  Now, the question of floatation has been mooted here.  I was the one who came to this House and announced a number of enterprises which have been selected by GRIK to be voted for so that Ugandans can have opportunity to buy shares there and I said, hon. Mwandha will bail me out, because we were sitting here, that Uganda Commercial Bank should not be considered an exception to this Rule: that it is a candidate which should be possible for Ugandans to buy shares and this exercise is going to be carried out.

So, in conclusion, Government has not decided to come out with a total package that this is the way we are going to privatise. There would be no point in hiring a consultant to come here and help us with that! Let me assure you once again, in the presence of my Minister here, and as the Minister of State responsible, that there has been no underhand negotiation, there has been no deal make behind your backs, that the whole thing will be a front exercise through which we will quickly make possible consultation, including the committees of this House and the Members as a whole. Thank you.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, it has given us opportunity to have insights in decision and the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee earlier on had proposed that the issue of Uganda Commercial Bank should be discussed and that is acceptable.  Time will come when we can discuss also UCB as a subject.  However, now, we have carried out some consultations here while the debate was going on.  It is really a lot of component involved in these two billion shillings.  So, if we tie it because of UCB alone, we shall be jeopardising the financial sector.  None of us here  - I think we are proud of at least of the financial reforms we have gone through painfully over a period; we are more less getting in terms to and end of this and this is very important.  So, in consultation with the Chairman, the committee was only that we did not have time to submit all these.  So, what I propose, that the hon. Member should bear with us; so that we do not tie up this Budget, that the issue of Uganda Commercial Bank will be given time to be debated as we ventilate all your grievances.

MR LUWUM OKELLO: Mr Chairman, I do not want the House to be rally misled.  I want the House to take a decision independently; the Minister or the Minister of State for Finance has just stood here and said, he discussed something with me and we reached a compromise; because they had given me all the details, now that one is not true - that is not true.  What I heard, what I had discussed with him, is that, may be the UCB component could be removed; but since the Minister of State here, has now stood up and it looks as if it is a set of blackmail that the whole package is together; none of the components can be removed.  So, I think now it is open to the House, to make its own independent judgement.  Thank you.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order to continue debating the issue when you know very well that the House is divided.  Would it not be a proper order for us to adjourn to come back tomorrow when we have made a proper research?

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE & ECONOMIC PLANNING IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY


THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE & ECONOMIC PLANNING IN CHARGE OF ENTANDIKWA  (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply considered Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance and Head 107 up to page B 38 and approved Vote without amendment. I beg to move. And I will have to continue to complete the Votes: we had to adjourn due to technicalities.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: With that we come to the end of today’s Session and adjourn the Council until tomorrow, starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, 14 September, 1995)











