Tuesday, 13 September 2011

Parliament met at 11.02 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. We were supposed to meet yesterday but at very short notice, the sitting of yesterday afternoon was postponed. The reasons are that the paper work that was necessary for us to move forward with the discussions yesterday was not ready. So, we were not able to proceed, and of course some Members had travelled from upcountry to come and be in Parliament for the afternoon of yesterday. We apologise for all those inconveniences that were caused to you. 

I cannot emphasise enough the urgency of what we are dealing with, and that is the Budget. The budget process is urgent and we should do whatever is necessary to finish this in good time. On the Order Paper today we have a lot of work and we hope that we will have the usual stamina to finish this business today and have only the business to follow on the Order Paper. 

We also had training that should have started today. We have three Members of Parliament from the House of Commons who should have been interacting with Members starting from today and tomorrow but given the situation we are in with the incomplete budget process, we have postponed that meeting. It cannot, therefore, start today; it will start tomorrow, if we are able to finish what we are supposed to do. 

Two of the hon. Members are already here and when they come to the gallery, I will introduce them to you. I had a meeting with the two of them this morning. One was delayed, she should be coming in this morning and then we will see how to engage with them on the course of our deliberations on these matters. Thank you. 

11.06 a.m.
MS BEATRICE ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance concerning my constituency, Kitgum District. On a very sad note, I am reporting to the House that there is an outbreak of Hepatitis B in my district. Kitgum District has been suffering from the effects of Hepatitis E for the last three years and to be again invaded with Hepatitis B, which is more critical than Hepatitis E, is very unfortunate. 

As I speak, St Joseph Hospital has already confirmed 12 cases of patients who have been admitted to this hospital suffering from Hepatitis B and in the neighbouring districts like Lamwo; most of their patients also come to Kitgum. Unfortunately, there is lack of regents for testing the blood samples for these cases. This means that there are even more unidentified cases that have not yet gone on record. The areas so far identified with patients are Kitgum Town Council, Mucwini, Orom and Mpalabakar, Adilang, Dwore and these already have patients who have come to St Joseph Hospital in Kitgum District. I have confirmed that outbreak. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, Hepatitis B is infectious and it affects the liver of human beings and causes its inflammation. Therefore, the whole area of Acholi, Karamoja and Lango is suspected to be the area of this infection. I, therefore, ask Government to come up quickly to the rescue of my people of Kitgum and calm the spread of Hepatitis B by providing the regent, which is most needed to identify cases and hence to have the treatment mechanism in place so that we don’t see this case go out of hand as it were with Hepatitis E. 

When I reported Hepatitis E in this House, Government responded with laxity; and it (the disease) spread to the whole region. I hope this time round, it is not going to be the case. I want the Government or probably the Minister of Health to come up and even inform this House, first of all, if they are aware of this outbreak and what they are going to undertake to quickly curb it and give us enough information –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, my sister, for giving me this opportunity. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that this Hepatitis B is not only in Kitgum and Lamwo but also in Gulu District already some people have lost their lives in Lacor Hospital. Lacor Hospital registered over ten cases and seven people have died of Hepatitis B. So, it is a big concern. Maybe the minister could have also followed it. We really need more information about it. Thank you. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: This is further information, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to the submissions of hon. Betty Anywar on Hepatitis B. Once again, I still believe that a nation that is sick is not productive at all. I was working in Mbarara Hospital as a lecturer and we did some research and found that Kiruhura alone had ten percent of infections because we sampled people and got about ten percent. In other words, we have Hepatitis B even in Western Uganda, which means that if it is in Gulu, in Mbarara, and it has now gone to Kitgum, then the country is under attack. 

The infection of this disease is very tricky because if you just sleep with anybody unprotected, you get it. If you get in contact with any blood sample of anybody infected, you are going to get infected. When you have a simple cut on your body and touch somebody who has it and your food actually gets into contact with that person, that person also gets infected. The thing that is actually very tricky about Hepatitis B is that the treatment for it is not there. Ideally in the United Kingdom and other developed countries they use Interferon Gamma combined with some antiretroviral drugs for treatment of Hepatitis B, but again the treatment is not very clear and Interferon is very expensive. In fact in Uganda now we do not have anybody who can give Interferon. 

How do you prevent it? The thing is very simple. We must make sure that nobody gets it. And if we could immunise all health workers and anybody who is at risk and we just look for this disease and we make sure that we prevent it even in pregnant mothers, it will work for us.

For that matter I am urging the Ministry of Health that kindly - the ministry was put in your hands to look after us; and I tell you we cannot bury our heads in the sand like ostriches when Ugandans are getting infected. For example, I believe that anybody that is sending his child to study Medicine in Gulu, Mbarara and Makerere should arrange some vaccination for this child, otherwise your child is going to end up getting infected because you have such people who are very sick. 

For that matter I do not know whether the Ministry of Health now has procured vaccines against Hepatitis B in this country so that we do not get any more people infected. And honestly, I feel the Minister of Health should give us at least a word as far as Hepatitis B vaccination is concerned. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, would you like to close your statement? Normally you do not give information but you first introduce the subject and then allow the minister to answer.

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank colleagues for the very useful information. You can now realise that as much as I was thinking that it was only Kitgum, it seems the whole country is at risk of Hepatitis B. My only contention here is that if the vaccine is supposed to be procured, it should not be for only the medical personnel. We should have the whole country access the immunisation so that we can protect the very people we are standing here for. 

And, therefore, it is now urgent and prudent that the Minister of Health comes to this Parliament and gives a statement as far as the spread of Hepatitis B is concerned in this country, highlighting the concerns of Members and the steps undertaken by Government to curb the spread. Otherwise, we shall wake up and find that even the very people we represent are dying and when it reaches Parliament we shall say we never heard. I want immediate action from Government with his statement. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.16 a.m.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sorry for coming in a bit late so I did not pick the concerns right from the beginning. However, as requested by my colleague, I am very willing to come with a statement tomorrow afternoon, if you allow, on Hepatitis B. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But are you aware of the outbreak?

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, I think I will check. I do not want to give half facts. 

11.17 a.m.
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this important issue of Hepatitis B and I also thank the minister. 

I would like to inform this House that the ministry is fully aware of this Hepatitis B. I remembered last month we had a workshop in Imperial Royale informing Members of Parliament - who are in vulnerable areas of Hepatitis B and they explained to us clearly the causes, the effects and so forth. We told him to find the vaccine to vaccinate everybody and people who are not yet infected. From the information they gave us, if you are already infected that is the end of you. The immunisation will not help you. And we are mostly likely to be infected right from childhood. Some of us are here and we may be carrying the Hepatitis B virus and waiting for the outcome. But now the fact is that the children are most vulnerable. They need to be vaccinated and those who are not infected should be tested and vaccinated. We urged them that they should do it urgently.  

I am surprised when the minister says he is not aware of what is happening in the ministry when actually everything is clear. So, we really need action. People of the North, Koboko inclusive, are mostly affected compared to other regions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The 15 minutes are up. Hon. Minister, you are directed to issue a statement tomorrow to this House on the state of affairs concerning Hepatitis B and what actions Government is taking in dealing with the situation. 

Hon. Members as I said earlier, we have guests from the House of Commons. So in the distinguished strangers’ gallery we have Members of Parliament from the House of Commons: hon. Andrew Stevenson from the Conservative Party and hon. Richard Young Ross from the Liberal Democratic Party. We are also expecting hon. Pamela Nash from the Labour Party. They are here to facilitate the workshop for Members of Parliament. The title of that meeting is, “Meeting the Challenge: Balancing the Roles of an MP.” Please, join me in welcoming the hon. Members from the House of Commons. You are welcome! (Applause)  

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OT THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.3 TO THE BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is suspended for 15 minutes. 

(The House was suspended at 11.21 a.m.)

(On resumption at 12.18 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 3 TO THE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011

12.19 p.m.
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on Budget, I wish to apologise for keeping you waiting. It was unintentional but as you know, we have been dealing with figures, adding them up and there is a difference of 500 and we have to go back. You know, it is unfortunate that we have many accountants in the committee and they want everything to balance. 

I beg to present the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Schedule No. 3. 

On 06 September 2011, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to this House the Supplementary Budget Schedule No. 3 amounting to Shs 25.942 billion. The Schedule was referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny. Mr Speaker, it is my pleasure to present to this august House the report of the Budget Committee and its findings. 

Methodology

The Budget Committee scrutinised the Supplementary Schedule together with other relevant documents. This enabled the committee to raise issues that were discussed with the minister. 

Chairpersons of the sessional committees of the relevant sectors also scrutinised their respective sectors to establish the impact of the proposed supplementary expenditures on the original financing of sector outlays and work plans.

Framework for the Scrutiny of the Supplementary Expenditure

The committee used the following framework for scrutinising the request: 
1.	Whether the supplementary expenditure is in conformity with the law: for example, if the supplementary expenditure is below the statutory limit or equal to three percent provided for under the Budget Act.
2.	Whether the minister of finance indicated the impact of the supplementary expenditure on the original financing arrangement and sector work plans as required by Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act; the source of funding for the supplementary expenditures; and 
3.	Whether the supplementary expenditure was occasioned by the unforeseeable emergencies that the relevant sectors could not capture in the normal budgeting process.
4.	Whether all the deserving emergencies were covered under the supplementary expenditure.

Overview of the Supplementary Expenditure  

The supplementary expenditure request under Schedule No. 3 on the Budget for the Financial Year 2010/2011 are as follows:
i.	Shs 14 billion under State House to cater for shortfalls in the non-wage recurrent and development budget for the 4th quarter of the Financial Year 2010/2011.
ii.	Shs 11.942 billion under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to facilitate the Government of Uganda’s technical and legal team in the Heritage Arbitration case.
iii.	The committee also noted that Shs 1.394 billion in Schedule II was passed under the Ministry of Defence Vote - 004 but had been erroneously reflected under State House Vote - 002, an error that the minister of finance admitted.
iv.	The committee observed that Supplementary Schedules 1, 2 and 3 bring the total request to more than three percent provided for under the Budget Act. However, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that Section 156(2) of the Constitution permits the Government to spend and report to Parliament within four months.
v.	The committee was also informed that the supplementary was to be funded by surplus collections by URA, which performed beyond the set target of the Financial Year 2010/2011.
vi.	The committee proceeded to ascertain the merits of the supplementary request Vote by Vote as illustrated below.

Specific Vote Scrutiny  

Vote 002 – State House

The committee was informed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that a total of Shs 14 billion was required to cater for the fourth quarter for FY 2010/2011 operations of which Shs 12.391 billion is to cater for the shortfall under the non-wage recurrent budget. 

The committee was informed that the recurrent budget for the Vote had been exhausted yet there were still a number of critical activities that required funding. These included mandatory routine training for the presidential jet crew, classified operations, payment of utilities and Shs 1,608,916,000 for the purchase of specialised machinery and equipment.

The committee noted that most of the items under the Supplementary Schedule are of a predictable nature and could have been provided for within the normal budgeting process. The Budget Committee has, over the years, made this observation but there are no signs that their recommendations are being taken into consideration.

The committee further noted that State House tends to under budget for predictable activities in order not to exceed their ceilings only to apply for supplementary expenditure during budget implementation.

The committee was also concerned about the low level of adherence to budget discipline by State House where little or no effort is made to live within means and constraints provided by the expenditure ceilings issued to all Government ministries and departments. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the sessional committee takes keen interest in the systems meant to improve financial and resource management in State House to reduce on wasteful expenditure. These systems may include preparation and implementation of training and recruitment plans, introduction of prepaid services for utilities, and general financial discipline. 

Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 	
The committee was informed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that Shs 11.942 billion is for funding the legal expenses for appeal or arbitration against the suit by Heritage for US $400 million in Capital gains tax on transfer of 50 percent of its interest in oil exploration. This process is expected to last three years. The money was to cover preparatory activities of the Government and legal team and external legal fees, travel expenses, office equipment, stationery and facilitation of attendance at meetings. 

The committee noted that not all the money had been spent. Indeed only Shs 201,519,240 had been paid on the arbitration activities. The committee further noted that this matter is already being handled by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

The Legal and Parliamentary Committee Affairs in its report on the budget estimates for the year 2011/2012 recommended that, “No more funds should be released in relation to the arbitration case of Heritage Oil and Gas Ltd until the committee has concluded analysing the matter”. 

The committee’s concern was in regard to the legal costs and quantum of costs relating to the case. The Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee will be reporting to the House in one month’s time.

Mr Speaker, in light of the above the Budget Committee recommends that only the amount of Shs 201,519,240 which has already been spent, be approved. The balance of Shs 11,740,764,666 should be held on an account in Bank of Uganda titled “Heritage Arbitration - Ministry of Justice” and should be appropriated through the normal budget process. The committee recommends that Government reverses the entries for these funds.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that this House approves the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule III for the Financial Year 2010/2011 as follows: Vote 002 - State House; recurrent supplementary expenditure is Shs 12,391,084,000 while development supplementary expenditure is Shs 1,608,916,000. 

Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; recurrent expenditure of Shs 201,519,240 should be approved. 

In total, the committee recommends that Shs 14,201,519,240 should be approved under Supplementary Schedule No. 3. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is the report of the Budget Committee, so I open debate on this matter.

12.27 p.m.
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for presenting the report. I stand to oppose this report on legal grounds – 

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, when I look at the list here, hon. Ekanya is a member of the committee. I know he did not sign it but is it procedurally right for him to debate his own report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I made a ruling on this subject hardly a week ago. I thought that by today we would have been more organised to - he is the Shadow Minister for Finance but we made a ruling that this is a committee report and not a ministerial policy statement. May I have somebody else who is not a member of this committee? Please, because hon. Ekanya is standing up to oppose the committee report of which he is a member. As much as he did not sign, we agreed that the right procedure would be for him to file a minority report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are in a big dilemma until our rules have been resolved and that is how we have been proceeding. Our shadow ministers have been assigned to committees; this was an agreement between the Office of the Speaker and us. It was agreed that when we are in the House and the committee report is being debated, they will come and make their case; that is why they made alternative statements. 

In that regard, that is the manner in which we have been moving. Until our rules come out clearly, we still have this. Since we are going to deal according to our rules, for now, allow our shadow minister to make a case and then in future we shall see how best to deal with this issue. If it were a mere member of a committee, I would have agreed with you that he should not debate. You remember in your last ruling, you said, “I would have listened to you if you never signed – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I later clarified on that. What I can do is – but the rules are very clear; if you stand as a member of the committee and you start by saying, “I oppose the report” then there should have been a substantial minority report, which allows you to do that. In this case you are not giving information but you are opposing the report of a committee of which you are a member. Under what rule do we proceed in that case? 

Let me put it this way; at the time I will ask the minister to respond to the report I will be able to accommodate the shadow minister. That will probably be the right time to do it but now if there are no debates then I will call upon the minister to respond.

12.32 p.m.
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am drawing the House’s attention to page 4 of the report – actually it starts from page 3. The last sentence says: “However, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that Section 156(2) of the Constitution permits Government to spend and report to Parliament within four months.” 

I need to be clarified on this because I am wondering why the law is so open to abuse that Government can spend any amount of money and then later report to the House within a given period of time. What happens, for example, if the House refuses to approve that figure? Given what we have been told that this amount of money was to be spent from the surplus of Uganda Revenue Authority, I find this thing so prone to abuse that Government or the Executive can decide to spend big sums of money because they have seen that we have a source – a definite source and then come and report to us later. 

I am wondering whether this was the position that the committee received or it is an interpretation from the Attorney-General that any amount of money can be spent without restriction and they just come to Parliament later! If we decide that we do not approve, will the Government bring the money back? That is the clarification I want to get concerning this particular area of the report. I thank you.

12.34 p.m.
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I see a lot of contradiction here. The chairman has made a detailed report and they have in their committee critiqued this very issue that is Vote - 002 of State House on page 4. When you read critically, you realise that the tone was nationalistic in the sense that they were able to identify the inconsistency in the expenditure of State House. Shs 12.39 billion was spent without seeking the mandate of this Parliament, and here it is at the end being presented as something that this Parliament must endorse - that means endorsing and illegal expenditure that took place behind the curtains. 

I think we have reached a moment where this Parliament must be seen to be doing the correct thing, and I am asking this House to oppose this motion because if this money was spent without parliamentary approval, I do not think it is right for us to go ahead to approve this money since they already spent it. 

I think it is important that we must investigate this matter of how it was spent and if people did it illegally, then they must be brought before the law because we are running this country according to the law. The Constitution is clear and the Budget Act is clear on how we are supposed to proceed in spending tax payers’ money. So when I see the chairman in his conclusion requesting this House to approve the same money over whose expenditure he has expressed concern, I do not think it is right.

My colleagues, hon. Members of Parliament, teachers were crying here recently for money to increase their salaries but today if we are again to go ahead to approve this supplementary budget, I think the world will not see us well and I am sure you will see the teachers going back to strike. Otherwise, as for me on behalf of the people of Ayivu County, I am not in support of this supplementary proposal. I thank you.

12.38 p.m.
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank the chair and members of the committee for producing the report and I rise to support the motion moved by the chair. I just want to make a few comments on the report:

One; the committee observes that the State House tends to under budget for predictable activities in order not to exceed their ceiling. The question I want to ask is: when does Government intend to review the ceilings of the various sectors so that the various sectors can actually plan and budget appropriately? This question keeps coming up and I think it puts the image of State House in bad taste and yet I think State House is trying to implement the activities that fall under their jurisdiction. 

So when do the ministry of finance and stakeholders intend to review the various ceilings so that an institution like State House can actually budget and plan for its activities within the ceiling? I know that within two or three months from now, they will probably come with a supplementary. So, when does Government intend to streamline so that the various sectors can actually plan for their activities within the ceilings instead of getting these reports, which are probably –(Interruption)  

MR TUMWEBAZE: I thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I have a brief piece of information that I would like to give you. I think that as Parliament we should really not be promoting the idea of encouraging Government to review the MTEFF ceilings upwards because that will extremely promote financial indiscipline; worsen the challenges we have; monetary policy will be tampered with if at all MTEFF ceiling should be lowered. I thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much for the information but that is debatable because much as supplementary expenditure are lawful contrary to what the honourable colleague was saying, the institution is allowed by law to spend up to a particular percentage of three percent and report back to Parliament. So, these expenditures are within the law. 

But the question is: if you have institutions and departments, which cannot plan and budget for their activities and year in year out, they come here for supplementary budget, what is the model that is likely to promote abuse? Is it when we get a ceiling where the institutions can adequately accommodate their activities or when it is too restricted and then they keep coming through supplementary? I think this can be debated. 

So, the point I am raising is that the Prime Minister, as he tries to streamline the work of Government, should review the ceiling of the various sectors so that the sectors fit all the activities within the ceilings that are provided.

Second and lastly, is about the observation on the resources spent on these cases of Heritage Oil. I did attend a meeting of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs where there was debate on whether payments have been made or not and now here what I see is that about Shs 200 million had already been spent. I just want to inquire from the Attorney-General or the minister for justice whether all the necessary instruments in terms of agreements; procurement of the lawyers who are supposed to prosecute this case had been done before the over Shs 200 million was spent? Was it spent according to the required procedures because you require around Shs 11 billion and yet you had spent over Shs 200 million? I just want to be satisfied that the due process was followed in terms of procuring the lawyers and also having the necessary agreements –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. We as the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs have just been having a meeting with a team from the Attorney-General’s Chambers led by the Learned Attorney-General. This particular transaction had already been queried by our committee. We asked the Attorney General’s Chambers to provide us with the relevant documents and by the time we adjourned they had not yet brought all the documents. Let me give one example about the documents, which they have just provided. They say they are going to hire -(Interjections)- it is a brief from the Attorney-General’s Chambers to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and one of the items is the external legal consultants. They are hiring five personnel; three are senior personnel who are being hired at US $830 per hour and according to them, acceptable international hours a day is, eight. So, each lawyer will be paid US $830 per hour for eight hours a day and they have budgeted for six months. The assistants are going to be paid US $625 per hour. Their budget is eight hours a day for six months. A quick calculation gives the senior lawyers US $1,000,195 per lawyer and then the legal assistants around US $900,000 each. 

When you look at the budget, there is an item on media consultancy and they have budgeted for Shs 250 million for public relations to explain that this is okay. Then among other items being budgeted to constitute that Shs 11 billion are office consumables, including black law dictionaries and English dictionaries. Can you imagine the Attorney-General wants to buy black law dictionaries as if the Chambers do not have these dictionaries? This is the detail but we have queried and I think tomorrow, we are going to have another meeting in the committee. 

I am giving this information as the Shadow Attorney-General because we are very much interested in this matter. The details are here but I think it would be better when the committee comes up with a report when we have studied this entire document.

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, it is always good to give information when you actually have all the information because when you read only parts of the agreement, you distort the agreement. What the hon. Shadow Attorney-General is giving is only part of what is contained in the agreement and therefore -(Interjections)- be patient -(Interruption)

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Mr Speaker, I rise up on appoint of order. Our procedure in the House is that when a Member is giving information, it is a supplementary to a colleague who is holding the Floor. The Attorney-General is standing up to say that when you are giving supplementary information to a Member who is holding the Floor, you need to give the full response. Knowing for sure that when you are giving information you just give a bit to supplement and knowing for sure that as the Attorney-General he has the option of bringing the full report on the Floor to give information to the Members of Parliament, is it in order for the Attorney-General to jump on the Floor curtailing the members who are giving information normally to supplement a Member who is on the Floor rather than for him to come on the Floor and give information as Attorney-General? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member, the learned Attorney-General rose on a point of information, he was allowed by the Member holding the Floor to give his information and that is what he was doing.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, I did not jump on the Floor, I was allowed to come to the Floor. The Member wanted to find - he was inquiring as to whether lawyers have been procured. I want to confirm to this House that lawyers have been procured after going through a process. The external lawyers who are handling this case for us are called Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP. It is a firm of lawyers, which is established in the US and the UK. So, they are lawyers who have been hired to handle this matter -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, of course I have lot of respect for my learned colleague, the Attorney-general but one of the issues actually in our committee is about the procurement of those external lawyers. We are actually querying it and the Attorney-General knows it. So, the procedural point I have risen on and I would like clarification from you is that, is it correct for the learned Attorney-General to come here and literally pre-empt because that very issue about procurement is being queried? 

The information, which I have given, includes figures, which he does not dispute and which were just applied by him but the particular point of procurement is being queried by the committee. Is he in order or procedural right to come knowing very well the committee is investigating the procurement and say -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, both the Attorney-General and the Shadow Attorney-General attended a meeting in which the Speaker was not present and the Speaker is now supposed to rule on the propriety of the information that they are exchanging. I am unable to rule on that subject. Hon. Member on what point do you rise? (Laughter) There is a Member holding the Floor.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I had given him the Floor but I think he will come after me -

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really rise on a point of procedure because as you know and my learned brother, the Shadow Attorney-General knows, those who seek equity must come with clean hands. It is the learned Shadow Attorney-General who came and pre-emptively reported what was going on in his committee by reading all those things he read. Is the learned Attorney-General procedural correct to take advantage and talk about -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The learned Attorney-General or Shadow Attorney-General?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The shadow one. (Laughter) I have absolutely no doubt that if he were in the right place; he has the qualifications to be Attorney-General. The problem is that he is in the wrong place but is it procedurally correct for the learned Shadow Attorney-General who started it all now to try and use the procedure to stop a response to what he started? Is it procedurally correct? From what I have heard, this matter which the holder of the Floor is raising is before the committee; the committee has not concluded, they will come and report. It is the learned Shadow Attorney-General, who is a member of the committee that is seeking to report ahead of his committee. Is it procedurally right for him to do that and then seek to prevent his counterpart from doing the same?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have ruled on this subject. The Shadow Attorney-General rose on a point of information; he was allowed by the Member holding the Floor. Against the information which was to his knowledge, he learned Attorney-General rose on a point of information – the same Member granted him leave to give that information. A debate arose between the two of them as to who was saying the proper thing. I ruled that I was not part of that meeting and so I cannot rule as to the propriety of what happened in that meeting. Please, conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, the point I was trying to make is that the people of Kinkiizi East constituency, which I represent, would want the Government to be frugal and save money. Luckily, I come from Kanungu together with the Prime Minister; there are services that we urgently need like the tarmac road to Kanungu and other services. So, we request Government to remain very frugal and save money to give us services - and to the other parts of the country. Therefore, I agree with the committee that the money which hasn’t been expended be ring-fenced in a particular account until the issue is resolved and I support the committee in its recommendations.

12.56 p.m.
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Reading page 4 of the report, the bottom paragraph, last sentence states that the Budget Committee has over the years made this observation but there are no signs that their recommendations are being taken into consideration. 

When committees make recommendations and maybe eventually this House - it would be very appropriate for the relevant organs to take recommendations of this House seriously. It is unfortunate that recommendations are being made and people do not take these recommendations seriously. It is my prayer that you guide us on what happens when this House keeps making recommendations and the Executive ignores them.

For us to have a harmonised and well governed country where resources are spent according to the book and where accountability remains paramount as to avoid corruption and other scandals, it is very important that all the arms of Government take seriously the recommendations made by this House. Mr Speaker, it is my prayer that you guide us on this issue.

12.58 p.m.
MRS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of the committee for the report; in fact it is a report that really leaves a lot to be desired. On pages 4 and 5, I want to touch on the issues of the recommendations where the committee was informed that the supplementary was to be funded by surplus collections by URA, which performed beyond the set target. 

I am aware that this country operates a cash budget. If you are operating a cash budget and funds come your way, should you just misappropriate them at will? The ministry of finance has the National Planning Authority under its docket; I have always made this comment on the Floor of this House; why don’t we set our priorities right? If Uganda Revenue Authority has managed to raise funds beyond the set target, so what? Should we misappropriate them? Should we use them at will? These are the questions on which the National Planning Authority needs to guide this country and guide it well.

I know that State House has planned activities, but so do other ministries. I am talking about priority areas: one of them is the department of health. All health services are almost in a mess. Even if we had excess funds, why should we think only of State House as a place of priority; why don’t we distribute this money equitably? We talk of equal opportunities; why should they be given only to one sector and we forget all the other sectors that matter in this country?

So, I look at this as inequality of the highest order and it is high time we started thinking about it. Even if we had more money than we can generate, we should also think about the other sectors and not only State House. This is just the beginning of the Ninth Parliament but by the time we reach March next year, State House will have come up with over four supplementary budgets. I can bet my little figure on this –(Laughter)– yes; we are not going to continue like this. 

Mr Speaker, the issue is not that we do not have the funds; the problem of this country is lack of priorities. We have people dying in the countryside due to lack of food and lack of health services and we misuse the little we have! Much as the Bible says, “Those who have will be added and those who do not have, even the little they have will be taken away”, but still I look at this as very unfair. 

On page 5, the committee says: “In order not to exceed their ceiling …” this is a good recommendation by the committee. We have public service, and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in particular. A health centre III is supposed to have a minimum of 15 staff but go to the health centre IIIs in the countryside; you will find a maximum of four, including the watchman and the cleaners. Yet you are talking of lifting the ceiling of State House –(Interruption)

MR OMOLO: This is information on the health sector. Three weeks ago, I was in Soroti and I found that 13 children died in the maternity ward within one week; just because of lack of power and they could not have diesel for the generator. Here we want to give all the money onto State House; where are we heading?

MRS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. So these are some of the issues we are talking about. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has a shortfall of over 20 staff at the centre alone and when you go to the countryside, it is just – no wonder they have only 0.3 percent of the national budget! Why doesn’t the Ministry of Public Service help to recruit staff in all other departments and ministries in this country? But you are talking about – and they are bogged down by the ceiling yet you can lift the ceiling for State House? I think this is a shame! Much as we appropriate funds, we should not do it selectively. 

Lastly, let me say something about the issue to do with Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Yes, I don’t know any law, but I am perturbed. Last week or so, on the Floor of this House, the Attorney-General who is supposed to guide this country stood here – when the committee recommended that we don’t have a foreign policy – and told us that the Preamble to the Constitution is the foreign policy of Uganda as a country. I feel so bad when taxpayers’ money in this country is spent on arbitration of cases by people who are supposed to negotiate for this country. Why should Uganda lose these colossal sums of money? We are choking with the bad services of Umeme that came here after negotiations between it and Government of Uganda were entered into. Why should we continue losing money in cases like these ones? If the people who negotiated it on behalf of Government were London-qualified, why did they commit the meager resources of this country? Now we are talking of US $4.0 billion and you want part of it chopped to cater for such cases? If the politicians who come to this House to be appointed – (Interruptions)

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, the hon. Member holding the Floor is making an allegation that the country has lost money. I would like to say clearly that no money has been lost by this country. In fact we have this money only that one of the firms to the dispute has gone to court for arbitration proceedings saying that we should not be holding this money. So, is the hon. Member in order to tell this House that money has been lost, when no money has been lost or misappropriated? The Attorney-General is only appearing to ensure this money is safe in our hands.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought that is the subject of what the committee was saying that some money was spent in this transaction, not so? Isn’t it true that some money was spent? Maybe it depends on where you are picking it from. If you are somebody who thinks it should not have been spent, you will call it lost money. And that is still within the permitted parliamentary language. Hon. Member, please proceed and wind up.

MRS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me talk about the Office of the Attorney-General as part of my conclusion. If politicians who come to this House are not competent enough to handle cases of this nature, we should shop outside for competent people to be appointed Attorney-General –(Laughter)- in order to handle such issues for us. 

Let me conclude by saying that instead of committing Uganda to losses, Chinua Achebe once said, “Knowledge is like a gold-skin bag where everyone carries his own”. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.09 p.m.
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you look at this report, you realise that URA was here with the minister telling us that they want to widen the tax base. And that is why URA is now charging VAT on property worth Shs 50 million, and immovable property. However, in this situation they are telling us that URA got surplus collection. I would like to ask the minister to give us more information about that. I am saying this because if in the 2010/2011 fiscal year URA got surplus collections, it means we can allocate that to ministries like that of gender that have been under funded.

The second thing is about the issue of reversing the money that is said to be for arbitration. In economics, if you reverse the money on an entry, it means you can spend it later. So, if you are thinking of limiting the expenditure until the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs analyses it, it means we have to change from reverse to halt.

Lastly, I would like to query the caliber of lawyers we are using in this oil case. We have unemployment in Uganda; we have qualified lawyers and other professional people who can do the same work at a lesser amount. I would like to suggest that we employ our own people who will bring that income back to Uganda and not abroad. Thank you.

1.11 p.m.
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Mr Speaker, thank you. I also thank the committee for the report. Yes, the committee has presented a report, which we have read and understood but when you look at the conclusion, the introduction and the body, you realise that there are a lot of inconsistencies. For instance, look at the predictable things that we spend money on and later bring supplementary on the Floor of Parliament. If the ceiling is so much money, why can’t we plan within that? I believe that when we start tabling supplementary budgets here especially on issues that can be predicted and which are not emergencies - that is indiscipline.

Secondly, I agree with hon. Karuhanga. If the committee has made a recommendation for the first year, the following year and the third one but the same things keep coming up, then the committees are rendered useless. So, I don’t see why we are spending so much on these committees.

The other issue is about the case of Heritage Oil. We have had a lot of problems with that case. It appeared in one of the proceedings of the previous Parliament, so, what are we doing? I remember hon. Abdu Katuntu had come up with something, but on a procedural point, he was almost ruled out. However, I encourage him to bring up those issues at an appropriate time and we look at them, and debate them as Parliament.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that asking for a supplementary is in most cases indiscipline. I was a Member of the Budget Committee in the previous parliaments and I now I chair a committee as you know. Throughout this period, I have noted that when our technical people advise our politicians, there will be a mess in the committee meeting. I can assure you of that. You will find figures not tallying and so forth. What are we doing about that?

The other issue is about Article 156(2) of our Constitution, which I hope will not be misused. I am saying this because when we grant you permission to spend and report to Parliament – I hope that will be taken in good faith. Of course I support the supplementary, although with a lot of pain but I encourage Members not to support such a thing next time. Thank you. (Laughter)

1.14 p.m.
DR GABRIEL ARIDRU (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification. Much as the Constitution allows the minister to spend and come back to the Floor within four months, the report is very silent in terms of when these expenditures were actually made. Was it last financial year in June, February, March or April? Because it could be that the expenditures were made way beyond the four months, which is allowed for in the Constitution. So, it is more of a legal issue as opposed to whether it is right to spend the money or not. 

I would have expected the committee to have said the money was spent in February or March and it is within the Constitution and, therefore, Parliament should sanction the expenditure. Mr Speaker, I just needed clarification on that matter. 

1.15 p.m.
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): I thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification on page 4 of the report on 4.1, Vote - 002 State House. In the first paragraph, it is indicated that Shs 14 billion is required to cater for the fourth quarter of 2010/2011 and I do understand that we are now in 2011/2012. When you look at the statement, it is not clear as to whether these activities being talked about were conducted then and now we are looking at paying the arrears; or they were not carried but rolled over. If they were rolled over, then they should be contained in the normal budget process. So, I would like to get clarification on that matter. Are we talking of arrears or we are talking of the activities which were supposed to be done in the last financial year but were not done and are to be done now?

I also want clarification - on the same page 5 where it is indicated that the committee was informed that a supplementary was to be funded by the surplus collection by URA, which performed beyond the set targets for the Financial Year 2010/2011. Thanks go to URA for having performed beyond their targets. The clarification I want to get – with my little knowledge in finance and accounting, if those collections were made in the previous financial year, they were considered as receipts and balances for then and cannot be taken to be the revenue for this financial year. Are the balances there now on the account they are talking about to be used to fund the supplementary? If it is so, how do we treat this irregularity because if this was the revenue then it was considered then and as balances then, it cannot be considered as the revenue for now? Therefore, we are not right to talk of the – (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you hon. Member for giving way. We are talking about the Financial Year 2010/2011. I thought I should make this clear and the activities we are talking about are activities of 2010/2011. Thank you.

MR KYOOMA: I thank the chairman for the information. I also understand that the chairman has very good accounting and finance knowledge. If you collected revenue in 2010/2011, where you talk about performing beyond the set targets; it means it was collected then. In terms of budgeting, we are looking at the estimates of revenue vis-à-vis expenditure for 2011/2012. There is no way that the receipts collected then can cross over to this financial year. When you say we shall use the other funds to finance us now, it would imply that you still have those funds. We know that when the Financial Year was ending, the Treasury was closed and we are on a new chapter. That is the clarification I am seeking. I thank you.

1.19 p.m.
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to read from what the Members of this committee reported. I am really disturbed that the Office of the President has a correlation with the State House and it has a correlation with the Executive and that the Executive is mandated to carry out these functions, which the Members are querying right now. 

Since 2002, I have been taking note of what has transpired in this country especially with regard to these supplementary budgets. The view out there is that State House is being used as a conduit for corruption in this country, and they want to spend this money without meaningful activities. If the Office of the President, State House and the Executive is supposed to guide this country towards a corrupt free nation called Uganda, I wouldn’t agree with the recommendation of the committee that we approve this money. 

First of all, the monies that they have spelt out here on page 6, especially for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are being investigated by a committee of Parliament. It would be unfair for this House to approve these monies, which are under contention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the approval that they seek is not for money but for expenditure already made. In other words, it is like a post-mortem. Under the provisions of the Constitution, that is what it says that any supplementary expenditure done in the previous financial year should be approved in the next financial year. So, there is no money you are approving right now to be spent. The money is already spent. So what we are approving is the expenditure. 

MR NZOGHU: I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. It would be promoting financial indiscipline in this country if we continue operating like this. First of all, I want to add that Members of this committee have not indicated to us as to when exactly this money was spent. If we knew when the last money was spent, it would be proper for us as Members of this House to ascertain whether the four months have not elapsed or not. 

I want to propose that the approval of these monies would be unfair to this country. It would be cheating this country and also unfair to sectors that are critically in need of support.

1.25 p.m.
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Mine is a concern and I share the sentiments raised by the committee. I want to be guided on this issue of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which is being debated even when a committee of Parliament is still investigating. From the report here, there is some indication that a contract has been signed and that some lawyers have been procured to do the litigation or arbitration on our behalf. Whether the procedure was good or bad, I may not go into it now. 

I seek guidance of what would be the legal implications since this country has partly performed the contract. What are the legal implications of Parliament not approving the expenditure as requested? 

I am aware that the committee is investigating. Are we going to see a situation where the other parties, especially the lawyers, would be suing for specific performance? Maybe not but it would be good to consider such a thing. We have lawyers in this country; even those in the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee are mainly lawyers. The failure of the negotiators of this agreement to domesticate the arbitration clause could have led to this but maybe that was the design of the contract. We would like to be guided on the legal implications of withholding the amount of money due under that contract. Does it have any legal implications for this Government? And if so, will it be fair for Parliament, after commitment, to hold the payment? I will be glad to get guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I intend to close general debate on this in 30 minutes. I am going to allow ten Members to take three minutes each. I will take six from this side and four from this side. 

1.28 p.m.
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Page 3, the second last paragraph reads: “The committee also noted that Shs 1.39 billion was passed under Ministry of Defence but erroneously reflected under State House.” I am not surprised, State House looks like a big magnet to me; it attracts all the money whether big or small. 

This morning Members were reporting that there is an outbreak in the country of Hepatitis B. I do not think there will be any mistake of money being taken to the Ministry of Health by accident yet this is a ministry that needs a lot of it to help us. There is even another type of TB that is spreading seriously. To cure it, you need Shs 3 million per person and we already have over 140 patients. 

Look at Ministry of Education, there is completely nothing. I think the Ministry of Defence is well motivated. You can look at the way they do their work. Someone performs his duty according to the way they are motivated. We request the Government to help us in this; the roads in Uganda are a death trap. Everyone has roads in their area that are bad and for my case who comes from the village, it is hard for us to get to town. 

We once had somebody in this country called Wanjusi Wasieba, he was only a minister of state but he did some work for Uganda. What is happening to other ministers? I am sure you have been here for so long and you know the same tactics that he used. Why don’t you help Uganda sincerely? This is just a humble appeal. We cannot force you; you are on top but for the love of our country do something, we need help! 

The other time I was requesting other ministries to borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Defence; they are doing very well. There is always a cry in other ministries. It is not that they do not know what to do but they just neglect us. They have left Uganda to the dogs. This country needs prayers, I will always ask the Almighty God to help us through, otherwise we have talked and there is no change.

1.31 p.m.
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): In the first paragraph the committee said: “The committee was informed that the recurrent budget for the vote had been exhausted yet there were still a number of critical activities that required funding.” The question is: what was this money spent on yet there are critical activities for which money was desired under State House?

Here they have also mentioned the mandatory routine training for the presidential jet crew and other things related to State House. Hon. Speaker, I call these areas irrelevant under the Vote of State House, the ones on which money is spent. They are a duplication of all these ministries. If you go to the Ministry of Health, you find something to do with HIV/AIDS and also under President’s Office, the same. If you go to loss of drugs, the team of investigators into the theft of drugs is under State House. Why don’t you put this thing under the arm of the state, which deals with investigations?

If you go to disaster preparedness you find money in State House. For example the issue of mudslides in Bududa is under disaster preparedness, why do you take it to State House when we have a Ministry of Disaster Preparedness? Hon. Prime Minister, it shows the President does not have confidence in your ministers and even you. He does not want you to supervise the work of your ministers. Things that are done under State House are not supervised by you but by the President. This is a vote of no confidence in all of you. So what are you doing here? (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we need, as a Parliament, to regulate State House. State House must have some activities, which are designated to be State House activities. Those activities, which are fit to be in the ministries, must be in the ministries. I am speaking to the President, through the Minister for the Presidency. Your Excellency, watch this space! There are activities which are for you and there are others, which are for the other institutions of Government, do not monopolise Government. Government is not you; Government is Government and it has institutions. Government is us. 

Activities which are fit to be under the Police should be under the Police; those under the Judiciary should be under the Judiciary; those under the Ministry of Health should be under Ministry of Health; those under the Ministry of Internal Affairs should be under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We have these ministers and we pay them for this -(Member timed out_) 

1.35 p.m.
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the Attorney-General and the Prime Minister are here, we have got a very big challenge in this country when it comes to those who represent us to negotiate on behalf of Government, with other external parties. I think we really need to take keen interest because some of the people who are in offices that we think are representing the interests of Uganda –(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, he is a Member of the committee and is standing to again debate the report; and I do not know under what rule he is doing that. 

1.36 p.m.
MR WILBERFOCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 5, the committee is recommending to the sectoral sessional committee to take keen interest in the systems meant to improve financial and resource management in State House, so as to reduce on wasteful expenditure. May I know from the committee whether the Shs 14 billion under consideration is the money being referred to as wasteful expenditure? In their conclusion on page 6, they are recommending to this House that we approve this wasteful expenditure. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, the way I understand wasteful expenditure especially in utilities is like you have opened a tap of water and you have left water to flow for 360 days, and from the way I understand it, the committee gets the opportunity to invite the relevant technical people for explanation. Whether the explanation they got was that the Shs 14 billion was wasteful expenditure or not, but because it has already been incurred, they are now lamenting and, therefore, they are helpless and are asking that we should approve this expenditure. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.37 p.m.
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion on the ground that first of all, this money has been spent by State House and the only problem has been that it was spent without the approval or authority of Parliament. Parliament must insist tomorrow if such expenditures are to be done, that they must get approval first. You say there are no roads, there are no drugs in hospitals and yet the money is not there and it was spent in the previous financial year and this is a formality of ratifying what has already been done? 

I support the motion but I am saying that we must be strict to ensure that this over-expenditure, which calls for a supplementary budget by Government, must be controlled and Parliament must pronounce itself strongly to ensure that if any expenditure is going to be made, Parliament must approve it first. I think that should be the position of Parliament. 

Secondly, we have a case of arbitration with Tullow Oil. I think it is important that we hire these lawyers from outside because the first mistake that was done during negotiations was to say that arbitration was going to be done outside in Britain and not in Uganda, and yet oil is here in Uganda. So, the people who were representing us in the negotiations had thought arbitration was going to be done in Uganda, which is less expensive, and we would use our lawyers. But I think it is only right to use those foreign lawyers to represent us because they understand their systems. I, therefore, believe that we cannot retrieve this money. 

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs should go and look into the issues that are questionable there and later on we shall proceed; after all Government wants this money, which has been withheld and Tullow Oil also do not want to pay and we must fight to ensure that we get this money. We just don’t have to be talking of other issues when we know there are problems that we have to face. So, we really need this money to handle this arbitration. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.40 p.m.
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Supplementary expenditure is always requested for unforeseen, emergency expenditure like what we heard this morning that there was an outbreak of Hepatitis B. But what we read in this document is that this money was being requested for the routine training of the presidential jet crew. The President has had this plane for some time now and there is a crew and it is routine training. Why is this being brought to Parliament to request for supplementary expenditure? Even the equipment in the State House, surely, I believe that State House has got professionals. 

Even the ministry of finance has got economists and the budget is still going on and before the budget is completed, they have come to request for supplementary expenditure? This is not fair at all to this country and this is not fair at all to this Parliament that everybody turns up to come and request for a supplementary. 

I want to congratulate the Chief Whip on the other side because everybody is in the House today to pass this supplementary request. However, it is not proper! 

Mr Speaker, I want to congratulate the Uganda Revenue Authority that they collected a lot of money but we have been crying in this House and the Opposition tried to identify money to pay the teachers, who have been on strike crying for an increment in their salaries –(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have come here to do our noble duty of attending Parliament. The Order Paper for today has a number of items and yet the Member stands up to say that simply because of these supplementary requests, we are here and yet not all of us are here for that and it is well-known? Is the Member in order to insinuate such; and may he also explain why they are not many on the other side, to insinuate that we are here simply because of the Supplementary Bill? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, certainly there must be something very attractive today because I am personally impressed by the attendance. (Laughter) Proceed.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. What I was saying is that if we could have spent this money, which was collected by Uganda Revenue Authority on paying the teachers’ salary increment just by about 50 percent - we needed only Shs 340 billion to pay the teachers. We have a crisis in the country. The cost of living is very high and people are finding it very difficult and now you want us to approve a supplementary budget for State House in billions of shillings when our people are suffering?

The Ministry of Justice -(Interjections)- I will not take the information since I have got very little time. The Ministry of Justice has learned lawyers. Why did the Attorney-General not advise Government not to sign this agreement? And in case of any disputes, why must the disputes be heard in Britain? Why? We have our professionals. The whole ministry is full of learned people; lawyers. Why should we hire lawyers at that huge expenditure to the taxpayer? (Member timed out_)

1.45 p.m.
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. My problem is one. The committee has indicated in their report that according to the law, the supplementary budget was well above the three percent that is allowed. I know that Article 156 allows the ministers and all the people responsible to spend and report to Parliament within four months. While we observe that this money was spent erroneously, we are at the same time approving the same money.

My question is: where are our values? Where are our principles? We are saying one thing is wrong but at the same time we are going ahead to endorse it. So, where do we stand as a Parliament? 

In my experience of management, I think as a supervisory body we owe it to Uganda to put measures in place to put controls over these expenditures because to me it looks like even as the committee laments, we make recommendations year in, year out, we come here and speak and the day closes and tomorrow we are seeing the same thing. Today even as we talk there is no guarantee that after approving this budget a supplementary is not going to come back to this House. I would like to get an indication of what values this Parliament holds in terms of what we profess and what we actually act on. Why do we say something is wrong but we go ahead to approve it?

Article 157 provides for the Contingency Fund. I do not know whether this has been activated or not. If it has not been, could we at the opportune time, in the interest of putting controls in place as far as expenditure of taxpayer’s money is concerned, activate this and put ceilings and make sure State House, President’s Office, Ministry of Education or whatever does not exceed its ceiling? Why does it seem like Parliament is toothless? After speaking here what is the end result? I am a result oriented person. What are we going to achieve? I thank you.

1.48 p.m.
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to thank the committee for their report and to support their request for the Supplementary Bill to be supported. However, I would like to focus on a specific issue, which is highlighted by the committee in the second paragraph of page 5 and that is budget indiscipline by State House: their failure to live within the means as provided by the expenditure ceiling. 

It appears year in, year out there are certain departments of Government which continue to operate on supplementary budgets and I think this is very dangerous for this country. You look at the first paragraph. It gives us an insight into some of the causes of this and they are saying for State House there is under-budgeting for predictable activities. So, there are certain activities, which are predictable and we do not provide adequate funds. They point out, for example the presidential jet. We are aware that the jet crew will need routine training every year for and yet the money is not provided. That notwithstanding, even with the money provided, State House is not able to exercise budgetary discipline to live within the budget ceiling.

I would like to recommend the following, Mr Speaker. No.1, that as we discuss and pass this budget let us ensure that this year we provide the level of funds to State House that will enable them to meet their statutory obligations and that we make a fundamental statement that this is the Ninth Parliament and there is no supplementary budget for State House this year. (Applause) 

We should look at the committee recommendation and strengthen it in the third paragraph. The sessional committee does not merely take keen interest in the performance of State House. I would like to recommend that the Committee on Presidential Affairs be requested to submit a quarterly report on their oversight function with respect to the performance of State House in respect of their budget ceiling. 

Let us, Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of this country, ensure that everybody knows that resources are never enough and that if we provide a budget we have a responsibility to provide adequate resources for statutory expenditure. So, we cannot provide a presidential jet and we do not provide money for routine training of the jet crew. And we cannot provide adequate funds for some of the activities they are calling classified operations whatever these are; if they are important they must be provided for. But that having been done, all departments of Government have a responsibility to exercise full budget discipline. (Member timed out_)

1.52 p.m.
MRS VICTORIA BUSINGYE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report, a report which is critical and which points out weaknesses and strengths. I would wish to convince this House that we should not confuse approval of the budget with the investigations. These are two distinct activities and we should tackle the approval of this budget and await what will come out of the investigations. 

I would like to comment that whenever new equipment is acquired, definitely they come with modern equipment, which requires new skills and I do not believe we can acquire jets and then fail to train. Then we would be rendering the jets useless and, of course, they are not useless.

We have noted where we all need improvement, including State House, and I do not think this is going unnoticed.

I wish, therefore, to recommend that we approve the budget because it is what has brought us here. I wish to convince my friends that our numbers this side are a request of Parliament, and I do not want to believe that theirs are few because they wanted to sabotage the budget. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.54 p.m.
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I only have one small issue on page 6. I see that the committee has recommended that the funds for the case of Tullow v. the Government of Uganda should be appropriated through the normal budget process. However, the question I have in my mind is, I assume that by the time a request was made for a supplementary budget, the monies required for this case were not put in the original budget. So I am wondering about this statement. How will they appropriate the money for this case, from the normal budget process, when originally it was not budgeted for? I assume that it was not budgeted for and that is why it was put in the supplementary. 

Therefore, if Parliament does not approve the whole amount of money, which is about Shs 11.7 billion, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs may not have money available to the ministry to pursue this case successfully and complete it. Therefore, it would seem to me that it will need for us to approve the entire amount of money, including the Shs 11.7 billion, and when the legal committee completes its work, the decision will be made about how much of that will need to be used for the case. However, we shall need to approve all of it because if we do not and then later on the decision is made to pursue the case, where will the money for the case come from? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have come to the close of debate from the Floor. I am going to give a chance to the Opposition to make a statement in five minutes, then I will give the Government eight minutes. We shall then close and the chairman will move for adoption.

1.56 p.m.
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will start with the law. Under Article 154, as quoted by the committee, it allows the Government to spend and come and present the supplementary in Parliament but under our Budget Act, Section 12, it says the Government can only spend up to three percent prior to parliamentary approval. That means that for any other expenditure to be incurred for supplementary, you must come here first before you can spend. I wanted to put that clearly. So, this money they are trying to spend is already above the three percent. That means that you should have come here first. That is the law and if the chairman never saw the law, I will give him a copy.

Parliament is supposed to appropriate money. I would have been very happy if the committee had shown Schedule No. 1 and what each got, Schedules No. 2 and No. 3. You are talking of Shs 14 billion in State House but I want to show you that it is more than Shs 14 billion in supplementary.

We approved a budget of Shs 64 billion for State House. Under Supplementary No. 1, they came for Shs 80 billion under recurrent and Shs 16 billion under development. That is Shs 96 billion. Now you have come again for Shs 14 billion. That is Shs 110 billion against Shs 64 billion approved. Is that planning or budgeting?

If you are talking of Article 154 and saying that it is the reason why we spent money, then I do not see why you should sit here and budget. We better pack our bags and go home, otherwise we are wasting time.

It hurts! I want to agree with hon. William that we gave Shs 50 billion then under Supplementary No. 1, President’s Office came for Shs 14 billion and under Supplementary No. 2 it came for Shs 3.0 billion and that came to Shs 67 billion.

If you look at all these supplementaries, they talk about allowances then they come to classified. What is this animal called “classified”? If you read an email from Gen. Elly Tumwine, he is saying we have left the issue of the Ten Points Programme we came with from the bush. You are aware we all came from the bush in 1986, and we said zero tolerance to corruption and agreed that public resources must be treated with public trust. If you look at State House, which is the head and how it is setting the example, then I agree that the fish starts rotting from the head.

They are talking about adding expenses twice. If you look at this, this makes us very worried. I believe we should have a debate outside this House and I would call on the Government side that we need to have time and discuss the issues of Uganda. This is because we are coming here and saying we need to pass it because Government needs the money, or it has spent or we should warn it. We have warned it many times and they have not done anything.

I do not want people to abuse parliamentary processes for purposes of doing wrong things. You need to wake up. They are talking about mothers dying when giving birth; roads being bad; people looking for school fees because they cannot afford and salaries for teachers. If one ministry, that is, State House, can get a supplementary of Shs 150 billion without approval for a man and a wife, why can’t we look for approval of supplementary for teachers of Shs 341 billion?
 
MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to stand here and mislead the House and raise the sentiments of the people of Uganda against the President by stating that State House is just one man and his wife? Is it in order, knowing that State House is an entire Government department that actually spans the activities of the President and the entire country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, State House is a Vote. There are details of what goes in there: there is a budget on salaries for more than two people, there is a budget for transportation for more than two people. The honourable member is, therefore, not in order to make that statement because it is not just for two people. (Applause) And, it might be proper for you to re-phrase your statement and withdraw the other one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are right; State House consists of transport and whatever. I thank you for that. Even in my home, I have my wife but there are people who help me to run my home and I pay them. (Laughter) So, there are more men and women at my home who have come to serve me and my wife and they are my servants –(Interruption) 

MRS BUSINGYE-RUSOKE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for a Member to continue arguing after your rightful ruling? Can he, please, withdraw that statement with apology?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I was clear in my ruling that State House is more than a man and his wife or just two people. Your statement is misleading and you should either re-phrase or withdraw the statement you earlier made.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am withdrawing the statement, “a man and a woman”. Now I want to say, in State House there is a man and a woman served by servants who are both men and women. (Laughter) If we are talking of budgeting –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. I want to just remind Members to read the policy statement, where the mission statement of State House is clearly defined. It says: “To cater for the President and the first family.” It is very clear and so I do not see why we should – other things are incidental. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in fact, the former under-secretary –(Interruption) 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I want to confirm that it is not only two people in the State House and let me read in full the mission statement of State House: “To provide, at all times, support to the presidency in order to facilitate effective and efficient performance of its constitutional and administrative responsibility; and to cater for the welfare and security of His Excellency the President, the Vice-President and their immediate families.” (Laughter) So, do not pick only the President because there is the President, the Vice-President, their families and their constitutional mandate. Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Could the hon. Minister read the mission and the mandate of the Office of the President so that we distinguish between two institutions of Government?

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: The mission statement for the Office of the President reads: “To provide leadership in public policy management and good governance for national development.” So, which other one do you need? (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Members, I want to call on you who are near the President to give him honest advice because this country belongs to us all. And if I hear hon. Kamateeka, who was the under-secretary in charge of budgeting – she has been the one bringing problems in State House. Now you have come here and instead of helping us, you make mistakes –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker is the hon. Member in order to attack individuals in this House, knowing that I worked in State House ten years ago? How then could I be the cause of problem or whatever is happening? In addition, is the Member in order to incite people against the presidency, knowing that it is the Fountain of Honour for this nation? Whatever we are discussing should be put in perspective while preserving the honour of the presidency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, our rules are very clear on statements that can be interpreted or understood to mean personal attacks. The statement you made was a personal attack on the personality of the honourable member.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Schedule 3 is very clear and it is talking about staff training. I do not know when staff training became unpredictable. Electricity, welfare – I hope Members you have the schedule. What we are talking about are issues on the schedule. Surely, when did staff training, welfare and entertainment, electricity, water, supply of goods and services become unpredictable? It becomes very bad for us to condone a wrong act; we should come out strongly against this act. 

I know the Prime Minister will go and tell the President, “Don’t bring these issues of supplementary.” As we talk now, I am sure State House is looking for supplementary; by now it must have spent all this money. I want to plead with you – I know the President invites us to his home in Rwakitura and other places. Be careful because the money you are enjoying is money that was meant for drugs. Be very careful! This country is for us all. (Laughter)

I agree with the Minister for the Presidency when she said, “...and the immediate family”. That is why the President was right to take his daughter to be delivered in Germany because in Uganda the hospitals are bad. I like you for that statement. Please, keep it up! (Laughter)

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is full of lawyers. They say the process will take three years. How do you come for a supplementary when it is going to take three years? Mr Chairman, why don’t you help us? Why didn’t you get the portion for the supplementary and the other one you said is allowed? 

Having said that, who is this one who made a case for us that we should go to London and yet the oil is in Uganda, the Ministry of Energy is in Uganda, Bank of Uganda is in Uganda and yet we had to go to London? I think we need to find out who did this agreement for us and if we do not do that, then we are really in hell. We have many bright lawyers like the Attorney-General himself. Are you telling us that you are very stupid and that those ones out there are more intelligent than you; and that is why you are taking the case to London? (Applause) I thought you were bright - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon. Member, parliamentary language is important so words like “stupid” are not permitted by our rules. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I was saying –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kindly withdraw that word “stupid” from our Hansard.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, let me explain. I was saying that are our lawyers not intelligent –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the word “stupid” is not permissible. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if they have taken offence in that, I have withdrawn. I am now saying that why would our Attorney-General, who is very intelligent, take a case to London to get other stupid lawyers when you could have handled it? (Laughter) 

Having said that, there is a report here by KPMG – I want to conclude. The report is on Dura Cement Limited v. the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General knows it and even the Prime Minister. These people were licensed to mine lime in a place by the National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) the one under defence. They were given the authority to go and mine and when they went, they carried out research and they came up that they needed to be compensated. The compensation has so far reached over Shs 40 billion but KPMG said the investment alone was paying for the license. How do you compensate Shs 40 billion? The KPMG report is here and it is very good for your reference. Now what am I bringing? I am saying that the Office of the Attorney-General is the one making Ugandans lose money and –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MS KOMUHANGI: I thank you for giving way. The procedural issue I want to raise is that the hon. Member is discussing a matter that is not in the report before Parliament. Is he procedurally right to divert us from the real matter we are discussing? The report is very clear. Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, kindly restrict yourself to the issues and please, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. It is unfortunate that people do not want examples. I was giving an example to show you what problems we were getting from the Office of the Attorney-General. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, hon. Member.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to say that if we get money for supplementary for the State House, President’s Office to the tune of Shs 190 billion, it means we are able to get money for teachers – Shs 340 billions! It will be very unfair for you to pass this supplementary and not give a supplementary to the teachers. (Applause) I would plead with all of you that you regard these teachers as ours. 

In Kenya, teachers have been worked on, in Tanzania they have settled them and we believe it is time for Uganda to settle teachers. (Applause) I know that the Prime Minister is very intelligent and likes intelligent children – these teachers are our backbone and without paying teachers, we shall have our education going down. The Chinese say that if you want the country to develop, invest in education. I believe that all of us together can move this country forward and together, we should able to get 50 percent for the teachers. God be with you! (Applause)

2.19 p.m.
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, I have three responses. The first one is that I am not surprised by the utterances of the Leader of the Opposition. He recently graduated in law and, therefore, some of the things I am going to say are by way of teaching him -(Interruption)

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament have parliamentary language. You have just ruled against personal attacks. As Members of Parliament, we lead by example and encourage adding value to our selves. Is it in order for the Attorney-General, who is a learned friend in this country, to demean the Leader of the Opposition and maybe even other Members of Parliament who are trying to add value to their education level that they have just graduated and, therefore, they should not express themselves? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought that if somebody said “recently graduated,” the word that should come next is “Congratulations”. I think it is a compliment. (Applause) Please, proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have no problem with derailing the debate. I went to Busoga College Mwiri, which I left in March 1985. I went to Makerere and finished in 1988. Does it mean graduating in 1988, I graduated yesterday? What does graduation got to do with what I am saying? Well, I know I have qualified in many ways and even the last qualification I got many years ago. Is it procedurally right for somebody to use graduation as a point of discussion in the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, when did you graduate in law because that was the reference? (Laughter) Please, proceed.

MR PETER NYOMBI: I raised that issue for the purpose of congratulating him for having graduated recently with a Bachelor of Law. I do not know whether he got a pass or honours’ degree because it is beside the point. Secondly, I advise him to learn before making certain statements.  

One of the things that has been raised on this Floor is: why did we retain external lawyers? Before Heritage and Tullow started exploring for oil, they signed an agreement with the Government of Uganda, and remember that we are dealing with a multi-national, and one of the clauses in the agreement was that arbitration would be conducted in London before -(Interjections)- I know patience is very rare these days. The two parties agreed on a neutral arbitrator and the arbitration proceedings would be in London. 

Before a foreigner comes in to practice law here in Uganda, as you know, the foreigner must go through a certain procedure. Similarly, if you are going to practice law in London, you must go through a certain procedure. You cannot just come from Uganda and say you are going to practice in London. That is why we retained a firm in London to represent us in the arbitration proceedings and [MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: “Information”] No, I am very well informed. I am a lawyer and I have been practising law for very many years.

An issue was raised about the charges. Some of the lawyers we contacted could have charged as much more than US $5,000 per hour but we negotiated - (Interruption)

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Mr Speaker, our practice in this House is that if a member of the Executive is making a submission, Members of this House can seek clarification on the issues that they are not aware of. Is the hon. Attorney-General procedurally right to reject procedural requirements as I raised and he just ignores me while leaving me in the dark? Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In seeking clarification, you mean?

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Yes, I was seeking clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By these rules, points of clarification are treated the same way as points of information. It is the prerogative of the Member holding the Floor to accept or not. We cannot force information on people and neither can we impose ourselves on people except as prescribed by our Rules of Procedure. Please, proceed.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, we had to retain a foreign firm because arbitration proceedings had to take place in London, as agreed on in the agreements that were signed between the oil companies and the Government of Uganda.

The second issue that was raised - very good question: what are the legal implications if we do not approve this budget? The legal implications are that we will not have funds to defend the US $404 million, which we are trying to get. If you do not approve this money, you put in jeopardy - we are going to follow the usual procedure. When we went to London recently, we were told by our lawyers that the chief arbitrator, who we have agreed upon, would call us for a meeting any time. If we are going to this lengthy procedure of applying for funds, we may not be able to attend these proceedings. Otherwise, if you do not approve this money, we stand the risk of losing US $404 million. I want to plead with this House because from the arguments that have been raised, it is apparent that Members do not have all the information but I hope that when the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee - (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the learned Attorney-General for giving way. From what you have said, I am equally aware that actually there is a case pending in the Tax Appeals Tribunal here. Assuming the tribunal upholds the prayers of the Uganda Revenue Authority that actually the assessed tax is payable by the oil company, would that mean that we still have to lose that money you are talking about if we lose the arbitration case?

MS BEATRICE ATIM: Mr Speaker, listening to this submission, we are increasingly getting worried. In the last month or so, there is already a precedent that, “If you do not do this, this will happen”. As a House, we were told recently that if we do not approve some money, darkness will come. Recently, we were told if we do not give land, sugar will be in shortage. We are now being told if we do not approve this money, we shall be in another problem. My submission is that wouldn’t it, therefore -(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I have been following these proceedings very well for the last couple of hours and hon. Beatrice Anywar has been stood up about ten times. I am beginning to wonder whether she is following these proceedings or she has to ask for clarifications all the time. Is it in order for hon. Anywar to keep disrupting us when we are busy following the proceedings? If she is not following these proceedings at all, she could be educated somewhere else because this is about the tenth time - is it in order for hon. Anywar to disturb those who are following these proceedings every five minutes?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Attorney-General, proceed.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, as I said, I hope when the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee presents the report, we will be able to inform the House so that they have full knowledge of what is happening. 

Lastly, hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau said how desirable it would have been to recruit an Attorney-General from outside. I am sorry last week, hon. Ibi Florence found it difficult to understand the argument I raised. She was saying that I talked about the preamble as part of the Constitution. I want to educate her that a Constitution is an agreement of people on how to run the fairs in their country and when you are drafting an agreement, you begin with names of the party; you add the preamble and then the clauses. You cannot say -(Interruption)

MRS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If you notice, I really kept quiet and made him build his point and waited patiently to really know whether I had caught it wrong. Those who were in the House last week will remember the debate that ensued here when the learned Attorney-General was convincing this House that the country had a foreign policy in the name, and he quoted the preamble of the Constitution and yet the committee had come up to say that this country does not have a foreign policy. It was out of that that I said today that these are some of the competencies that we see re-occurring and the country is losing a lot of money under the ministry of the Attorney-General, which is supposed to guide this country on matters of huge funds. Is the learned Attorney-General in order, therefore, to say that what I met then was in contradiction with what he said, yet he misguided the House by saying the preamble of the Constitution was anything but a foreign policy for this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, you have been reminded about what you said. Proceed, please.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, that reminds me of a verse in the Bible which says that if one doesn’t have knowledge, it is better that one keeps quite. Because the moment he or she says something then we are able to see the ignorance – I will give her the verse. I was saying that a Constitution is an agreement of the people –(Interruption)

MRS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General has just heard the ruling of the Speaker as far as parliamentary language is concerned. Is he, therefore, in order to insinuate that hon. Ibi is ignorant?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear the word ignorant. 

MR PETER NYOMBI: Mr Speaker, you have ruled wisely because I never used that word in reference to Florence; I was merely quoting the Bible. 

I want to conclude this point that a Constitution is an agreement of the population of Uganda as to how they want to manage the affairs of this country. The Constitution begins with parties; it goes with preambles, and different clauses. You cannot say that the preamble, which lays out the national principles, is not part of the Constitution. 

The point I was making last week is that they were saying that there is nothing at all and I was saying that in the Constitution, there is a framework, which needs to be augmented but unfortunately, maybe hon. Florence Ekwau was very low in understanding what I was saying last week.

2.37 p.m.
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We thank the Budget Committee for their report and we thank this House for the comments made. They are hereby noted by the Government. We accept the Budget Committee’s report with the following amendments:

To remove Shs 1.3 billion from State House under supplementary Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2010/2011:

1.	This was an error in the final computation of the table. This amount should be under the defence budget. 
2.	To appropriate the expenditure incurred under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Shs 200 million for the Financial Year 2010/2011. The balance of Shs 11.7 billion will be dealt with as this august House has decided. We plead with this House to safeguard Uganda’s interest in this every important case, which involved more than Shs 1,000 billion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.40 p.m.
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to conclude the remarks made from this side by making three points, which have already been covered but which I think need clarity. One Member suggested that the Ninth Parliament should make a clear statement that there should be no supplementary budgets. However, our Constitution is clear; in Article 156(2) it reads: “If in respect of any financial year it is found -
a)	That the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or
b)	That any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which amount has been appropriated by that Act;

A supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of the excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.”

So, it appears to me that the Constitution, which commands the conduct of Government and public affairs, is clear. If for any purpose for which no amount was appropriated or if it was appropriated it was inadequate - Government felt that that amount had to be spent; the Constitution allows that. 

And it says that within four months, the Executive must come to Parliament and lay before Parliament those supplementaries and that is what is being done now. This is the Constitution and it is the supreme law; all other laws must be read in the context of this provision.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I wish to apologise. I had to attend to an emergency; that is why I was not here in time. I also would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Yes, the Prime Minister is absolutely right when he quotes Article 156 of our Constitution. But I also want to bring to your notice that our intention is to save the Office of the President and the presidency in general. This is because if you don’t do things neatly, we are putting the President, who is the defacto minister of finance, to future litigation. That is what we are trying to avoid.

Article 156(3) is categorical: “Where, in respect of any financial year, a supplementary estimate ... have been approved by Parliament in accordance with clause (2) of this Article, a supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament” in the next financial year. 

If you look at Schedule III, you realise that we have an item in respect of which a supplementary was introduced in this financial year. The money was spent this very financial year really – yes, and I have documentary proof to that. That item regards the Shs 11 billion to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

Also, I would like you to clarify on a statement, a copy of which I want to lay on the Table, from the Bank of Uganda showing that the money was moved from some account in that bank on 17 August 2011. I beg to lay this on the Table, Mr Speaker. From that document, you realise that although the request by the ministry of finance started way back in June, the money was released from the accounts of the Consolidated Fund on that date. So, was that action in conformity with the Constitution?

Secondly, we also would like you to –(Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE: Mr Speaker, hon. Geofrey Ekanya is a Member of the Budget Committee. Under rule 178 of our Rules of Procedure, is it in order for the honourable member to debate the report produced by his committee? Also, may I know whether the Member is presenting a minority report or not? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member that is why I was resisting your point of order. I am observing the proceedings in this House and so I know when there should be a point of order and when it should not arise. I know that! So first, I start by ruling you out of order -(Laughter)- but secondly, let me, for your benefit, state that the honourable member you are trying to put to order rose on a point of information allowed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. It was as simple as that. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Let me just conclude. As I was saying, I also would like to ask you to make clarification to this House whether at any one time Government has ever come to the Floor of Parliament to state that the Budget Act is inconsistent with the Constitution. Can we get that clarification?

Finally, the procedure that we adopted when we were approving Supplementary Schedule No. 2 was that in case Government spends beyond three percent, they should come to seek authority retrospectively. But the minister of finance has not brought a motion to seek retrospective authority as regards Schedule No. 3. Therefore, do you think that this schedule is legally being debated by this House?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: First of all, let me respond to those points. If any Member has any doubts about the legality of a matter before Parliament, that Member has every right to challenge it and there will be a ruling accordingly. So, in case you have any doubts, exercise your freedom. Now that it is not being challenged, therefore, it is legal.

Secondly – I think I made this point last week that the reason I give way is because I hope to benefit from information given by colleagues. I expect everyone to have some useful information. So, when I take on the Floor, you kindly have to allow me to respond. 

So, like I was saying, my second point was; is the Budget Act unconstitutional and if so, why hasn’t Government said so before? Mr Speaker, I was reading the Constitution, which is clear. So, I don’t want to make my own assessment of the constitutionality of those provisions. I am only saying that as long we are compliant with the Constitution, there is nothing else we will be in breach of. Anything that is consistent with the Constitution is lawful.

The third point is the one you began with. When was this expenditure incurred? Let me make that point. First of all, the debate is about the Shs 11.9 billion, but this is not a relevant point because the committee is saying that we should not look at Shs 11 billion for the reasons they gave - they are talking of Shs 200 million, isn’t it? So, the permission or authority of Parliament they are seeking in not in respect of the Shs 11 billion but of the Shs 200 million. And they are saying that the balance of the Shs 11.9 billion should be handled differently and not as a supplementary now. I thought it was important to bring this fact to the attention of all colleagues especially those who have been talking about the Shs 11.9 billion because it is not a relevant point, it not being in the report.

The Shs 11 billion, which you made reference to, was actually a subject of communication between the minister of finance and the Auditor-General; and you are absolutely right that the minister of finance wrote a letter dated 13 June 2011. It is true it was after the budget had been read but it was still in the old financial year. And as you know, expenditure occurs when authority to spend is given. I hope that my brother and friend, hon. Ekanya -(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. He is my big brother. Mr Speaker, I want you to help me with the law because I need to understand it. As hon. Nyombi, the Attorney-General, said that I am not conversant indeed, I am not conversant. Section 12 of the Budget Act says that the total supplementary expenditure, that requires additional resources over and above what was appropriated by Parliament, shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament. We are talking about the supplementary because we are already above three percent. What this means is that you should have got prior approval of Parliament. I want you to help us, is this clause useless? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will try to be careful not to pronounce myself directly on that but for the benefit of colleagues, my response to that is what I said earlier on. The Constitution in Article 2 - and the marginal note is the supremacy of the Constitution - with your permission, Mr Speaker I would like to read it. Clause (1) reads as follows: “This Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda and shall have binding force on all authorities and persons throughout Uganda.” 

Clause (2) - and I want hon. Ekanya to listen to this - “If any other law or any …” for emphasis I will repeat, “If any other law or any custom is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Constitution shall prevail and that other law or custom shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.” 

The simple point I have made is that Article 156 of the Constitution of Uganda, clauses (2) and (3) which you read, are categorically clear. And if anyone has a different interpretation, you know how to seek interpretation of provisions of the Constitution. Therefore, within the ambit of the provisions of this Constitution, the minister and the Executive are perfectly within the law. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker could the Attorney-General guide us on this because his presentation hinges on the unconstitutionality of the budget law? He is saying we should use this Constitution but in the Budget Act it is clearly stated that we should not exceed three percent. So, could the learned Attorney-General throw more light on this so that the House can move without any contradiction? I am seeking the guidance of the Attorney-General.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I just wanted to inform my colleague that I am no longer Attorney-General but I gave way because you asked for my clarification. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is still holding the Floor. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: If you seek clarification from me, I will give it to you. That is the only basis on which I can give way.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, yes, there will be a misconception if we do not recognise the fact that there is a problem as far as some of these provisions of the law are concerned. I stand to strengthen the point being pushed by the Prime Minister. We have got quite a number of laws as far as matters of our budgeting processes are concerned: we have got the Constitution, the Budget Act, the Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003. The Budget Act is of 2001. We have got Rules of Procedure. When you read the Constitution together with these other enabling laws, you come to a conclusion that the Prime Minister is making. 

The Public Finance and Accountability Act of 2003 is a later Act than the Budget Act. In statute interpretation, a later Act supersedes an earlier law. When you look at the Public Finance and Accountability Act, which in essence really operationalises Article 156(2), then you seem to get the point the Prime Minister is emphasising. Because this particular Act in Section 16 says, “Where, in respect of any financial year it is found that the amount appropriated by an Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimate showing the amount required shall be laid before Parliament and the expenditure votes shall be included in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill to be introduced in Parliament to provide for their appropriation.”

Section 17 says, “Where at the close of accounts for any financial year it is found that monies have been expended - 
(a) On any expenditure vote in excess of the amount appropriated for it by an Appropriation Act; 
(b) For a purpose for which no moneys have been voted and appropriated; or 
(c) In excess of the sum assigned to an estimate forming part of an expenditure vote in the estimates of the expenditure approved by Parliament for the financial year and to which no further sum has been applied under this Act or any regulations issued under it –

The amount of the excess expended or not appropriated, as the case may be, shall be included in a statement of expenditure in excess which shall be laid before Parliament and referred to the committee of Parliament.” 

In this one, no mention is made of more than three percent. At this moment, what we should be talking about as Members of Parliament is to harmonise our laws as far as this process is concerned. There is no way we can deny the operation of the Constitution as the supreme law of our land. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me guide on this issue so that we can move forward. Section 11 in the revised edition, but under the Acts that you have it should be Section 12. That section is talking about Article 156(2). Under 156(2), it is not considering the total expenditure in the year. Article 156(2) is talking about the particular request that is made in a financial year while Article 156(3) is talking about the end of the year and the final Appropriation Bill which will be dealt with then. 

If you look carefully, you find that at the time when the first supplementary was requested for, it was done under Schedule I and it was brought to the attention of Parliament. At the time when the second supplementary came, the request was brought to Parliament and approved. The third one is under II because we have not looked at the Appropriation Bill for the Financial Year 2010/2011. The Appropriation Bill will come and I think that will be the right time when the issue of three percent possibly can be raised. 

Supplementary Schedule No. 1 was presented to the House and approved; Supplementary Schedule No. 2 was presented to the House and approved. What we are dealing with now is Supplementary Schedule No. 3 and what is the total of that money requested for? It is Shs 11 billion. Is that more than three percent?

My assessment is that, when you are talking about the final total, which is also mentioned by the Budget Act, you are now talking about what has gone into the Supplementary Appropriation Bill in total now. What that means, therefore, is that the previous expenditures that were appropriately authorised by this House, that is schedules 1 and 2, fell within what was required by the law. Now we are dealing with Schedule No. 3.

This gives us the opportunity to examine the full total, which is now contained in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. Should that not be the position? That is now what, in my understanding, is the position and it should not exceed three percent. We will be addressing this issue once we come to deal with issue of the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. Is that correct? 

Then on time, when were these expenditures incurred because the four months have been respected? Schedule 1 was within the four months, the same with Schedule 2, therefore, this schedule could still be within the four months from the last expenditure. The timing problem would not be an issue; the big issue is that of three percent. That three percent cannot be examined now. You can examine it when you are looking at the total appropriation for the Financial Year 2010/2011. It cannot be piecemeal. 

When we come to the supplementary appropriation, where the sum total of the expenditure for 2010/2011 is going to be looked at, that is when we plug in the three percent and then begin the argument. This will take us back to what the Prime Minister and the learned Attorney-General presented. For purposes of this Schedule No. 3, we should not hold it too long because the actual decision will be when we are dealing with the final, Supplementary Appropriation Bill. 

MR KATUNTU: I have been silent throughout, following this discussion. The argument of the learned Leader of Government business and the learned Deputy Attorney-General is that the provisions of Section 12 of the Budget Act, in as far as it relates to the three percent and prior approval of Parliament, are inconsistent with Article 156 of the Constitution. The learned Deputy Attorney-General put it in nice words that, “We need to harmonise.” He just fell short of saying that in his view, the provisions of the Budget Act are inconsistent with the Constitution and the Prime Minister is also labouring to say the same but without saying so.

Mr Speaker, you seem to be saying that this provision, as far as it relates to the three percent and prior approval, relates to the Appropriation Bill and we shall be handling it later so there are two different positions on table. Your argument is that it is okay but it relates to the bigger appropriation and then the argument they are raising is that actually this provision is not in harmony with the Constitution. We need know if it is in the opinion of Government that the Budget Act is inconsistent with the Constitution. Tell us such that we know that we will not rely on it any more. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just to restate what I stated, I said that the issue of the three percent and the constitutionality or lack of it would come when you are dealing with the total expenditure. But at this stage, it will not apply when you are dealing with Schedule No. 3. That is what I was trying to guide you about so that we can go and examine this thing and talk about constitutionality or lack of constitutionality when dealing with the final Appropriation Bill. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are not saying that the Government should not get a supplementary; it is free to get a supplementary. The one they can spend, according to us, without coming here and just report within four months is the one that does not exceed three percent of the total budget. But should they need more money that is above three percent, prior approval is needed of Parliament before they spend. We want the Attorney-General to tell us that this law is hopeless so that we go home and sleep and say, “There is no need for us to be talking about a budget anymore”. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I think we should go by your guidance and obviously when we are handling the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, we can tackle it then. The Shs 200 million has already been spent.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister. If we do pass this now, then it will have been overtaken by events. We will have passed it, and it is not about being difficult but what can we get? Where is the problem? We have the Leader of Government Business here and we have both attorneys-general. Just tell us the position of the law as it is. When I was looking at the Constitution, and the Constitution is very clear, the Attorney-General is the principal legal advisor to Government, including this Parliament. Give us the position of the law as you understand it. Where is this uncertainty? Why don’t you want to commit yourself because if we pass it here, then it will be relevant at the final Supplementary Appropriation Bill? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if you look at Item No. 5 of the Order Paper, there is “Bills Second Reading” and that is the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011 which has already been submitted to this House and it has gone to the committee and hopefully, the committee will report on it and we will have a discussion. It is going to go through the normal stages that Bills go through. I thought that would have been the moment -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in financial management, it is true that the public finance –(Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_) Prime Minister, do not worry, I am going to give you the opportunity. You are my brother, hold on! What we are asking is for you to help us. We agree that we have read the Constitution and Article 154 says that no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except with the approval of Parliament or with the Act as it is done. Now we have got this expenditure where money was withdrawn without parliamentary approval because as Parliament, we have only approved three percent. This is above and we want to sort it out. Is the law wrong, because before that, they should have come and told us that, “We want to incur this expenditure of Shs 24 billion; allow us”, and we would have said, go on or not. But now they have spent it. Is it legal? Hon. Attorney-General, do we throw these laws out? That is what we need. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, this is the first time in my long life in Parliament that I have seen the ruling of the Speaker being challenged –(Interjections)- let me finish my sentence. But to be fair, I always allow you to speak even when I have the Floor. Is it fair that you deny me? The rules are clear on how a Speaker can be challenged and I would like to invite my colleagues to apply those rules if they have any challenges. For me, being a disciplined Member who abides by the rules of this House, I will just take your guidance and I will be ready to conclude the arguments I had presented here when we come to considering the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2011. 

My other point relating to this case is that – and by the way let me also make this point - when money has already been spent, even if the expenditure was unlawful, the reasonable action to take is not to strangulate Uganda but to strangulate those who were responsible for the illegality and the procedure of doing it is known. 

But for the importance of this case, Mr Speaker, it is not true that because the transaction was here, arbitration must be in Uganda. Under international law, if the business is international, even only in this sense that the parties are from different countries, then it is proper and appropriate that you submit to international arbitration and this is precisely what happened. We have an agreement and in this agreement, the parties agreed to submit to international arbitration in the case of dispute and this is what happened. 

The critical question is: what is at stake? What is at stake is US $400 plus million. We have already been taken to international arbitration by Heritage. The case here is different, it is by Tullow Oil. The two should not be mixed up because they are different. Heritage has taken Uganda to international arbitration over the payment of US $400 million. Supposing the management of this contract was not the best, is it proper for this Parliament to take a decision that may jeopardise receipt of this US $400 million by Uganda? Obviously not and I know that all Members of Parliament, being responsible and reasonable leaders, none of you will support such a proposition. I definitely would be surprised if anyone stood out -(Mr Ekanya rose_)- wait! 

Finally, I am increasingly worried by our conduct in this House because surely the conduct of Members of this House must be calculated to give honour and respect to the institution of Parliament. And, therefore, when we are speaking, however strongly we may feel about a point, we can achieve the same result by speaking with utmost decency. (Applause) Our rules - if I may just give an idea about our rules, rule 59 is about content of speeches. Mr Speaker, you had alluded to it. In sub-rule (1) it says, “It is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions.” Please, you can be as effective as any if you are decent and you make your point without breaching this rule.

The other day I was communicating with someone on Twitter who calls me names, and I told him that, “Politeness is appreciated even among those who are most despised”. The President is the President of Uganda even if you disagree with him. In this House, the hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi is the Leader of the Opposition and my relationship with him is defined by his status. You are Members of parliament. I do not have to like you, we do not have to be buddies, for me to recognise you and treat you respectively as a Member of Parliament -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, may I draw your attention to rule 59(3) because the Rt Hon. Prime Minister seems to have diverted from what we were discussing, and started lecturing us on how we should behave in this Parliament? (Laughter) May I, therefore, draw your attention to this sub-rule, please? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this particular debate has been the most exciting. In the history of my rather limited experience of parliamentary procedure, this has been the debate that has received the highest number of points of order. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you were winding up and possibly you could have restricted yourself to winding up on the subject? (Laughter) Please, wind up on the subject.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The points made, for instance, about the laws and so on, are well taken. They are well received and I can only assure you that Government will consider all of them and if we need to take appropriate action, in order to streamline things, we will do so. All I ask of you is that we should not take any decision that may jeopardise the interests of the country because of the actions or mis-actions of some of the Members of this House. I thank you and I urge all of you, without exception, to support the reasonable report that the committee has presented. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman. 

3.30 p.m.
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Timothy Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Members for debating our report. I do not have many comments to make except that I think this issue of the balance of the money, that is going to remain on the bank account, needs a bit of technical clarification. When we approve the 200 million, the 1.7 billion which remained on the account will have to reverse the entry. It will go back to the Consolidated Fund and then it will follow the normal process, through a supplementary, onto the budget that we are about to approve. When we looked at it, we did not think that it should take a very long time because at the moment, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is handling an issue regarding this particular amount and so it would not be right that we just adopted their report recently and then we are going ahead to approve the entire amount. 

The other issue is: when was this money spent? Expenditure is done when authorised. It was authorised I think on the 13th of June but the actual money left the Consolidated Fund on the 24th of June at 1538hrs and I think we discussed this in the committee, and the shadow minister was there and he is aware of this. 

The other one is about critical activities. What we gave in our report are the activities on which State House pays money. Wasteful expenditure - what is wasteful? Wasteful is when you spend for no value and here we just referred to the cost of electricity, and we did advise the members of State House, who came to our committee yesterday, on what they can do on that one. 

On the issue of budgetary discipline, definitely it is something we should all have. All ministries must have budgetary discipline.

Mr Speaker, having made those few comments, under Section 177(2), I beg to move that the report of the Budget Committee on Supplementary Schedule No. 3 be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations! Hon. Members, it is 25 minutes to 4.00 p.m. I am sure there is no lunch left by now. Let me first assess the state of the business that is pending so that we know exactly what time we need to come back here. The next business is for us to go to supply and then the following one is the Bills Second Reading, Supplementary Appropriation Bill. What is the status of the supply figures? Who can help us with that? Are we ready to supply; Budget Committee?

MR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, we should be ready by about 5.00 p.m. It is almost 4.00 p.m. and we need an hour to eat because some of us did not have breakfast. So can we say 5.00 p.m.?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we ready to supply?

MR LWANGA: We will be ready to supply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In one hour?

MR LWANGA: At 5.00 p.m.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is really important that we roll up this business because without us supplying, they cannot even print the Appropriation Bill. So, I urge hon. Members - this has been a record, you impress me all the time! Today has been excellent; we have sat here without lunch up to this time. Since the Chairperson of the Budget Committee says the figures for supply will be ready by 5.00 p.m. can I suspend the House till then? The House is suspended until 5.00 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 3.36 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.38 p.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, welcome back. I am sure we are ready to take as long as it takes for us to finish the business before us. We are all set.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE  FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have finished with the committee reports and so we are ready to supply and the motion has been proposed. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to proceed with the motion? 

5.42 p.m.
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As fate would have it – the Speaker is busy. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this motion was moved on the Budget day. (Applause)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Recurrent expenditure

Vote 001 – Office of the President

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, as we are going into the Committee of Supply, we had some issues, which we wanted to deal with on Votes before we could – we had some items we wanted to handle concerning the Votes we are going to supply. We wanted to ask for your advice on what time we can move amendments to the Votes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When we come to the Votes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What about if it affects all the Votes, what will happen?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You mean affecting the entire Budget? How does it arise?

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Our proposal is in line with your guidance that – I presented it to the Budget Committee and I gave it to the technical staff in the meeting, and it should have been attached. Budget Committee Chairperson, the document is not attached -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Did you print out?

MR EKANYA: Yes, Mr Chairman, I handed the document to the committee chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it a minority report?

MR EKANYA: Yes; and I want to thank him very much – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I do not understand what is happening with –(Laughter)

MR EKANYA: May I proceed; Sir?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not know, with what?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, based on your guidance this morning that in case a Member has any variation – a view that the committee could not incorporate, then they present it and it is attached. So, based on that advice – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: When do you -

MR EKANYA: I have come up with a proposal that we cut the Budget by 8 percent on domestic development and non wage so that we avail the money for the teachers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, this is a rather peculiar kind of procedure that you are adopting. We are in the Committee of Supply and we are supplying. I see a minority report of the Budget Committee report on supply and we already voted on that report and we adopted it – yes, but we adopted that report before we broke off for lunch. So, how does it come now after adoption of the main report? We have passed this process, hon. Ekanya. (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, what we –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because this is a minority report of the Budget Committee report on supply. We finished that process and we adopted the report before we broke off for lunch. I do not know what kind of procedure we will be following. Why don’t you wait if you have a matter to raise on a particular Vote and then you raise it on the particular Vote?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I am seeking your guidance –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the guidance I have just given you.

MR EKANYA: The guidance is that the matter we would like to raise affects all the Votes: the development component, domestic and non-wage - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, what I am saying is that this matter should have come – we spent almost six hours debating the report of the Budget Committee and we approved it. There was no minority report attached to it. We have now come to the Committee of Supply. How do we now start handling a minority report at the stage of Committee of Supply? It is procedurally irregular and cannot be entertained at this time, please! (Applause)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I am seeking for your indulgence. What we handled in the morning was on supplementary appropriation. This is not about supplementary appropriation but supply for the Budget for 2011/2012.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which report was this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what my Shadow Minister for Finance is saying is that we are going to supply, which means that we have figures in relation to every sector. These figures are the ones we want to have a deduction on, to be able to take care of the monies that we are looking for; for the teachers as an increment. What is being said is that because the percentage affects the entire Budget – this means that if we are saying 8 percent of non-wage, it runs from Vote 001 up to the last Vote. 

He is saying that he has been able to identify money at that rate, which can take care of 50 percent of the teachers’ pay and that is the indulgence he wanted to seek.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The simple point I am communicating to you is that these matters we are dealing with now, we did deal with them during the committee report, including the report of the Budget Committee. They made a report on what they were able to do as the Budget Committee. 

At this stage, I do not see any provision anywhere, even by imagination, I cannot see that kind of provision where at this stage you are bringing a report and calling it a minority report. We are now at the stage of supplying and we are going Vote by Vote. That stage is passed. Can we go on?

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, are you saying that throughout this process, even the Executive will not in any way alter anything in this report? Is that what you are saying? That now our duty is just to pass? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I am saying is that when we are dealing with a particular Vote and you have issues on it, you raise it. 

MR SABIITI: But what we are saying is that the 8 percent we are talking about covers every budget and so it will be better if we come up with our proposal at the beginning so that it does not cause any problem.

MR DOMBO: I thank you very much. This House is now fully constituted into a Committee of Supply and every Member of this House is at liberty to vote on every vote that is going to be put. Can we procedurally allow the chairman to proceed so that if any Member of this House has any specific question to ask, he raises it when a particular Vote is mentioned? That is the only way we can proceed but I do not see how we can re-constitute ourselves into a House to consider a minority report, which should have been part of the main report in the first instance, when the vote was being moved on the Floor of the House. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We can start. I can just say that this particular report is minority to no report because we are not considering any report at this time. (Laughter)

Vote 001 - Office of the President
I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 56,309,048,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment that this House reduces Vote 001 by Shs 20 billion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, is the amendment seconded? Okay, it is seconded. The amendment is that we remove from this Vote Shs 20 billion. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 56,309,048,000 under Vote 001 - Office of the President, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 002 – State House

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 57,764,526,000 under Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We would like to amend that we remove from non-wage, Shs 8.12 billion and take it to Ministry of Education to cater for teachers. This eight percent of the non-wage should be transferred from State House to the Ministry of Education and Sports to cater for the teachers’ salary enhancement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 57,764,526,000 under Vote 002 - State House be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 26,140,847,000 under Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment that we reduce Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister by Shs 21 billion to Ministry of Education and Sports to cater for wages for primary school teachers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 26,140,847,000 under Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 495,256,874,000 under Vote 004, Ministry of Defence, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment that we reduce Vote 004 by Shs 23 billion and move it to Ministry of Education and Sports to cater for wages for primary school teachers. I beg to move.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. Rule 129(11), reads as follows: “When the House is in the Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates -
a) Any Member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimates and such motion shall take the form that ‘I beg to move that the sum of Shs 10,000 be reduced in respect to vote …’
b) The motion for reduction shall be moved when the sub-head to which the motion relates is under consideration by the committee;
c) Where a motion to reduce has been agreed to or negatived, no further motion to reduce that vote in relation to the same sub-head shall be made;
d) When a motion is moved to reduce a vote, the question shall be proposed from the chair accordingly;
e) When consideration of a vote has been completed, the chairperson shall put the question that the amount proposed (amended if appropriate by any reductions agreed) be provided for under the vote.”

I have read this extensively. This was in line with Article 93 of the Constitution, which reads as follows:
“Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government -
a) Proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill that makes provision for any of the following -
(i) The imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction;
(ii)the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise, than by reduction …” and so on and so forth.

So, what I hear the Opposition say is to move a motion to reduce but they go ahead not only to reduce, but to allocate under another Vote. Whereas it is within the powers of a Member to propose a reduction, from what I have read, my understanding of it is that, it is not within the power of a Member of Parliament to propose what the hon. Member has proposed, to shift funds by reduction of one Vote and then propose to supply in another Vote.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Vote for the Ministry of Education and Sports has been provided and agreed upon. A reduction from another ministry is permitted but moving the money to the Ministry of Education and Sports, which in essence will be adding on the Vote of the ministry, is not permissible by the Constitution. It would be an increase on that Vote, which is not permitted by the Constitution. 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has just read that provision. You are permitted to propose reductions but you are not permitted to propose increase. In essence, what we have gone through previously is a proposal to increase the budget for the ministry. Increasing on that Vote - and that is what we are saying - under the Constitution, is not permitted. That is the guidance I have just given.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, the Article reads that: “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government...”

The motion before us is by the minister of finance and that means, according to my understanding - and I am seeking your guidance - that if the motion is by Government, then you are allowed to do Roman (i), (ii) and (iii) because you are aware that we had here the VAT Bill, which we amended and introduced a new tax on gaming. 

Government had proposed removal of VAT on construction – the House moved on that. So, unless or otherwise, if Members of Parliament cannot do that, then we should have passed the Budget on the first day because we cannot change anything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, the motion is moved by Government; the law covers amendments as well. So, the amendment in essence, unless it is agreed to by Government in which case they would concede, then it becomes the proposal of the President that it should be like that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we want to thank you for guiding the House, but we are not imposing any charge on the Consolidated Fund. Let me read it: “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government, proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill that makes a provision of any of the following -
1)	The imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise done by reduction.
2)	The imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public funds of Uganda or the alteration of such funds other than by reduction.”

We are not imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund. The charge remains as it is; the Shs 10 trillion Budget remains intact, but what we are saying is that instead of this, we reduce this Vote. Short of that, we would be doing nothing sitting here.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us proceed. I now put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 495,256,874,000 under vote 004 - Ministry of Defence be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 005 – Ministry of Public Service

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to move an amendment that Vote 005 - Public Service, be reduced by Shs 5 billion and taken to the Ministry of Education and Sports as wages for primary school teachers. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment moved by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum Shs 29,865,874,000 under Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/12.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the sum of Shs 10,053,843,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012 –

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we reduce Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affair by Shs 720 million and take it to Ministry of Internal Affairs to cater for wages of the policemen. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negated.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the sum of Shs 10,053,843,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 7,485,248,000 under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move an amendment that under ministry of justice, Vote 007, we reduce Shs 720 million and provide for prison officers’ salary increment. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 7,485,248,000 under Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 52,169,156,000 under Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MRS KIWANUKA: We oppose the amendment, Mr Chairman – [HON. MEMBERS: “Which amendment?”] (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move an amendment that Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be reduced by Shs 4.4 billion and it be provided to the Ministry of Defence to cater for increment of the salaries of officers of the UPDF.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that –(Mr Byabagambi rose_)– hon. Member, we are wasting time. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I rose on a point of procedure, Mr Chairman. It has come to our attention that the document that was supplied, which we are using, may have problems because the committee has noticed that there are problems with the figures.

So, on a point of procedure, may I request the indulgence of my colleagues that really in order not to make a grave error, we suspend the proceedings for a few minutes, sort out the documents and –(Interjections)– it is in the interests of everybody – then we resume when we are sure that we are doing the correct – I beg to request that we look at it – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you started the process with this document; and the chairperson of the committee has not complained about it. Now that the chairman of the committee has not complained, it means Parliament is right on what it is doing. Let us supply, even if we supply air. It will be very bad for us – for my big brother, hon. John Amama Mbabazi, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to start changing goalposts when we are about to score. That is not right. Let us continue. If you want, you can come back next year and make those changes and I know hon. Tim Lwanga is aware of this.

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, some of us have the right document, but others have a document –(Interjections)– well, that is the problem. If you have a document that starts, “Under Parliament, with 3,860,000, then you have the right document –(Interjections)– it looks like they made two different copies, there is a document that talks about the summary of draft estimates by expenditure and category –(Interjections)– the chairman has been reading the right figures, but it would be very beneficial for everybody to have the right document.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman of the Budget Committee, are the figures I am reading correct?

MR LWANGA: Yes, Mr Chairman, they are correct.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what is the problem?

MR LWANGA: The problem is, when they were balancing the Budget, they realised that one of the documents they had originally was not balancing. So, they produced the right and the wrong one. So, I do not know – I have asked the Clerk to Parliament where he got the document from –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have sets of documents from which I am reading what I am reading –

MR LWANGA: Yours is the right document.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then why don’t I continue? If this is the authentic document, this is the document Parliament is proceeding with. I, therefore, put the question – 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Chairperson of the Budget Committee has just told us that he has the right document. May I know from him how he got to know that some people have wrong documents? And what are those wrongs documents? I am asking this because the chairperson, while in one of the committee meetings, told us that he has 35 years of experience, when some of us wanted to seek clarifications. So, can he tell us where all these have come from?

MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, I do not reproduce copies in – (Interruptions)

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I think what we are going through, as Parliament, is unprecedented. This is very new.  So, I think that while it initially seemed okay for us to proceed like this, I now would like to suggest that the prayer for suspending the House should be given the opportunity –(Interjections)– yes, because there are more serious issues about the figures that we need to harmonise and this should be in the interests of the Government. I really do not care what you do with your figures. Otherwise, it is important that harmonised figures are brought to us in a smart way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have more than 70 ministers. We have over 70 accounting officers and a fully-fledged ministry of finance with - all these people worked and brought us figures. Mr Chairman, you are doing your work very well. So, there should be nobody to stop you from continuing. Parliament is now working. If there are issues with what hon. Mbabazi is saying, we can deal with that tomorrow. For now, we are a Committee of Supply and we have to supply. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I hear from hon. Rose Akol.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We were considering this report as a committee. What is now before the House is the draft report. But I also have the correct copy of the report here, which has different figures for certain Votes. I would like to give an example. On Vote 005 - Public Service, the report, which is before the House has a total figure of Shs 16,889,874,000 as recurrent but the one I have has Shs 29,865,874,000. The point I want to raise is that the correct copy is the one which has Shs 29,865,874,000, which I have here. 

The one before the House has wrong figures -(Interjections)- some of you have the right report and some of you have the wrong one. As a committee, we received the draft and got the corrected copy. What we are only trying to say is: can we get the correct copy and we proceed, Mr Chairman? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment by hon. Ekanya. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of –

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, we object to the sum of Shs 52,169,156,000 for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under Vote 008. Already the consumptive items were cut prior to finalising the budget and submitting to Parliament. This will, therefore, cripple the operations of the ministry and undermine the implementation of its work plan. 

We take note of the recommendations of the Budget Committee to move resources and some institutions of the ministry of finance. While we appreciate the committee’s recommendations, we recommend that this be done in a systematic manner so as to allow smooth operations of these institutions during transition. These institutions are already implementing work plans and programmes in line with the proposed budget and they should be allowed to remaining part of this financial year to implement these programmes in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We consequently submit that apart from the Uganda Development Cooperation, whose transfer to the Ministry of Trade and Industry is already at advanced stages, the other institutions should remain as proposed and we work with other ministries on transferring the rest of the institutions at a more appropriate time. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Minister, what are you saying? (Laughter)

MRS KIWANUKA: Mr Chairman, I am proposing that the Vote for 008 remains at Shs 58,303,156,000. 

MR LWANGA: Thank you Chairman. The amendment that has been made was made with the full knowledge of the ministry. This House gave us the responsibility as a committee to sit and go through the entire Budget, which we did. The ministry officials were there and all the amendments were duly agreed to. We made a report to this House and the report was adopted. (Applause) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we have agreed on Shs 52 billion and the ministry of finance is the one which deals with prudent financial management; it should the happiest to even reduce further to cater for other Votes, which are in dire need of money. And you even have access to closing year balances, which you draw at your free will. I think it would be better, for the first time, for Finance to concede and we move on.  

MR NASASIRA: Mr Chairman, there is a problem. If I understand this document that I have – and I am seated next to the chairman and he says it is the correct one - the proposal from Parliament says that they deduct Shs 6,134,000 -(Interjections)- is that the proposal that they take away Shs 6,134,000. I think they forgot the “000” up there. So, the document needs to be adjusted. 
  
MR LWANGA: Mr Chairman, my I further inform the House that most of this money is re-allocation within the ministry of finance except the Shs 2.29 billion in respect of the youths, which we had recommended that it be transferred to the ministry of gender because gender deals with the youths. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think we should not be derailed. If the chairperson went into a process with other chairpersons and given the way we debated this on the Floor of Parliament; you remember we said that the money, which we think might be wasted - for example that youths must go to gender and the motion was passed on the Floor of Parliament - there was money for NPART for example - we should not discourage committees and lose trust in them. If Parliament is going to be doing work like that, then we shall lose confidence in it. We should go with the amendment of the chairperson of the committee and move on to other ministries. (Applause)  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, in light of the confusion about the figures, of course, I am sure maybe you have the right ones. As hon. Akol said, some of us have different figures and even what hon. Nasasira is saying about Shs 6 million is actually correct although what was meant –(Interjection)- no, because if you look in the columns, the column about annual draft estimates has “000”, therefore, that column is in millions of shillings.

The one on wages, non-wages are in millions and not billions. They do not show, I do not think it harms anyone for us to adjourn for 15 to 20 minutes, we sort out these figures and we are all sure that the figures we are passing are accurate. I so propose, Mr Chairman. Therefore, I move a motion that the House do resume.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members there is a motion that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports there to. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, they have moved a motion for the House to resume but we want to oppose it because of the following reasons. You know very well that we have a lot of work and we must finish this work of supply today so that by tomorrow the Appropriation Bill is out. That is why they are calling it the draft Appropriation Bill, 2011. 

If the Prime Minister has an issue with appropriation, then we shall handle it during appropriation time; as for now, we need to supply. We believe the Prime Minister never saw the zeros. For example, Office of the President, the first figure is of Shs 56,309,048, there are zeros at the end because these zeros up there mean that these zeros are below. Mathematically, you know it and hon. Nasasira, an engineer, knows it. He wants to confuse our Prime Minister because the Prime Minister does not know figures, he only knows law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports there to. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members we have already spent the 15 minutes that the Prime Minister had asked for. I do not know about you but I am determined to go through this process. We should go through it without any hitches. I am, therefore, proposing that we suspend the House for 20 minutes and then come back.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.43 p.m.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman and colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.44 p.m.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has supplied the appropriation from Votes 001, 002, 003,004, 005, 006 and 007 and supplied them without any amendments. This is under recurrent expenditure; I be to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.45 p.m.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted by the whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House is suspended for 20 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 6.46 p.m.)

(On resumption at 8.11 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the suspension, which was supposed to be for 20 minutes ended up being longer because there were consultations going on and I ask the Prime Minister to communicate what the result of the meeting is and then we proceed from there. Hon. Members, I hope all of you have the right text of what we are going to be dealing with. 

8.13 p.m.
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am happy to report that the break was very beneficial. In the first instance, it was clearly proven that some of the documents we had were faulty and others were accurate but in the break, the Office of the Clerk has produced the correct documents and I hope they have distributed them, so that we all have the same documents. We discovered that an error was made in the process of reproducing the documents. I know hon. Wafula Oguttu has a big heart and I know that he is not very familiar with parliamentary language yet. So, I am happy to report to the House that we made good progress. 

Secondly, we discovered where the problem was, in relation to the actual figures because if you look at the draft Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2001, on the recurrent expenditure, you have in brackets “000” meaning thousands. Therefore, all the figures presented here are in thousands. The only problem was in the third column, which is annual draft estimates, which has “000” and in the last column, annual revised estimates, which has the figures “000”. If we retained those zeros in the two columns, then the figures below would be in trillions. So to correct that we deleted the “000” under annual draft estimates in column three, and the “000” in the last column under annual revised estimates; and the rest of the figures will be accurate. 

Finally, we exchanged ideas on the Votes and we think we will move very well because after hearing from all sides, we discovered that most of these Votes are agreed on and there are no controversies and that we could quickly pass them and then those areas like Vote 008 and maybe one or two others, we can stand over them so that all of us, between today and tomorrow when we finalise this, get details. The reason is, for instance on Vote 008, we discovered from the chairman of the committee and the Vote holder, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that actually, for this figure of Shs 6.134 billion, the ministry agrees to some of the proposals. For example, reducing the budgetary provisions made for custodian boards and for NPART and so on, but there are others where there was no agreement because of some given reasons. So, we thought we needed more time than we had tonight so that this should not hold us back. We could stand over this and pass all the others so that we have a bit more time to look at the details of the figures and we generate consensus on them. And then for the other provisions like the referral hospitals, foreign missions, local governments, we also agreed that we would not be on the wrong side if we passed them omnibus; for each of them, we add the total rather than handling item by item. That is the report I wanted to make. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In terms of the omnibus addition of other provisions, the documents I have are not in the least the individual documents with the totals that relate to particular Votes. I will have difficulty doing the totals. I am using this type of document so let us proceed.

8.20 p.m.
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, the document we have has totals at the end of each and what we can do is to highlight for you the totals and when you read that there is an amendment on the totals, it should be brought by a shadow minister. 

DR BARYOMUSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek your procedural guidance because the Prime Minister has indicated some Votes that he wants us to stand over. My understanding is that the Committee on Budget has made proposals to vary the figures and the ministry of finance did not concede. My understanding is that they have come to the House to appeal to us.

Why doesn’t the matter come to us and we pronounce ourselves on those matters where the committee has not agreed with the ministry of finance instead of derailing the work of this House? When the House was suspended, we thought there would be agreement but if the committee and the ministry do not agree, isn’t it proper that the House pronounces itself over such a matter instead of derailing us? I seek your guidance.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that it has been found necessary to break down the figures, which are being reallocated by Parliament so that everybody knows where these are going, so that when get to agreement on what we agree on, everybody is aware of what we agreed on. This is the reason we want them broken down.

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the chairman. He presented a committee report to this Parliament when he had recommended all these changes that are being reflected and it was adopted in this Parliament. What went wrong? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What went wrong? Well, the challenge that we are faced with is that the ministry of finance had objections to some of the figures and it was necessary because the blanket figures - there were aspects that the ministry of finance agreed with but there were also aspects that they objected to. But because it was presented altogether and we could not single out which ones were agreeable and which ones were not; that is why it was agreed that they break down the figures so that everybody could understand which ones were agreed upon and which ones were not, so that if you want to take a vote, you can take a vote on the ones that you think there is no agreement on so that we do not have to take a vote on the issues that are agreed upon. That is why this process was taken like that.

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am wondering; you are saying the figures have been broken down. How do we see the broken down figures so that we know as we go -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely, that is what they are saying. We stand it over so that they can break down the figures. If you look at the ministry of finance, what they are saying - there is the banana project and there are all those details, which constitute the amount that they have proposed to reallocate. On some of those amount items, Finance agrees to them and they do not agree on others.

We wanted to have them separated so that we get the ones that are agreed upon finished with and maybe you take a vote if you like on the ones that are not agreed upon. That is why this matter, as I said, we stand over some of the Votes and the ones that are clear we move with them first to expedite the process. Can we make progress now?

The proposal in the meeting that was held is that we should pronounce ourselves on the Votes that have no controversies at all and make free time to deal with the other ones, which are controversial. Can we proceed? (Mr Oguttu rose_) What is the point, hon. Oguttu?

MR OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. We have been sitting here trying to understand what we are doing. This is an honourable House and we are leaders but we are behaving like we need -(Interjections)- to be led. We have looked at these budget figures over and over. You directed the Budget Committee and evoked what the President had said in his State of the Nation Address that, “You go and look for all areas where there is waste across the board and cut”. The Budget Committee, I hope, did exactly that and there are figures. I have a document here where they cut up to Shs 17 billion based on how you had requested them to go and work.

So, who has got the power to appropriate? Is it Parliament? Is it Government? Is it the ministry of finance? If Parliament has appropriated, who is then asking us to change those figures?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Parliament has not appropriated any figure, hon. Member. There is no appropriation that has taken place yet. That is why the Bill still has to be printed. Even the Appropriation Bill has not yet been printed, so, we could not have done that even before this Bill.

MR OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, my problem is that what the chairman of the committee has presented - the figures here - has been approved and you are saying the ministry of finance is objecting. The ministry of finance should have negotiated with the committee before they came here and once we have approved them, why should be changing the figures? In fact, I would like some clarification on that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we make progress, please?
 
COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 008

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is stood over.

Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 8,496,107,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, that we reduce it by Shs 680 million and provide (the same amount) for the teachers’ salaries. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,496,107,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is stood over. 

Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, Vote 011, Ministry of Local Government is stood over.

Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 10,877,229, 000 under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move an amendment under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, be reduced by Shs 850 million to be provided to Ministry of Education for wages for primary school teachers. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 10,877,229,000 under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 155,326,802,000 under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move that under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports (central) be reduced by Shs 13,073 billion to provide for wages for primary school teachers. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 155,326,802,000 under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 28,960,755,000 under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move -(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On Friday, the Budget Committee presented a report here. In that report, there was a recommendation by the Budget Committee. Hon. Ekanya is a member of this committee and on Friday, he profusely defended this report, including that recommendation on teachers. Is hon. Ekanya procedurally right now to come and start making amendments to the Committee of Supply on the matter to do with teachers and yet on Friday, he supported a report, which had a serious recommendation on teachers?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I beg to move an amendment that Vote 014 - Ministry of Health, be reduced by Shs 2.4 billion and (the same amount) be provided for the ministry of education for wage. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the proposal by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 28,960,755,000 under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 4,406,570,000 under Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment that under Shs 340 million under Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, be reduced to provide for wage for primary school teachers. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,406,570,000 under Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 106 - Ministry of Works and Transport

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 19,274,811,000 under Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport, be reduced by Shs 1.5 billion and moved to the ministry of education for wages for primary school teachers. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 19,274,811,000 under Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 8,353,822,000 under Vote 017, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move an amendment that Vote 017, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, be reduced by Shs 615 million to provide for wages for primary school teachers. I beg to move -(Mr Mulindwa rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,353,822,000 under Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You were rising on a point of order. What was the order about? Hon. Members, I would not want you to waste parliamentary time indulging in matters that are not helpful.

MR MULINDWA: Mr Chairman, hon. Ekanya is continuously moving -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are ruled out of order, please, sit down.

Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 19,389,897,000 under Vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development be provided for as – stand over? Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is stood over.

Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 7,185,136,000 under Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment that Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment be reduced by Shs 395 million, to provide for wages for primary school teachers. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 7,185,136,000 under Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 020 – Ministry of Information, Communication Technology

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 4,869,251,000 under Vote 020 - Ministry of Information, Communication Technology, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment that Vote 020, Ministry of Information, Communication Technology, be reduced by Shs 419 million and moved to the ministry of education for primary school teachers’ wages. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,869,251,000 under Vote 020 - Ministry of Information, Communication Technology, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 021 – Ministry of East African Community Affairs 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 15,102,439,000, under Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment that that Vote be reduced by Shs 1.46 billion and (the same amount) be moved to the ministry of education for primary school teachers’ wages. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 15,102,439,000 under Vote 021 - Ministry of East African Community Affairs, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 022 – Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 5,396,585,000 under Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, this sector is very important and I will state that we pass all the money. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,396,585,000 under Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 109 – Law Development Centre

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 1,178,694,000 under Vote 109 - Law Development Centre, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 110 – Uganda Industrial Research Institute

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 5,713,000,000 under Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move amendment that Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute, be reduced by Shs 164 million and (the same amount) be moved to the ministry of education under primary school teachers’ wages. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 5,713,000,000 under Vote 110, Uganda Industrial Research Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 111 – Busitema University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 7,928,699,000 under Vote 111 - Busitema University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move amendment that vote 111 - Busitema University, be reduced by Shs 370 million and (the same amount) be moved to the ministry of education under primary school teachers’ wages. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 7,928,699,000 under Vote 111 - Busitema University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 112 – Ethics and Integrity

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 1,448,882,000 under Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move amendment that Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity, be reduced by Shs 98 million and (the same amount) be moved to the ministry of education under primary school teachers’ wages. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 1,448,882,000 under Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 113 – Uganda National Roads Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 27,176,315,000 under Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move amendment that Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority, be reduced by Shs 350 million and (the same amount) be moved to the ministry of education under primary school teachers’ wages. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 27,176,315,000 under Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 114 – Uganda Cancer Institute

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,132,915,000 under Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 115 – Uganda Heart Institute

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 567,948,000 under Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 116 - National Medical Stores

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 206,811,235,000 under Vote 116 - National Medical Stores, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 1,728,880,000 under Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move an amendment that Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board, be reduced by Shs 133 million to provide wages for primary school teachers. I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,728,880,000 under Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

Vote 118 - Road Fund

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose a question that the total sum of Shs 280,949,000,000 under Vote 118 - Road Fund, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move an amendment that Vote 118 - Road Fund, be reduced by Shs 27.9 billion to provide for wages for primary school teachers. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have already passed the Vote for the ministry of education and I do not know what is going to happen. I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 280,949,000,000 under Vote 118 - Road Fund, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of - to be stood over? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau, is stood over.

Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 7,022,608,000 under Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I thank you. Based on your guidance, I beg to move an amendment that Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control, be reduced by Shs 515 million and (the same amount) be moved to Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service for wages.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 7,022,608,000 under Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 121 - Dairy Development Authority

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I propose that we stand over this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 121 - Dairy Development Authority is stood over.

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are right that you have passed the education Vote but that is recurrent and not development –(Interjections)- yes, there are salaries and if you look there, they are there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The hon. Leader of Opposition, the proposal is to allocate it to salaries for primary school teachers; that is not development but recurrent. I now propose – 

MR OMACH: I also beg that we stand over this because we still have to reconcile the figures with the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority is stood over.

Vote 136 - Makerere University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 46,289,073,000 under Vote 136 - Makerere University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg the House to pass this one since the lecturers and students are on strike.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 46,289,073,000 under Vote 136 - Makerere University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 137 - Mbarara University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 8,373,538,000 under Vote 137 - Mbarara University, be provided for as Recurrent Expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to an amendment that Vote 137 - Mbarara University, be reduced by Shs 289 million and (the same amount) be moved to Internal Affairs as wages for the police under Vote 144. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,373,538,000 under Vote 137 - Mbarara University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 5,290,090,000 under Vote 13 - Makerere University Business School, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move an amendment that Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School, be reduced by Shs 233 million and (the same amount) be moved to the Uganda Police Force under Vote 144 for wages for police officers. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,290,090,000 under Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year, 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 139 - Kyambogo University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 18,756,255,000 under Vote 139 - Kyambogo University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, I beg to move an amendment that Vote 139 - Kyambogo University be reduced by Shs 710 million and (the same amount) be moved to the Uganda Police Force, Vote 144 for wages. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put a question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 18,756,255,000 under Vote 139 - Kyambogo University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I pray that this item be stood over.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute, stood over.

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 98,097,784,000 under Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chair, I beg to move an amendment that Vote 141 be reduced by Shs 3.96 billion and moved to 175, Moroto Referral Hospital for the people of that region. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment proposed.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 98,097,784,000 under Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority be provided as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 25,301,922,000 under Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year, 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg that this Vote be stayed because we want to move amendments to add it more money. Agriculture is very important for this country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, he is proposing that we stand over this Vote, National Agricultural Research Organisation. Hon. Members, there is a proposal that this Vote be stood over. Should I put the question to that?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the proposal that this Vote be stood over.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 25,301,922,000 under Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I propose that we stand over this Vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that this Vote be stood over.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 190,638,944,000 under Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 54,791,576,000 under Vote 142 - Uganda Prisons be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I move a motion that we stand over the Uganda Prisons’ Vote because I want to propose more money to be added to it. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that this Vote be stood over.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 54,791,576,000 under Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 4,122,098,000 under Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission be provided for as recurrent expenditure -

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I beg that we also stand over this. We had agreed, in principle, that where we have proposals by the parliamentary committee -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that this Vote be stood over.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 149 - Gulu University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 11,149,750,000 under Vote 149 - Gulu University, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Vote 149 – Gulu University be reduced by Shs 455 million and (the same amount) be moved to Butabika Hospital. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 11,149,750,000 under Vote 149 – Gulu University be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,075,974,000 under Vote 150 – National Environmental Management Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment that Vote 150 be reduced by Shs 265 million and (the same amount) be moved to National Forestry Authority - Vote 157, for wages. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,075,974,000 under Vote 150 – National Environmental Management Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Service

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,433,979,000 under Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Service, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 152 - NAADS Secretariat 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 6,240,624,000 under Vote 152 – NAADS Secretariat be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Vote 152 - NAADS Secretariat, be reduced by Shs 414 million and (the same amount) be moved to Vote 163 - Arua Referral Hospital. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 6,240,224,000 under Vote 152 – NAADS Secretariat be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 153 - Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I beg that we stand over this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the proposal that we stand over Vote 153 - PPDA.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 7,531,000,000 under Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move that Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards, be reduced by Shs 176 million and (the same amount) be moved to Lira Referral Hospital.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 7,531,000,000 under Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 155 - Uganda Cotton Development Organisation

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,700,000,000 under Vote 155 - Uganda Cotton Development Organisation, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that vote 155; Uganda Cotton Development Organisation, be reduced by Shs 570 million and (the same amount) be moved to Mubende Referral Hospital.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,700,000,000 under Vote 155 – Uganda Cotton Development organisation be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, this is a statutory body – 

Vote 157 – National Forestry Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 200,000,000 under Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 159 - External Security Organisation

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total of Shs 9,275,270,000 under Vote 159 - External Security Organisation be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR EKANYA: I beg to move an amendment that Vote 159 - External Security Organisation, be reduced by Shs 320,000,000 and (the same amount) be moved to Gulu Referral Hospital - Vote 165, where the Speaker comes from. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total of Shs 9,275,270,000 under Vote 159 - External Security Organisation, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,150,500,000 under Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital Complex

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 27,820,536,000 under Vote 161; Mulago Hospital Complex be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/1012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162 – Butabika Hospital

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,388,334,000 under Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move a motion that votes for referral hospitals be passed in an omnibus form. I beg to move.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I concur with the motion.

Votes 163 to 175 - Regional Referral Hospitals

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 35,798,047,000 under Votes 163 to 175 for Regional Referral Hospitals, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 201 to 233 - Missions Abroad  

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that foreign missions’ votes be moved in an omnibus form. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 61,541,035,000, under Votes 201 to 233 for Missions Abroad, be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 501 to 778 - Local Governments

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the local authorities’ Votes be passed in an omnibus form. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,256,534,832,000 under Votes 501 to 778 for local authorities be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move a motion that the House be adjourned to allow me and the minister of finance do consultations on the development expenditure this evening so that we can handle the item in there tomorrow. I beg to submit.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I pray that we stand over all Votes over which we do not agree and continue with the supply done to all Votes on which we agree.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, since the minister of finance says we should supply all those Votes on which we agree and stand over all those that we do not agree upon, I would like to move that we pass all those Votes upon which we have agreed in a block. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The difficult thing will be on how to add up the figures.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, under the development budget, there are only eight areas over which we do not have an agreement. So, I would like to pray that we supply.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we have agreed to supply, we need to know that development expenditures range from Votes 001 to 162. And we can actually pass these Votes as a block. Because you want us to move, let us move.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, in light of what the Leader of the Opposition has said, I would like to pray that we go to sections B, C and D on referral hospitals and pass Votes 163 to 175; Votes 201 to 233, under Missions Abroad; and Votes 501 to 778, under local authorities, in an omnibus form. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the proposal as moved by the minister of finance.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure

Votes 163 to 175 - Regional Referral Hospitals 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 17,050,000,000, under Votes 163 to 175 for regional referral hospitals, be provided for as the development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 201 to 233 - Missions Abroad
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 7,494,200,000 under Votes 201 to 233 for Missions Abroad be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 501 to 778 - Local Authorities 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 400,463,259,000 under Votes 501 to 778 for local authorities be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification from you about the number of Votes that are being stood over. As you are aware, the Budget Committee under your instruction and also using the guidance of the communication from the President, considered a number of Votes and looked at the monies, using those guidelines, and we sat with the ministry of finance for three days and we came up with a report, which was adopted by Parliament. The clarification I am trying to seek is, the minister of finance wants to agree - with whom does he want to agree? Because we sat with him –(Interruption)  

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman and colleagues, we did agree in this House, this evening, that there are certain Votes that we stand over and we will do some reconciliation tomorrow morning before we finalise the supply. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think this is a pertinent question and it impacts the work of this Parliament. The committee had sufficient time to interact with the ministry of finance and other ministries and it is that work that produced this report. We really want to be guided and to be sure. With whom does the ministry of finance want to reconcile the figures? Is he trying to arm twist the committee so that it bends and does not yield to the changes, which they are suggesting? What is that process? Who is going to constitute that team that will reconcile the figures? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we still have a lot of work. Instead of spending time on matters on which we are disagreeing, there are matters upon which we agree. Why don’t we make progress on that? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have Votes on which the minister is disagreeing with Parliament. There are those on which we agree. Wouldn’t it be prudent that we get the positions of where we don’t agree; we subtract and pass those that we have agreed? For example, we can say, “We will pass this and that; minus this and that.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We will have to announce the figures. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is what we are saying. We say, “001, stood over; this and that stood over. The total bill is this and we subtract this and that”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That would be difficult because those totals are not here. We don’t even know which ones we don’t have an agreement on. Can we just make progress, please? Let’s see what we can do with the time we have because we are eating into the time we should be using productively. 

MR OKUPA: When we are passing this and leaving out some to be looked at later on, I see a situation here where we are going to pass this and when we go back to it, we shall not have the opportunity to move because we would have already passed the others where we would have wanted the adjustment to be made. We will find ourselves just wasting time. So what Dr Baryomunsi is raising has some sense. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, we are now going to development expenditure.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, because we have stood over a portion of some items, I can tell you that if we are giving them leeway to go and meet our committee again; when they agree, these figures will be passed again as one line. Because we shall say, “Development expenditure is this”, and we pass it. So, instead of dwelling on one to one, they can allow them go and sit down, with whomever they have agreed to sit with, and we pass it as one line as we did with referral hospitals because the whole position will have been agreed on.

MR NASASIRA: I know that hon. Mafabi is trying to cover a lot of ground in a short time. I appreciate that but you will have to find a way of how the Votes are going to be announced. Because you can see that for sections B and D, the Speaker would announce, say Votes 163 to 175 and then announce the total. What you are proposing now is that we take out the Votes, which we are going to stand over, deduct it from the total but then you will have to find a way of how the Speaker will announce those Votes we are going to pass and the total after deduction. I don’t know how easy that is. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Eng. Nasasira, what I am trying to say is this: if they reconcile all these figures, from 001 to 162, they will be passed as one line. Because we shall say from 001 to this number, this is the amount and we pass it because they will have agreed on a position. If they went and agreed and put up one line –(Interjections)- if the committee disagrees and sticks to Shs 4.89 billion, that is what we shall pass as one line. Otherwise, we are going to take more time here and tomorrow we shall come back to the same items, which will be time wasting. I hope you can see sense in that, my brother. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have seen where we have controversies, particularly in Votes for development expenditure. They are areas that came from even our sessional committees and reported to the Budget Committee and even the Budget Committee carried that figure of the sessional committee but now that it has come here, the ministry of finance is saying that we stand over it. If we proceed with them, we will have killed the work that was diligently done by the sessional committee together with the budget committee. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move a motion that committee of Supply be suspended and the House do resume. We should suspend so that we can reconcile these figures because your chairpersons are raising matters of concern. We should reconcile tomorrow - respect the views of your chairpersons. I beg to move.

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, taking up from where hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire has stopped; the committee that had the task of doing the work has done it. They agreed on some areas and disagreed on others, how do we move forward? The committee has brought its report here. They have reasons why they stated it the way they have put it. It is now up to this House to pronounce itself whether to go with the committee or the Executive and then we proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Prime Minister, help me when you rise up. If we suspend or adjourn and then come to these Votes that have been stood over, what is going to happen between who and who and what will be the results? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, the hon. Tinkasiimire whom we respect tremendously, influenced us to stand over item 122 of recurrent, which is Kampala Capital City Authority. The reason is that he came late and found that we had taken the position that we stand over only items where there was no agreement but the record here appeared as if there was an agreement on KCCA. He being the chairman of the sessional committee that handled this figure now says it is wrong. He says that the figure they have is Shs 53 billion so we stood over it because we believed him. As he clearly showed that there may be a problem with this, we said that there may be such problems in other areas where we need time to go through cooperatively but not in an adversarial way. We gave the example of Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which we talked about in the consultations we had with hon. Okupa and it was obvious that in that blanket figure there were some areas where there was an agreement between the committees of budget and finance and there were others where this was not the case. So we agreed to give ourselves time to go through those. 

The Budget Committee where all sessional committee chairpersons are ex-officio members with the ministry of finance and all those Votes where there was a problem so that we sort it out; should come here and the path is as smooth as what we have seen this evening in the cases where there is no controversy.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, we gave our committees work and they did it. They came back and met with the Budget Committee; they have produced this report; they have met ministries, and they are you telling us that they are going to amend these figures again yet we have already agreed? These committees are put there purposely to assist us and they have come up with such nice recommendations. What capacity do we have to change this thing within a few hours? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I am faced with a situation because I gave an extension up to the 8th, then I gave an additional extension up to tomorrow, which is just around the corner. I am looking at the volume here and we are now saying that we shall not be able to supply tonight, we will not be able to supply tomorrow. By 2 O’clock we will not be done in which case we cannot have the Appropriation Bill ready because it is waiting for the figures we are going to supply. That means that we have to wait and possibly by end of tomorrow get the Appropriation Bill and then come back on Thursday. Do I have to give another extension? Hon. Members, we have over indulged in this matter and I am really grateful to the Members for sitting this long. I think we should not abuse the good will that the Members have demonstrated in sitting for this long, especially the Speaker who does not stand up and go out like the other Members. 

We should work in the spirit of finishing this work. If we adjourn now, the earliest we can start tomorrow will be eleven or midday and by that time we will not have the figures ready. We still have to go through this tonnage and I do not know what time you propose that this committee should consult with the ministry and at what time? When do they report? My proposal is that we should supply where there is a disagreement, we take a vote and we move. One way or the other we must move on. We have to pronounce ourselves on specific figures.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, since we have agreed as Parliament that we need to supply, I think we have our figures here and we have agreed with our committees. You can read from Vote 01 to Vote 06248 then you say, “We are supplying this as an omnibus.” Those in favour will put up their hands and those against will put up their hands so that we go in that spirit and conclude. 

MR IGEME: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We spent time with the ministry and the Budget Committee and I think on the development budget, there are six Votes that we should vote on. Actually, the Budget Committee made recommendations on only six Votes on the development budget. So, let us go to Votes 001, 008, 014, 106, 107, 109, vote on those and we can pass the whole development budget because those are the only issues where we could not agree with the ministry. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can we proceed with the development budget? 

Development Budget 

Vote 001 - Office of the President 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose that the total of Shs 15,379,570,000 under Vote 001 be provided as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Chairman, we discussed this issue and this Shs 1 billion. The committee – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, if there is contestation on this one, we stand over it and move forward. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Yes.

Vote 002 - State House

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Chairman, I thought you guided that we should vote on matters where there seems to be disagreement. I thought that was the import of your ruling that as we proceed, not to bog down the House, we should vote on matters where there is disagreement and proceed, instead of standing over the issue?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, on the Vote you just stood over, as a committee, we proposed that Shs 1 billion be shifted to the Uganda AIDS Commission Vote. From the Shs 4 billion, which had been moved by the ministry, we only approved Shs 3.5 billion for building RDCs’ offices and this is why the figure has come down. So, the report of the committee is correct. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Chairman, before we vote, the Uganda AIDS Commission, where they propose to move this money, has no unfunded development activities. I don’t want - when we come next financial year - because I am the same person who will defend this - for Parliament to ask me, “Where did you put this Shs 1 billion?” Whereas the Office of the President has planned activities and outputs for the Shs 1 billion, the Uganda AIDS Commission does not have unfunded development activities. So, I beg the indulgence of this House that this Shs 1 billion be left on the Vote of the Office of the President. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I am looking at the House and I can see the best way we can move forward. So, when I propose that we stand over a matter, I know the reason why because I am observing the House and please, trust me in some of these things. When I say we move forward my way, please support me on this. 

I now propose the question that the total of Shs 8,880,079,000 under Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment that Shs 1 billion be reduced from Vote 002 - State House and be moved to Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total of Shs 8,880,079,000 under Vote 002 - State House, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that the total of Shs 164,947,045,000 under Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment that Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister be reduced by Shs 10 billion and (the same amount) be moved to Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence, to provide for accommodation for UPDF officers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairman, I move that we stand over this matter because – 
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote stood over. 

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total of Shs 452,736,205,000 under Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 005 - Ministry of Public service

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I beg that we stand over this Vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 005, stood over.

Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total of Shs 928,591,000 under Vote 006 - Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total of Shs 26,243,676,000 under Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

MR OMACH: I propose that we stand over this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Stood over.

Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 92,782,529,000 under Vote 009 - Ministry of Internal Affairs, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR MULONGO: Mr Chairman, on this item, the sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs did recommend, and this recommendation was adopted in this House -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 009, stood over. 

Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I propose that we stand over this Vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 010, stood over. 

Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 188,708,259,000 under Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,296,997,000 under Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 215,593,251,000 under Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I propose that we stand over this Vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 014, stood over.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg that we stand over Vote 015 because there are some sheets -(Interjections)- yes, we discussed this with the Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one are you talking about? 

MR EKANYA: This is Vote 015, Ministry of Trade and Industry.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have not even called it yet.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade and Industry  

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I beg that we stand over this Vote.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 015, stood over.

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 104,087,161,000 under Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 1,539,130,930,000 under Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

I now put the question -

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, there is a column here under corrigenda, which was raised. Can the minister clarify or should we stand it over?

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, under Vote 017, column for corrigenda, this figure is enshrined in our report that was presented to the House and it was adopted. So, this figure is correct and I do not see why we should stand it over.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the sum of -

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is on record, that corrigendum 1 was laid on the Table with an amount of Shs 325,000,000,000. Corrigendum 2 which was also laid on the Table had a similar figure. I would request that the minister clarifies - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 017, stood over.

Vote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 10,945,710,000 under Vote 018, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 192,693,210,000 under Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 020 - Ministry of Information and Communication Technology

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 11,950,288,000 under Vote 020 - Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 021 - East African Community

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 280,000,000 under Vote 021 - East African Community, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 5,968,750,000 under Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 101 – Judiciary

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 9,334,840,000 under Vote 101; Judiciary, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 102 - Electoral Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 445,880,000 under Vote 102 - Electoral Commission be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 103 - Inspectorate of Government

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,578,629,000 under Vote 103 - Inspectorate of Government, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,966,232,000 under Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 105 - Law Reform Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 134,292,000 under Vote 105 - Law Reform Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I move that we stand over this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Vote 106, stood over.

Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I move that we stand over this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Vote 107, stood over.

Vote 108 - National Planning Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,793,916,000 under Vote 108 - National Planning Authority, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 109 - Law Development Centre

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I propose that we stand over this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Vote 109, stood over.

Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 8,230,000,000 under Vote 110 - Uganda Industrial Research Institute, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 111 - Busitema University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,577,521,000 under Vote 111 - Busitema University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,210,596,000 under Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 809,235,729,000 under Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,100,000,000 under Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,500,000,000 under Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 324,918,000 under Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 122, stood over. 

Vote 131 - Auditor-General

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,560,478,000 under Vote 131 - Auditor-General be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 132 - Education Service Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,796,020,000 under Vote 132 - Education Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecutions

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 997,706,000 under Vote 133 - Directorate of Public Prosecution, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 134 - Health Service Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 346,799,000 under Vote 134 - Health Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 136 - Makerere University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 22,601,685,000 under Vote 136 - Makerere University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 137 - Mbarara University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,298,769,000 under Vote 137 - Mbarara University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,800,000,000 under Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 139 - Kyambogo University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 422,845,000 under Vote 139 - Kyambogo University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute

MR OMACH: Mr Chairperson, I pray that we stand over this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Vote 140, stood over.

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 18,174,718,000 under Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 88,661,712,000 under Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 143 - Uganda Bureau of Statistics

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairperson, I beg that we stand over this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Stood over.

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 49,678,636,000 under Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 11,415,430,000 under Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 146 - Public Service Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 711,791,000 under Vote 146 - Public Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 3,364,058,000 under Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission, be provided for as Development Expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 148 - Judicial Service Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 139,819,000 under Vote 148 - Judicial Service Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 149 - Gulu University

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,150,100,000 under Vote 149 - Gulu University, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 6,292,250,000 under Vote 150 - National Environment Management Authority, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Service

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 400,000,000 under Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Service, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 152 - NAADS Secretariat

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 48,116,463,000 under Vote 152 - NAADS Secretariat, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 153 - PPDA
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 384,000,000 under Vote 153 - PPDA, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,994,000,000 under Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 12,717,500,000 under Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 157 - National Forest Authority

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 8,083,505,000 under Vote 157 - National Forest Authority, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 159 - External Security Organisation

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 442,000,000 under Vote 159 - External Security Organisation, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 23,220,000,000 under Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 27,182,041,000 under Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital, be provided for as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

MS AKOL: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Attached to my schedule is Table 4; Statutory Charges on the Consolidated Fund. These have to be approved by the House although we do not have to supply or appropriate for that matter. This is necessary because this is the procedure we have always followed.  

Statutory Charges

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund under Votes 001 to Vote 149 -(Interjections)
Vote 001 - Office of the President
Vote 005 - Public Service Pension Compensation
Vote 007 - Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
Vote 018 - Resident Industrial Courts
Vote 101 - Judiciary
Vote 102 - Electoral commission
Vote 103 - Inspector General of Government
Vote 104 - Parliamentary Commission
Vote 105 - Law Reform Commission
Vote 106 - Uganda Human Rights Commission
Vote 107 - Uganda Aids commission
Vote 108 - National Planning Authority
Vote 130 - Treasury Operations
Vote 131 - Office of the Auditor-General
Vote 133 - Directorate of Public prosecution
Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force; Inspector-General and Deputy Inspector-General
Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Services; Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner; and 
Vote 149 - Gulu University, Gratuity Arrears. 
The total is Shs 1,426,354,806,000. I beg to move.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, we have not included Vote 156, Uganda Land Commission for Shs 543,877,000 which was deferred from recurrent as statutory by the minister.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I take note of the motion by the minister of finance. I stand here as a Parliamentary Commissioner; we did have consultations with the minister - I request that we stand over this budget as we harmonise with him.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I pray that we stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, if there are issues that are not resolved, we stand over these statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund for the Financial Year 2011/2012; those Votes that have been read by the honourable minister.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

10.47 p.m.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman and colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

10.47 p.m.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has supplied the Budget for the Financial Year 2011/2012 with some amendments and has stood over a number of Votes. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

10.48 p.m.
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move a motion for adoption of the report from the Committee of Supply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of supply. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, congratulations. (Applause) I am very impressed and one of these days, I am going to prepare some certificates to award the most resilient Members of Parliament. Thank you very much. I am sure Uganda is proud that we can sit almost up to 11.00 p.m. trying to make the country move forward. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to -

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I expected direction on the way forward from you or the Leader of Government Business on what we have stood over.

10.52 p.m.
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. As you know, tomorrow is Cabinet day but I have asked all the ministers whose Votes have been stood over to hold a meeting with technical staff and with the Budget Committee, which will have in it the ex-officio members who are chairpersons of sessional committees to go through all these figures in the morning so that by 11.00 a.m. or midday, they will have hopefully gone through all the figures and all the details so that when we resume - and I propose we do so at 2 O’clock - then we simply go through the figures without waste of time so that we can handle the rest of the business. I would like to assure colleagues that unless the Shadow Minister of Finance does tomorrow what he did today, to come up routinely to propose amendments, we should be through with this as soon as possible because on the part of the Executive, we undertake to be as cooperative as possible so that we minimise any area of disagreement. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A motion was moved for this House to resolve itself into the Committee of Supply and consider reports and approve them; but we have had some issues and some Votes have been stood over. The Leader of Government Business directed that the Budget Committee handles this with the minister. I would like to seek clarification from you, Mr Speaker; we have gone through that process and now we are in the Committee of Supply. Would it still be appropriate for the Budget Committee to again go over this when actually the issues that were brought before the Budget Committee are exactly those which the sessional committee presented and have been put in the Appropriation Bill? Shouldn’t it now be the Committee of Supply, which is the Committee of the whole House to resolve this matter?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is connected to what hon. Akol has said. I think the Prime Minister needs to put this right to the minister of finance. We go out and meet and agree on a position then when we get to the House, you change; that disturbs us! We delayed to get back to this House because we had a meeting with Finance but I was surprised that what we agreed upon was not included in table 4; we had agreed on these matters. 

The ministry of finance should take Parliament seriously, otherwise it does not make any sense for us to meet and when we come here, we find different figures –(Applause)– Rt Hon. Prime Minister, could you categorically deliver this massage to the minister of finance; otherwise even tomorrow, we shall not have any headway?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this matter of the minister of finance has cost some of us our integrity, which we have built for the last forty years. It is said that we were bribed by the ministry of finance with Shs 1 million; yet when we get here, he disagrees. I want the minister of finance to take us very seriously. We sat there up to midnight, yet when we come here you disagree! Now our names are all over TVs and radios saying that you gave us Shs 1 million.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the point hon. Okupa and other Members are making. I would attribute this to the fact that this is the beginning of a new term of Parliament and normally, when you go through the Budget process, Parliament should be engaged with the ministry of finance mainly because they are the ones that present the budget framework paper. But all of us get involved in the discussions; the Budget Committee, the sessional committees and the Executive receives the comments that Parliament makes on the Budget in full and we actually take them in account. So by the time the Budget Speech is made, the budgeting process would have been handled comprehensively and both the Executive and Legislature would have been party to the process. 

This time we have had a change; a new minister of finance; new members in the committees and so on. So I trust that the experience we have had now has taught us many lessons and we will do much better next time. I share the view that by the time ministers present their policy statements, all these issues should have been ironed out so that we do not spend the kind of time we have been spending now going over things that ought to have been concluded long ago.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of clarification: in the event that tomorrow the Budget Committee and the minister do not agree and the status quo remains, what will follow?

THE SPEAKER: That is simple; we would vote. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: The way we are moving is alright but somehow we are forcing the minister of finance and the ministry officials to do what they do not want to do and they are the people giving the money. Don’t you think they are likely to starve those areas that we have disagreed on?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the problem we are likely to have is that which Dr Chris Baryomunsi has talked about; the case of a stalemate. But the real problem is for the ministry of finance to assume that they are the ones who are always right; that is a big mistake! I propose that the Prime Minister takes up that role tomorrow so that the issue is solved once and for all. These people came to the Social Services Committee; they went to Budget Committee; they have come to Parliament and we still disagree. What is the way forward? Why don’t we meet with them tomorrow and we resolve this problem once and for all? But warn them; they are not above the law, nor are they more intelligent than all of us.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Chairman of the Budget Committee stepped out and asked me to stand in for him for now and pick whatever instructions of your ruling for clarity in tomorrow’s meeting. One thing I seek your guidance on and which will help tomorrow’s meeting is on the procedural and legal matter on which we seemed to agree here and which I think your further elucidation is required to help the meeting. Currently, there is a point advanced by Government that we do not have the mandate as Parliament to reallocate money. 

Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance to avoid more endless arguments in the committee. Reallocations of money between Votes within a ministry, where Votes have presented unfunded priorities and here we feel those priorities do not deserve those amounts they have allocated; the argument coming up is that we actually do not have the power to do that; that is the mandate of the Executive. So we need guidance on that one.

If it so happens that you rule that we do not have those powers, then to what extent do we – what do we look at? When we do not agree on some items, do we suggest that the money be dropped? I think there were some procedural issues that came up and if they are not well clarified, I am not predicting doom, but the same stalemate may remain. Consensus building has been a very good procedure instead of resorting to voting. I seek your guidance so that we can proceed while on the same page tomorrow.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. It is very true that we have a multi-party political democracy here with Government and Opposition sides. When passing the Budget, there is a process to be followed because the Budget is a very central part of the Government programmes. So, Government must ensure that its budget reflects its priorities, whose programmes must go through a parliamentary process.

So, as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament, it is part of his responsibility to ensure that the Government Budget goes through a consensus. Think about this process. We usually start with workshops, budget frameworks, we do the medium term reviews; we go through committees before we get this budget in place. If at this material time, no agreement has been reached with all these procedures – Parliament is supreme in appropriation -(Applause)- that is what it is, but I would like to plead that by the time we get here tomorrow, the Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government Business will have got the a clear position. Otherwise, in a parliamentary democracy, we cannot keep disagreeing on the processes on a government budget. We must find ways of crosschecking these figures. I believe the Prime Minister will get something done within the limits of the law.

MRS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of clarification. Now that many agreements have been reached with some reflecting of committee reports that have been adopted by this House – in table 4, the minister has noted something that is contrary to what some of the committee reports presented to this House. On the basis of that, how shall we proceed tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we said that until we pronounce ourselves on the Appropriation Bill, the matters before us are still negotiable between the parties concerned. Basically, this is the last chance we are giving to the disagreeing and agreeing parties. So, by tomorrow morning these issues should be sorted out. By afternoon of tomorrow, should there be any areas of further disagreements, we will proceed to vote without any undue delay. (Applause) And the vote of Parliament will be final on such matters; we will proceed as that. This position is not negotiable. We have to move the budget process to the next stage. So, I implore all the Members to be here at 2 O’clock because whichever way, we have to take a decision.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much. The ministry of finance usually agrees to agree. So, it is our prayer that tomorrow we shall fully supply. On 18 July 2011, the ministry of finance tabled a corrigendum to help us in handling the issue of the ministry of energy. However, on 15 August 2011, we sent yet another corrigendum, which superseded the one of July. So, I would like, with your permission, Mr Speaker, to withdraw the corrigendum that was tabled on 18 July 2011. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the proposal by the minister of finance is that the House permits him to withdraw the former corrigendum submitted in July, which he says may not be necessary, having submitted the one of August. It is a formality that should serve this purpose; any objections to the proposal?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If there are no objections, the July corrigendum stands withdrawn. With that the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 11.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 September 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

