Tuesday, 22 September 2009

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to this sitting. You may recall last week I did inform you that in commemoration of the International Day of Democracy, the Parliament of Uganda organised an activity to observe that day. I am happy to inform you that in fulfillment of the International Day of Democracy, a mock debate of youth representatives of political parties took place this morning in the Parliamentary Conference Hall under the theme, “Political tolerance under a multiparty dispensation in Uganda.” The youth parliament was well attended and displayed a high level of debate.

I wish to thank all the youth who participated and the Members who found time in their busy schedule to attend this function. 

I wish to further thank Hon. Hamson Obua, Parliamentary Commissioner, for playing the role of a master of ceremony and the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, for being the chief guest. 

I wish to declare that henceforth, the Parliament of Uganda will organise and host this activity annually.

Honourable members, you will recall that on Tuesday, His Excellency gave an address, and I indicated that I would give you an opportunity to debate the address but as it was pointed out yesterday, some copies of the documents he used were received but others were not. I understand that all the documents, save the Hansard, are available for you, and as soon as we get the Hansard, we shall then set a date when you can have a debate on this matter. This was your request that you want to debate the address together with the Hansard. 

I have not got the particulars of our guests today, but they are students who I imagine participated in today’s proceedings in the conference hall. Join me in welcoming them to Parliament. (Applause)

Honourable members, I have got very sad news of the demise of our former colleague, Hon. Francis Bantariza, who was with us in the last Parliament representing Buhweju. He died suddenly at his home. Burial will be 12 miles along Mbarara-Ibanda Road in Kashari County in Mbarara District tomorrow. I suggest that we observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

Those who may have condolence messages should pass them through the current Member of Parliament for Buhweju.

2.56
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): I rise on a matter of very urgent public interest. I think honourable members you have heard about the outbreak of swine flue in Bushenyi District. When I read the papers today, they were talking of more than 250 people who have been confirmed positive.

I wish to thank the local leadership, all the leaders and the Ministry of Health because they have come in promptly to contain the situation. But a lot of information is still lacking. When I was in the canteen at lunch time, I was seated with four colleagues; one of them asked me when I was last in Bushenyi and I said yesterday. At that same moment I coughed and sneezed and they all took off. So, if honourable members of Parliament can get scared – yes, even now Dr Baryomunsi is quaking. (Laughter) 

On a serious note, a lot of information should go down there because yesterday, people came and asked me, “Should we close the pork joints? Should we put a halt to all the seminars so that we are not in crowded places?” And they also said there are some students who went home and they do not know whether they took the virus with them to their homes and, therefore, spread it. This is serious and I, therefore, request the Ministry of Health to provide a report to this Parliament sooner than later because this is now an emergency. And it is not only in Bushenyi; one hears about it here and there. We thought that this thing had come to a halt, but it is springing up all of a sudden. I thank you. 

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What my honourable colleague has raised is true. We have sent a team to Bushenyi and of the cases tested, about eight students have been found positive. We are still investigating the source. The ministry will come out with a comprehensive report very soon. There are also suspected cases in Namagunga. The samples were also taken, but they were negative. After the taskforce which is in Bushenyi comes with comprehensive results we shall come and give an update of the whole Swine Flu situation. Thank you.

3.00
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, the issue of epidemic outbreaks can cause a lot of untold anxiety among the population and, therefore, I would like to join my colleague, hon. Karooro Okurut, in urging Government to make sure that regular updated information be given to the public. As of now, some people wonder whether it is really true that pork is responsible for the transmission of this virus. I think, first of all, naming it Swine Flu actually presupposes that pork has a bearing to its transmission and that is not correct.

I think the ministry should clearly and regularly bring this information to the public. The H1N1 virus has nothing to do with the pork. In fact, for me I would argue that people should eat well-prepared pork, but not because of the risk of getting the H1N1 virus. The misnaming of this viral infection as the Swine Flu should not scare people from eating pork because pork is not responsible for its transmission anyway. 

So, hon. Minister of Health, I would like to encourage the ministry to make sure that the vigilance is stepped up because as we speak, I think our epidemic preparedness is wanting. That must be admitted. We would like to urge the whole House to support efforts that the ministry will make towards controlling this epidemic.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me inform this House that hon. Dr Nduhuura, together with the team from WHO and the Ministry of Health, almost spontaneously came to Bushenyi. Not only did they visit the school, but they also had time on radio to explain the causes of the disease, its spread and how to avoid spreading it. Some of us have also been in the area and we talked as much as we could. The Minister of Health has handled this before since this epidemic broke out on the globe. 

I would really wish to plead that we do not return to the same situation as when Ebola broke out in Kasese and they were supposed to close transport and spray whoever came from that direction with some chemicals, which frightened the whole world. 

Fortunately, according to the available information and the occurrence that we have experienced, the version that has come to Uganda seems to be weak because we have lost nobody; the quarantine has helped; and the treatment has succeeded. So, let us hope that this is not the cause of fright.

There was talk of the virus being in Kampala somewhere but we need to really call the ministry and also, because we – ourselves, are the source of information and we can be a source of confidence to our people. Thank you.

3.04
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance. A constituent of mine called Hope Stephen, a young man of 18 years, was rounded up in the recent riots in Kampala while he was walking. He is an S.6 leaver and he was walking to a place where he is being trained to do videography. He was rounded up and the parents do not know his whereabouts.

His mother called Mercelina Kasangaki from Humura village in Karambi sub-county came to my home last weekend together with a councillor of that area called Margaret Kateeba and they wanted me to help them trace the young man. He is not a Muganda; he belongs to King Oyo’s great Kingdom of Toro. He was not among the rioters but he was, I think, rounded up erroneously as he walked to go to his place of work. 

Mr Speaker, I beg that the matter be taken on by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs so that the parents can rest. Now they are running everywhere looking for their son. They do not know where to go and who to approach. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, as you are aware, I was supposed to make a statement before this House to bring you up to date with what is happening to those that have been arrested. But my ministry, together with the Speaker, found it appropriate that this statement comes at the time when we begin to debate the presidential address. We thought that if we bring it now we shall be pre-empting your other debate. We thought that was a wise decision. 

But as for the concern of my sister, I have a full list of all the people that have been arrested and we know where each person who was arrested is. Maybe what I would suggest is that she should give me the name and I will go and check on my list and I will communicate to her where that person is. That is if he is in the hands of the Police. That is what I pray that we do. Thank you.

MS MUHANGA: Mr Speaker, it is quite a tricky situation because first of all, some people have already been taken to court and charged. I know it is beyond us as Parliament, but in the event that this boy was rounded up surely without necessarily being one of the rioters, what happens? What are we going to do as Parliament? If he was in the crowd and rounded up like that; what are we going to do to get these people out of court cases yet they did not have a hand in the rioting? 

THE SPEAKER: Now that you have given the details, they will scrutinize the cases and find out what to do.

MR KASAIJA: Subsequently, the Police and Ministry of Internal Affairs have discovered that in the heat of the moment there were victims, people who should not have been rounded up. As I speak now, we are screening and those that will be found to have no connection whatsoever will be released.

And for those that we have already committed to court, if we find in the file that actually the individual had nothing to do with the rioting, then definitely the state will lose interest in that case and the person will be released. 

I want you to appreciate why some Ugandans have been unduly inconvenienced by this riot. If you are faced with a riotous situation, you cannot easily tell who is involved in crime and who is not. If there is a group of youth rioting, there could be one of them who is not involved, but what would you do? Really, the Police was faced with a difficult situation. So I request you colleagues to appreciate our dilemma. 

We are sorry for inconveniencing every Ugandan who was not involved in that fracas, but there is no scientific means that we could use to differentiate that so and so is a strong suspect or not. But as I said, everything is being done - in fact one of my constituents is in prison in Kigo; and the boy had come here to trade. So we are doing everything possible to ensure that those who were not involved are freed in the shortest time possible.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, is the hon. Member of Parliament for Makindye in order to come to the House when he is improperly dressed? We all grew up here in Kampala and we saw people dressed in kanzu – whenever people put on kanzus here, they put on a coat on top to be properly dressed. The honourable member is incompletely dressed. So is he in order to come here and wish to address the House when he is improperly dressed?

THE SPEAKER: I thought that is a religious dressing; but I am not well versed with it. Can you explain, please?

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling, and I am sad that my senior colleague continues to hold Islamic dressing in contempt. This is a suit in the United Arab Emirates, if you did not know. 

Mr Speaker, I want to get clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs. But before that, I would like to thank him for having been honest to say that the government and Police were in confusion and therefore they did not know what they were doing at that time. The point over which I want clarification is that of screening. It is very pleasing that government has reached a stage of recognizing that the job was done badly. Due to that bad form of work, many people were victimized. But those who are lucky enough will be screened and be released, God willing. But my question is: who is going to screen the dead and bring them back to life?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I do not know how I should answer this. How do we screen the dead; we can only screen the living. So we should not joke and I think this is very contemptuous of our dead. This was a war situation; and in a war situation, you cannot be sure who was in the right or the wrong. So I want someone to teach me a scientific method that the Police should have used in a situation where people are burning buildings, burning tyres, beating one another and looting. How could a police officer come to know who is in the right or wrong?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already said that we are going to get a fully fledged debate on this subject when we get the Hansard; we should have started tomorrow or the other day with the President’s address on the subject. This statement and the President’s address are connected. So let us wait and have a full debate when we get the Hansard. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you made a proposal yesterday, part of the request really came from us that we needed the Hansard record so that we could discuss it in a complete form. But having heard what the hon. Member for Kabarole raised, it may become important that the minister makes his statement, because he will give us information that we can verify, so that by the time of the debate, we can come and say, “I checked and the information I have is this”. That way, we will not have to say, “Well, I have just got this information and I need to verify”.

THE SPEAKER: What we can do is: the minister can prepare a statement and give us copies, but he will formally make the statement on that day when we start the debate. Next item!

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday I told you we have two Bills: one is the Supplementary Appropriation and the other is the normal Appropriation Bill. Maybe we should start with the supplementary and then we see what we can do with the other?

3.15
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, I did communicate to you a matter that starting with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill would help us to review. If you permit me, I would like to state the situation that I found - the position that I met. 

During the debate on appropriation, the Opposition protested certain proposal expenditures that they genuinely believed did not represent the interest of this country, and the urgency with which we must prudently spend our money. They objected specifically on four expenditure items: One, the Shs 6.5 billion for assistant RDCs responsible for mobilisation for patriotism. The second one was the Shs 10 billion to be spent for the promotion of the Presidential Banana Initiative. Then there was the Shs 4 billion to be given to Kampala International University, and another Shs 1.7 billion to be spent constructing a market in Juba. 

Arising from those objections, I think the Members found out that rather than logic driving the process, it was the question of political sentiments and numbers driving the process. They gave way to those who thought logic was not so important to do their thing. 

Yesterday, the Shadow Minister for Finance informed me, because I was not aware - in fact, when you talked about the two Bills, I was not aware that the Appropriation Bill would come before the House today. If I was not mistaken in the situation, I would have called an urgent meeting of the Opposition to discuss how we should proceed. Members walked out at supply stage –(Interjections)– Well, that is the report I got. So, how do we proceed from our perspective?

Maybe starting with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill would help us to quickly consult and then come out with a position. Whatever position we come up with, I will convey it.

THE SPEAKER: So, you want some time? Five minutes?

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Let us have 10 minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I suspend for 10 minutes, in the gallery there are some students and teachers from Holy Cross Lake View Secondary School, Wanyange, Bugembe Constituency. You are welcome. (Applause) Now, let me suspend for 10 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 3.21 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 3.40 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

3.40
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2009” be read for the second time. I beg to move. 

3.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Mr Speaker, Article 156(3) of the Constitution provides that: 

“Where, in respect of any financial year, a supplementary estimate or supplementary estimates have been approved by Parliament in accordance with clause (2) of this Article, a Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into Parliament in the financial year next, following that financial year to which the estimates relate, providing for the appropriation of the sums so approved for the purposes specified in those estimates.” 

In the financial year 2008/09, Parliament authorised Government to incur supplementary expenditure to fund a number of activities of emergency nature. Honourable members may remember that the first supplementary expenditure was of Shs 5.35 billion to the Office of the Prime Minister to address crop failure and the food crisis in northern and eastern Uganda. 

Government presented to Parliament the first supplementary funding request of Shs 125.287 billion, including what had earlier been approved to address crop failure, on 19 March 2009. Parliament authorised this supplementary expenditure in April 2009. 

Government further requested Parliament to authorise another supplementary expenditure Schedule No.2 of Shs 124.85 billion on 14 May 2009. Parliament approved the supplementary request on 18 June 2009. 

In conformity with the constitutional provision cited above, the Minster of Finance, Planning and Economic Development read for the first time the Supplementary Appropriation Bill in the House on 10 September 2009. Consequently, the Bill was referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny and to report to the House. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I now wish to report that the Budget Committee securitized the Bill and established that it is a true reflection of the supplementary expenditure that Parliament approved for the various votes in the course of the last financial year, 2008/09. I now wish, therefore, to recommend that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2009” be read for the second time and consequently be enacted into law. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. So, the motion is that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2009 be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Chairman, as you were leaving your Chair, hon. Kamuntu emerged into this Chamber through the main door. Is he in order to equate himself to the Speaker of Parliament and to use a door he is not mandated to use when the House is in session?

HON. MEMBERS: Go through that same door! (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, he has withdrawn. (Laughter)

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.47
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.47
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2009” and passed it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.48
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House on the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2009. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

3.48
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I Beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: 
“THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION ACT, 2009”


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

3.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, just before the House was suspended, we had made a presentation to you in regard to item 3, which is now before the House. I requested that consultations be made amongst us on account of the fact that on the 9 September 2009, members objected to certain expenditures on grounds that they believed were solid. They expressed their displeasure for not being heard through logic by leaving the Chambers.

Consequent to that, we needed to agree on what the logical way forward would be, now that our withdrawal from the Chamber was based on logic. The simple logic is that if you are going to spend money belonging to the people of Uganda, the basis must be solid and there must be fairness in agreeing to that. Members particularly objected to the introduction of an expenditure on patriotism whose policy had never been discussed and whose intentions are largely political. You can never be a patriot if you are not a nationalist.

Consequently, you allowed us to consult, and we thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In our consultations, we discussed the options available to us and how to proceed.

It has become a very difficult situation when the country looks to Parliament to defend its interests yet because of procedural matters, Parliament is constrained and becomes unable to do so. Our universities are seriously under funded; it does not make sense for this Parliament to appropriate money to a private university. It is even more painful that the people behind that private university include an individual who previously received over Shs 20 billion just because he is who he is, and not because that is the priority of the country.

The Opposition, having considered this matter, and knowing that the next elections are just around the corner, know that money, like squirrels in Europe do, can be stacked away for appropriate periods. We believe, therefore, and very strongly, that these monies that do not serve the primary interests of Uganda should not be appropriated as has largely been agreed.

Since this Bill merely puts a final stamp on what we objected to in first place, we see no point in participating in the consideration of the Bill. We still want to express our extreme displeasure to this kind of expenditure and we, therefore, decided that we shall maintain our non participation in the funding of these programmes whose objectives are certainly not national. We agree like the Members said on the floor, that we are very few and that is the reason why we have problems in this country, because instead of looking at logic, you look at numbers; regardless of where the numbers drive you, you proceed. But in our smallness in numbers, the logic demands that we do not participate and, therefore, it is with deep regret, Mr Speaker, that I inform you of the decision of the Members, and since this item is now on the floor, we will leave the House to proceed as you wish. Thank you.

(Whereupon Members of the Opposition withdrew from the Chamber.)

THE SPEAKER: They did not want me to say something.
3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, I stand here on a point of clarification and putting the record very clear. The Leader of the Opposition has said they did not participate and they went out. It is not true because three Members remained behind and actually one of the Shadow Ministers moved a motion here about the market in Juba. Hon. Ekanya stayed up to the end and I recollect that there were two Members who stayed because I was here. So, the record should be put correct that they participated, voted and lost.

3.57 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I talk with a very heavy heart about the political behaviour of our colleagues. First of all, the word patriotism is not partisan. To be patriotic is to love your country and the Opposition can only operate when they have a country we all love. The value system of children growing up to love their country must be imparted and inculcated and is not automatic - it is part of the socialisation process of children who are growing up and it cannot be automatic. 

Consequently, when a state takes the decision to inculcate in the young the love for their country so that when they have grown, they will never depart from that belief - it cannot be a basis of walking out. It is very sad. 

Let me bring something that is structural and it is going to bring us a lot of trouble as a country. In a multi-party political system - it has ever happened in this country and I really bleed to feel that it could happen again. When you have the Leader of the Opposition – the only Leader of the Opposition in Parliament going out of Parliament - it shows the man is not a leader. It happened here when Basil Bataringaya was Leader of the Opposition – when the party leader is outside the Chamber, it is a structural torment for our brother, especially coming from a tradition of a university where the core belief is to be honest and truthful. 

I have the greatest sympathy for Prof. Latigo because he knows in his heart what the truth is but cannot dare say it lest they lynch him outside. The Opposition will lynch him outside this Chamber if he says anything which he believes is true, knowing outside his bosses do not believe it.

He has a problem and I do not know how we can help him. He is the Leader of the Opposition in the House and they must discipline him outside if he says something truthful contrary to what they believe. I have no doubt that Prof. Latigo believes truthfully that patriotism is an educational process, but he dares not say so – and he has to tell us he is going out. Isn’t this sad? This is a budget for the whole nation. 

Mr Speaker, when you give funds to a university which is universal and is teaching your children to be doctors, education becomes a shared responsibility between the State and the entrepreneur, and for this to be a cause of a walk out is really sad. Who are these students who are going to be taught? They are not the students of the proprietor or the entrepreneur, but of the nation where the State has a stake. The State contributing to that education is logical. You are asking for the logic? That is the logic. The children being taught by the funds we are appropriating in this Chamber is going to help our children to become doctors in medicine. Is that illogical? Honestly, it is terrible to walk out when the nation is appropriating resources for which – now if Members walk out, are they paid for work or they are on a strike? -(Interruption) 

MR BALIDDAWA: I need clarification from the hon. Minister because he is making a good and very eloquent argument for KIU. I want to know whether all the private institutions will also get money. Busoga University is in dire need of money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue of giving funds to Kampala International University came up and was debated by both sides and at the end of the exercise, appropriate measures to show the displeasure of the Opposition was done and Shs 10,000, as required by law, was deducted as an expression of displeasure and, therefore, this should not be repeated because we disposed of it here in the House when both sides were there. 

You know that we are running under a multi-party system where two sides are recognised – there is the Opposition and the Government side. The Opposition is entitled to be heard and the Speaker has a duty to give them an opportunity to be heard. As to what happens to what is contributed by them is decided upon democratically and this is known. Decisions are made here, they may not go with your side but you abide by the decision made by the House. So, we should not run away from the decisions being made here and then go outside. 

This appropriation is not only dealing with those two items or three, but is also dealing with the entire Budget and when we refuse to pass it, then we make those ministries or people who are supposed to get that money suffer and the activities of these ministries or departments suffer and people will not benefit at all. So I think we should teach ourselves what we call tolerance that even if you are defeated you continue carrying out your work.

With what has happened today, I think they may have second thoughts. In the interest of justice, I am going to adjourn to allow them to think about what we have said and perhaps tomorrow we shall continue. The o
House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 September 2009.) 

