
Friday, 25 September 2009

Parliament met at 11.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this morning’s meeting. As you recollect, during our debates on the Budget, there were a lot of complaints about uncompleted work. So in the Business Committee we agreed that we shall work extra time. I am now giving notice that we shall meet morning and afternoon starting from Tuesday at 10 O’clock until we finish the work. So the Clerk will issue announcements on radio to remind Members to be here on Tuesday morning at 10 O’clock. But for now let us proceed -(Mr Okello-Okello rose_)- Do you have a problem? Can’t it wait? Hon. Member you know the rules. You should have come but anyway – 

11.23
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): It is not a very important matter. Madam Speaker, some of us have been sitting here for more than an hour and yesterday we agreed that the House would start at 10 a.m. My request is that the Speaker should lead us in time management. If we say 10 a.m. you come in even if the House is empty. Because if you wait, we shall also wait and we will continue wasting time the way we are doing.

Secondly, most of our Members are in Entebbe for UWOPA. I really do not think that we should continue with the sitting when the House is almost empty. Can’t we wait for them on Tuesday so that we do things together? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I was in my office at 7.45 a.m. I have been watching the CCTV and there was hon. Akello, you and two Members on this side. Now that we have come, let us proceed with business. 
 
MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 35 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP FOR THE KAMPALA SANITATION PROGRAMME PHASE I PROJECT

11.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Members. I beg to present the request of government to borrow 35 million Units of Account from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the Kampala sanitation programme.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see it is seconded.

MS NANKABIRWA: “WHEREAS a loan agreement for Units of Account 35 million is to be concluded between the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group and the government of the Republic of Uganda for the purposes of financing the Kampala Sanitation Programme Phase I Project;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other Constitutional provisions 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated Constitutional requirements, government has laid before this Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for their approval and authorisation; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Government is hereby authorised to secure the said loan of Units of Account 35 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group upon the terms and conditions therein stated.”

I beg to move.”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson!

11.27
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): I present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by government to borrow Units of Account 35 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for the Kampala Sanitation Programme Project Phase I. 

I lay on the Table the file of minutes. It includes the project appraisal report implementation plan, draft loan agreement and workshop proceedings. 

The request was presented to Parliament by the Minister under Article 159(1)(2) of the Constitution. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now would like to report as follows: 

I will read briefly. You can read about the methodology on your own. 
    i) The request rose out of the water and sanitation sector and poverty alleviation as demonstrated by its inclusion among the key pillars of PIP; 
    ii) Pillar II: increasing the production, competitiveness of Uganda’s products and household incomes. 
    iii) Pillar III: trans-boundary water resources, management and adoption of climate change.
    iv) Pillar V: human development, water supply and sanitation.

The Programme Review

The proposed Kampala sanitation program phase I is detailed in the feasibility study of July 2008. It will meet the demand of services up to the year 2022. The main outputs will be a rehabilitated sewer system including provision of 53,000 cubic meters day waste water and 500 cubic meters day waste sewage treatment capacities. 

The direct beneficiaries of the proposed program will be the entire population of Kampala estimated at 1.4 million people and the people leaving along the showers of Lake Victoria. The programme will bring general improvements in public health within the city, curtail water and sanitation related diseases and contribute to the environmental sustainability of the lake. 

The programme objective is to provide sanitation for the people leaving in Kampala. The existing sewage network in Kampala only serves 7.5 percent of the population. This is intended to increase to 15 percent by the end of the project period. 

The project will also protect the quality of water in the inner Murchison Bay of Lake Victoria through the improved sanitation in Kampala. 

The project components include Nakivubo Sewer System with two components: rehabilitation and extension of existing 135 km of sewer pipelines of which 10 km are blocked and 7.5 km requiring realignment. A total of 30 km of the new sewer line will be laid under this new credit. The operation of the Nakivubo Sewer works involves constructing of a new plant of 45 cubic meters day at the designated cite at the upper section of Nakivubo wetland. 

Another component is faecal silage, treatment and management. There is construction of Kinawataka system which will serve the Eastern part of Kampala. It is going to be an 8,000 cubic meters of waste per day treatment plant and will be built; including the laying of the 15 km of sewer line network within Kinawataka catchment area. 

There is also another component of promotion of sanitation and awareness campaigns and this is the hygiene and sanitation promotion including community mobilisation, and education in most deserving areas of the city will be implemented by National Water and KCC using NGO. 

The programme cost – I will read in part. The costs estimates are derived from the Kampala sanitation feasibility studies; unit rates are derived from suppliers and contractors as well as from experience with similar ongoing operations in the country and in the region. 

Project Implementation

The programme shall be implemented using the existing structures, incorporating lessons and experience gained from similar programs laid down by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation.

Observations:
    1. Note was taken over the government’s divestiture of private owned companies at prices not commensurate with investment and concern was raised over National Water suffering the same fate. The committee was sceptical on whether government also intends to sell National Water. 
    2. The committee noted the government’s reluctance to pass this loan to National Water as a grant considering that National Water has several components like the treatment of flow to Nakivubo Channel, faecal silage collection and treatment, and hygiene in schools that are non-revenue generating yet they contribute greatly towards the operation and maintenance costs of the organisations operations. 
    3. The committee further noted that the issue of water and sanitation which concerns many other government departments is only being handled solely by National Water. 
    4. Another concern was raised over difficulties that National Water might encounter in implementing the project due to the encumbrances in land acquisition and the fact that most wetlands have been allocated to private investors while others have been encroached on illegally.
    5. Another concern was raised over the possibility of high late of seepage into the pipes that feed the boreholes in the surrounding communities given the fact that there are many latrines in areas like Bwaise. 
    6. The committee noted that National Water has not yet brought on board other stakeholders like NPA and other organisations so as to ensure integrated infrastructure development and avoid future structural replacements and reinstatement costs associated with uncoordinated developments. 
    7. Note was taken that although National Water is currently one of the world leaders in water supply management, the sewer infrastructure is still lacking. The committee noted that much as the project involved laying of sewer lines, which indicated use of waterborne toilet facilities, there is not adequate supply of water in Kampala to supply the whole city for the functions of the toilets. 
    8. The committee noted further that government is not doing enough to attract investment into this sector and to prioritise this sector. 

Recommendations:
    1. The committee recommends that government should step up this sanitation sector because it is not profitable and it is almost a social service.
    2. The committee further urges government to gear its efforts towards designing and construction of mini treatment plants. 
    3. The committee recommends that government desists from divesting public corporations especially with prices not commensurate with the investment so far put in.
    4. Government is further urged to pass on this loan to National Water as a grant.
    5. National Water is urged to develop a national satiation programme so as to be able to make future plans for funding and other cost implications as they may arise.
    6. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment fast-tracks the process of demarcating and mapping wetlands for easy management, monitoring and restoration.
    7. The Ministry of Water and Environment should spearhead and coordinate all government departments concerned with the issues of sanitation to come up with concerted efforts and comprehensive long-term solutions for sanitation.
    8. National water is urged to adopt eco-system sanitation as one of the options to safeguard ground water sources from pollution. National water is further urged to work closely with key stakeholders involved in the project. For example, they are supposed to work closely with the National Planning Authority, KCC, NEMA and others so as to ensure an integrated infrastructure development.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the committee appreciates the sector’s issues, constraints, needs, and sanitation challenges faced in the capital city while recognising the steps that government has taken in addressing Uganda’s and in particular, Kampala’s sanitation and environment issues. Noted is the need to obtain funding for the Kampala Sanitation Programme.

I would like to submit that the committee supports and recommends to this House the approval of the request by government to borrow UA 35 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Group to finance the Kampala Sanitation Project, Phase I. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

11.39
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for the report.

I support the motion. It is important in the sense that Kampala City is growing very fast, the most disappointing thing being the state of its sanitation compared to many other cities. Of late we have been hosting quite a lot of people who come to this country for various conferences, yet the state of our sanitation is very poor. I actually wonder what is happening.

I would like to agree with the committee that some integrated approach must be followed. The development of the infrastructure is being done by various groups and organizations, all of which must be integrated. 

Of main concern is the planning of housing development in this country. I am saying this because sanitation has a lot to do with where people stay. I have noticed that mushrooming estates and personal development is affecting planning very much. There is no planning. We are only developing modern slums, which makes it very difficult to even draw a plan for sewerage lines within the city.

Although earlier on I said that I support this initiative by government to secure money in order to put right the sanitation programme, I would like to emphasise the fact that we need a comprehensive sewerage and sanitation plan for the city. 

The idea of starting mini plants is very important. However, it must be done in a coordinated manner. During the construction of the Northern By-pass – while we boast of the new road, it has affected the drainage system in the city. I would like to hope that as we go on with this programme, we endeavour to make Kampala a clean city so that it is worth living in by Ugandans. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before Hon. Muwuma and hon. Bukeni make their contributions, I would like to say what hon. Toskin has reminded me of. Do we have any great plans for where the sewers will lie in the city? 

HON. MEMBERS: No!

11.42
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to call upon Parliament to approve this loan request. I would like to agree with recommendation No. 6 in the committee’s report, which urges the Ministry of Water and Environment to fast track the process of mapping wetlands.

This is very good because the rate at which our wetlands are being encroached on is very high. I notice that in the near future our ecosystem will be at stake; we will all be losers. We should urge, in the strongest terms, the Ministry of Water and Environment to scale up the efforts in as far as this recommendation is concerned.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I am happy that it is National Water and Sewerage Corporation that is being entrusted with the management of these resources. I am saying this because if it were KCC on its own, I would say no to this loan. I serve on the Committee of Local Governments, but I can tell you that the way resources are handled in Kampala is like somebody just carrying ground nuts and they continue dishing out to anyone who wishes. 

It is now that although they are being brought on board as stakeholders – but if at all any resources are to be passed on to them, they should be monitored seriously for us to get value for money. Otherwise, KCC requires total overhaul for us to get value for money from any resources entrusted to them. As I said in my opening remarks, I support this loan because it will help the sanitation problem that we have in the city so that we can all enjoy staying in Kampala. I thank you very much.

11.45
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the loan. As we all know, Uganda is indeed well endowed not only with good climate but also the landscape is easy for us to rely on the topography of our land so that some of these systems can run without necessarily pumping them. This means that it is easy to plan sanitation in Kampala which can run without necessarily pumping, making it therefore easier than other areas. We are also lucky that we have enough water unlike other places. My problem however is the need for government to organise the way things are being done in government especially in organisations like KCC, NEMA, Uganda Land Commission and the land board. 

We are worried about whether even the land for putting up this infrastructure will be available anyway because the land may have been leased out or may belong to another person. Every passing day there is land allocation either by the land board of KCC or by the Uganda Land Commission. What is interesting is that as long as there is a land title, NEMA cannot stop any development, which means that government departments are very happy with the lacuna in the law and are busy dishing out the land without anybody stopping them. We would like to be assured by government that by passing this loan, the wetland will not be given out as they have been doing and that the National Water and Sewerage Corporation will access that place to do what they want to do there. 

The sewer infrastructure is actually very old and I do not think it serves even 10 percent of Kampala City. I am also sure government has been called upon to be proactive and I take it that they are not only going to plan Kampala but are also going to plan other places because these other places are also growing. 

As you are aware, town councils are growing into municipalities, municipalities are growing into cities – it would be good that other areas are planned in advance so that when it comes to such infrastructure in future for these areas, the land is available. When you go to a place like Mbale, the wetlands that would be used in Mbale also are being given out left, right and centre and it is my fear that this is something that is not only happening in Mbale but also other urban areas, which we should plan for in advance so that when we pass money, we know that this infrastructure is going to be on our land. Also, there should be wetlands that will be used for the National Water and Sewerage Corporation for this purpose. Thank you very much.

11.49
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you. I support the motion and I thank hon. Sebunya for the way he has presented the report. This is a very good project on sanitation and as you know, government has been systematically coming out to help Kampala City Council to see that it becomes a place worth living in. We have passed loans on roads, we have handled transportation – the Minister of Works is handling transportation within the CDB and the Greater Kampala and just recently, we have seen they are handling the health sector by expanding hospitals like in Naguru. So, what has been missing is sanitation and I am very grateful that we are handling a very sensitive area of sanitation whereby these water borne diseases are going to be effectively handled to see that people can enjoy and live in the city, not only with local standards but approaching international standards. 

Madam Speaker, what is worrying me is the faecal sludge treatment and management areas which are going to be built in Lubigi and Nalukolongo. These are wetland areas and there is a possibility of people who are taking this sludge in the cesspool emptiers to even dump in the swamps. We have seen people dumping murram in the swamps and now they will start dumping sludge in the swamps and making a lot of environmental contamination. If and only if this is Phase I of sludge treatment that later will be upgraded in treating the sewage – if that is not the case, then I am a bit worried about having these faecal sludge treatment areas in these wetlands of Lubigi and Nalukolongo. 

I would urge government to see that we step up and get onto the sewer lines because sludge from the septic tanks is dangerous for us because most of these septic tanks are leaking and are contaminating underground water. In no time we shall not be able to use spring wells around Kampala and Mpigi because all the ground water will be contaminated. 

The other area where I urge the ministry to be very careful is affordability. They talk about the disbursement of funds I think by December 2009, and a detailed study for the tariffs and an affordability study to assess the effectiveness and adequacy of the current tariffs. While I agree that we should look at the affordability of these tariffs, we should make sure that it is not the driving force. I think you cannot trade people’s lives on affordability alone. We should make sure that we go ahead with this project, whether people can afford the tariffs or not. But government should look for more money until people are able to afford the tariffs. We should not be kept captive by our development partners that if people cannot afford the tariffs, then we cannot release more funds because even now, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation is doing projects and taking water to people who cannot afford the tariffs. So, this issue –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Byandala, for giving way. Forgive me if I am taking you back because with some of the technical issues, we have to digest them before we appreciate them. I think you did mention that shifting the sludge treatment plants to Nalukolongo and the other places means putting them in swamps and therefore causing an environmental risk and probably a health risk. I know that you were in KCC and maybe some of this planning started when you were still there -(Laughter)– I want you to help me with two things: 

One, if it is a treatment plant, is it not supposed to render whatever you are treating harmless so that you can then subsequently even reuse it? In China they even use faecal products for fertilisers. 

Secondly, if you think those places are not appropriate, when you were in KCC, what were the areas you thought could house these treatment plants?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. First of all if you check your history, the present treatment plant in Bugolobi is most of the time not functional and the Nakivubo wetland is constantly being contaminated and that is why the National Water and Sewerage Corporation is always complaining that they will need more money to treat the water from the lake. It is constantly non functional. So, I have no reason to believe that this faecal sludge treatment plant will work to ensure that the effluent is perfect. 

Secondly, about the planning, this was the responsibility of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation where I did not have a say. I was a city engineer and surveyor in Kampala and not in National Water and Sewerage Corporation –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall have hon. Santos, hon. Wamakuyu, hon. Okupa and the Minister for Water. I am interested in what he has said on the issue of not locating the sludge in Lubigi. I hope you will be able to tell us what is going to happen. 

11.56 
MR PIRO SANTOS (Independent, East Moyo, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I support the motion and I thank the committee for the good report. I have three points to raise. One is that the drainage condition in Kampala has been worsening even when this Parliament has previously approved loans to maintain it. How can the ministry ensure that this time the loan passed will be supervised and properly monitored so that the implementing agencies or the contractors working on these drainages do proper work? I am saying this because most of these drainages here like Nakivubo Channel were done about five years ago but if you go down town, you will find buveera and plastic bottles floating there as if there are no implementing agencies to clear this drainage. I wonder which department is responsible for the supervision. 

If the Minister for Water and Environment could assure us that after passing this loan they will take full responsibility of the supervision, then we shall pass it. The level of corruption in KCC is supported by the line ministry that is supposed to supervise Kampala City Council because if I am master of my house and I see something bad going on in my house and I keep quiet, will somebody be wrong to say that I am in support of what is going on in my house? The corruption in KCC is being watched by the Ministry of Local Government and they do not care to charge the responsible officers: the town clerk, the mayor and the councillors – it is as if they are working as a team to actually divert public funds. So, this should be taken very seriously by the line ministry and the loan we are passing should in future be properly supervised and monitored so that it is used for the right purposes. 

My other concern is as observed here by the committee in their recommendation No. 6: “The Ministry of Water and Environment is asked to fast track the process of demarcation and mapping of wetlands.” As Members are aware, this wetland is actually supposed to filter the drainage going to Lake Victoria but the level of settlement on this wetland is just terrible. NEMA is there and NEMA actually aids the encroachers by making some reports that, “If you want to settle on the wetland, please follow this, put some pipes here …” as if they are there to encourage people to continue encroaching on the wetland. (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, hon. Santos for giving way. The threat of encroachment in the Nakivubo Channel and the Kinawataka Channel is quite alarming. The Minister of Water and Environment, the Committee on Natural Resources and ourselves, National Economy, did have a tour with NEMA and other related wetlands management - the problem is very big and it is not only NEMA to blame. 

I would like to give this information and appeal that all stakeholders, including Ministry of Local Government and KCC, to really do something because we did find that there were even attempts to issue titles for some of this land. So, it is not NEMA to blame. We cannot leave it to NEMA alone even us as Parliament have really to be very hard with whoever is trying to get a title in a wetland.

The two committees of Natural Resources and National Economy, and the ministry, moved and we think that these titles should be revoked and something in that direction is already in one of the documents we did get. I thought I should give that information.

MR PIRO SANTOS: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for that information. What I was trying to stress is that if one goes to one of the wetland areas in Kampala, especially Ntinda side, you find that it is actually fully built; Ntinda wetland is fully built and who approves the plan? KCC! NEMA is there just watching and the Ministry of Water and Environment is just probably supervising this time. (Laughter) Where are we? This is really pathetic and something should be done about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mudimi, then hon. Okupa, then the minister.

12.02
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the loan but let us stick to recommendation No.4 where it says that government is further urged to pass this loan as a grant. I sit on the Natural Resources Committee and we went around with the Committee on National Economy for this loan. 

The MD of National Water clearly said that if this money is not given as a grant, we are going to pass the costs on to the consumers because it is going to be a long-term investment and they cannot recoup the money in a short time. So, we have to insist and we pass it as a grant and not as a loan to National Water because they are going to increase the tariffs, which will go to the final users.

We went around with the hon. Minister for Water and Environment to the areas in which they want to construct —

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you honourable colleague, for giving way. You are giving me a little difficulty here because you are saying that we should pass the loan as a grant -

MR WAMAKUYU: To National Water.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Ok, then I see your point; but you were saying that we pass it as a grant -(Laughter)

MR WAMAKUYU: No, Government borrows, but it goes to National Water as a grant not as a loan to National Water to repay. 

When we went around with the minister here, we went to those areas where they want to construct the sewerage plant, but that area is land for some other people. It is a wetland but people own it. So, I do not know if you have a provision for compensation for such areas. You saw what happened in Bugolobi. In future when you are going to Luzira, do not go via Kitintale; go via Bugolobi. They are encroaching on all those areas and they are finishing it up. The wetland in Bugolobi which connects to Luzira women’s ward is threatened; developers have encroached on it and soon there will be permanent houses and roads; therefore, it is going to be the shortest way to Luzira.

There are also problems in KCC because I have a friend who had illegally constructed a house in Bugolobi. KCC gave him a title but they threatened to demolish the house until recently when he sold the house. (Laughter) He knows it; he says, “These people gave me the title; again they are coming to demolish the house”. The person who bought the house, they are threatening him and he also wants to sell. (Laughter) So, it is a big problem. They know all this but they go there, threaten and they are paid some money, when they leave another team comes, like that. This issue of corruption, I do not when it is going to end.

Another point to note is that let the institutions have linkages: NEMA, KCC and the ministry. You find NEMA has done an environmental impact assessment for an area, KCC are doing other things, and the ministry says, “No, it is wrong”. Let us have linkages in these institutions such that we can move as a group.

Secondly, Kampala lies on seven hills as it was said, and there are more now, but when it comes to making one treatment plant along Nakivubo Channel, why can’t we have different sewer lines like one for Makerere and for those who are staying in Makindye, rather than concentrating in one area. I support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa then hon. Okello.

12.07
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, when it rains heavily in Kampala and you try to drive around, you get to know the gravity of the sanitation problem. The hon. Member for Pader has just mentioned that from Serena here, you see how the sewerage overtakes the roads; it invades the roads. Go to Clock Tower, which has just been re-designed. I was going to Entebbe Airport one time very early in the morning and it had rained so heavily. We got stuck at Clock Tower. It was all flooded and smelly. You wonder whether we are in the city of Uganda or not. Where is the problem?

I think the problem is the enforcement arm and the discipline of Ugandans - the discipline of the people who live in Kampala. You find people are driving; someone is in a Benz, in a BMW X5 and he is throwing polythene on the road and in the sewer. You find people on foot just throwing kaveera around. They are not even embarrassed that they are driving such luxurious cars and it is shameful for them to throw paper and bottles of water out of such cars. It starts with the discipline of us the city dwellers in Kampala before we even get to the people who are supposed to enforce.

We went to Nairobi last week; you cannot dare to be found even dropping just a piece of paper when the City Council of Nairobi has provided a dustbin and they have employed people. If you arrest someone for dumping polythene on the road, he is taken to the enforcers, and then to court and he is supposed to pay a fine of Kshs 1,000; if not, he spends one month in prison. 

If any ordinary citizen, especially when you are in Nairobi, arrests you and takes you to the enforcers, he or she is paid Kshs 1,000. It is self-enforcing. So even as you move on the street and you see a Ugandan messing up, you are supposed to arrest this person and take him or her to the authorities and you are given money for enforcing the law. 

But it is a different case here. You find people in Local Government and the KCC who have travelled all over this world, but they have failed to implement what they see. Where is the problem? You always keep lamenting here, but these people have developed an immune skill; they know they will just speak and end there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take information from hon. Mutuluuza?

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. One time I was coming from Mulago and I reached the Wandegeya junction. Somebody was eating maize and as we stopped at the traffic lights, they started throwing out the cobs. I jumped out of my car, picked these things and pushed them back to them. (Laughter) They started complaining and I told them, “If you throw them out again I am going to arrest you.” I pretended as if I was -(Interjections)- I want us to also be responsible and vigilant. Maybe we should have a provision that allows people to also arrest such people who are dumping anyhow in the city. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Mutuluuza. So, I think we need more of the Mutuluuzas to help us. It is alarming!

I was saying that the people who are supposed to enforce the law have just developed a huge cuticle around themselves and they have become immune to issues of corruption. It is very embarrassing. I think we must go beyond just lamenting.

The issue of maintenance of this sewer system is also another problem. Just get to that Old Port Bell Road and, Oh, the smell! And then as you go to Ntinda from Spear Motors - from the barracks down to Stretcher Road - you find that the sewerage is flowing onto the road from the Police barracks because the sewer system has been blocked -(Member timed out_)

12.12
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter we are discussing is very serious. I have worked in Kampala all my life and I know the problems there are. This is a technical matter. I would have wished to see the study that was done and the master plan for this project. We cannot start by borrowing money when we do not have the plan or the drawings to show where we are going to put the sewer lines and the drainages. We shall borrow this money and more than 50 percent of it will go into the studies. 

A few years back we undertook rehabilitation of the Nakivubo Channel and it was stated clearly that it would cure all the drainage problems in Kampala. But the problems are now worse -(Interruption)  

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague. In Kampala we have eight drainage systems and they are independent of each other. Nakivubo is one of them. The Nakivubo drainage system cannot cure a drainage problem in Nalukolongo or Lubigi. There are eight drainage systems and they are independent. So, working on Nakivubo would not cure the drainage problems in Kampala.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the former city engineer for that information. But you see, Nakivubo was supposed to cure the Kampala Central problem for Lugogo, Clock Tower, Serena and so forth. Those were part of the Nakivubo rehabilitation, but the problems are now worse. 

Normally, you plan a city first before you build. The problem we have in Kampala is that it is only about 25 percent - it is less now - which is planned and built. But the bigger part of the city is built without a plan. So to say that you are going to re-plan after building, to me, is like trying to open the door by pushing at the hinges. You will not do it. Kampala, in my view, is messed up beyond salvage. It is not possible to re-plan Kampala because you will have to buy off all these buildings, compensate the owners, put the roads and put the sewer lines. 

On page 4, the committee talks about realignment of 6.7 kilometres of sewer line. Where is this line? You will realign and where will you pass? The whole place is built up. How are you going to realign?  Ten kilometres of sewer line is blocked. Do we need to borrow dollars to unblock a line that is in place? (Laughter) This is the height of being irresponsible. We are very irresponsible. So, really, I think we should task the minister responsible to give us the plan for this loan first before we approve it. I don’t see –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we are all aware that government got debt relief. There was HIPC I and HIPC II and a multilateral debt relief. Under that agreement, there were supposed to be savings and those savings was supposed to be ploughed back to solve these kinds of problems that we are now borrowing money for.

During the Kampala Sanitation for Nakivubo, there was supposed to be a special account which was managed by the Permanent Secretary, Local Government and the Town Clerk of Kampala. It was meant to pay that loan. To our surprise, the loan was not paid and now, even after debt relief, we have learnt that most of the money that we got debt relief for under Ministry of Finance’s Sector for Debt Management - they even still have to pay the debt, which we got debt relief for. So the point that hon. Okello-Okello is making is really fundamental. There is corruption. We are passing the money, but the level of corruption is too much.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you hon. Ekanya. Madam Speaker that was my ending point, that is, corruption in the city council. I was an official of the city council for a very long time. All land matters of the city council were being handled from the Ministry of Lands. I attended millions of meetings in the city council, but I had to give up towards the end because corruption became impossible to handle. As long as the composition of Kampala City Council remains what it is, this money will do nothing for us.

At one stage I was against the idea of the Central Government taking over Kampala City Council but I have changed my mind. (Laughter) I think one is less corrupt than the other. I thank you. (Laughter)

12.18
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA-LATIGO (FDC, Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At some stage when the debate started, I actually wanted to rise on a procedural matter and ask that you allow hon. Byandala who was in KCC to lead this debate so that we could get the full perspective on what this is about. I sat, trying to figure out how I can have both feet standing for the loan which I know is necessary, but failing to grasp this perspective that Parliament ought to bring out so that we see how little this loan actually is compared to the municipal role that it will play.

Hon. Okello-Okello mentioned one aspect. He mentioned realignment, but on that same page they say that they are going to build a total of 30 kilometres of new sewer lines. I would have wanted somebody who knows Kampala City to tell me whether we have the reserves along which the sewer lines will be built and if not, whether people who built on the reserves will lose their property without compensation or they will be compensated and what is the scale of destruction of existing property that will have to take place and how we will manage the anger arising from that. I did not get that and I would like the minister, when she is coming to respond, to tell us, will these new lines involve buying land? I did not see any provision for compensation in this report and yet if you are going to buy land and remove properties from sewer lines you will have to compensate.

I used to live in Namuwongo. Namuwongo is a far better developed place than Kinawataka. There was some degree of planning, but I also know for a fact that when they planned Namuwongo they did not put sewer lines. And, therefore, even if you constructed a sewer line passing next to Namuwongo, people will not use it because they are all using soak pits and septic tanks. If Namuwongo, which is well planned, is like that and you are building a line in Kinawataka, how many of those houses will be connected to the sewer line? I would like the minister to let me know because you will just build a white elephant and it will not be used. 

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you very much, Prof. Latigo for giving way and thank you Madam Speaker. They are not talking about Kinawataka; they are talking of a catchment. A catchment is a big area which does not necessary mean it is one spot at Kinawataka. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you professor for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have not answered his question. He wants to know how those people will benefit. You are now talking about a catchment and leaving it hanging. What is it? (Laughter)  

MR SEBUNYA: No, Madam Speaker. What I wanted to bring to his attention is that this line is going to serve the Kinawataka catchment area, but for him he is specifically talking of those slum areas of Kinawataka. This one is an area bigger than that.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the natural resources committee and the information I wanted to give is that for the last three years, we have been requesting Parliament and informing Parliament of the very negligible, if any, investment in the sanitation sector. What National Water and Government have been doing is to try and fund water, but the sanitation component has largely been under-funded and the committee rightly observes that the funding should be stepped up, because National Water which can get some money from water cannot get money from sewerage with the way the city is currently planned. So, I thought I should give that information to professor that even the Namuwongo Project, if it was well planned, should have accessed the channel because it is actually just next to it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what he is asking is that since Namuwongo already exists, in what way is this arrangement going to benefit them? How will they access it now that it is already constructed?

MR SEBUNYA: On the second component of the project we said, there is faecal sewage treatment whereby the existing septic tanks and pit latrines will be emptied into the plant that will be planted in Namuwongo and Nalukolongo. Semi-plants that will not require pipes; from these ones they will pick faecal sewage physically and take it to these treatment areas.

12.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you very much. I was going to come to that, but it still does not change what I am saying because what hon. Okello-Okello said was that a very small part of Kampala was planned. In fact the sewage lines are limited to old Kampala. Kampala that has expanded - many of you colleagues that have built houses recently; I would like to ask, how many of you got connected to a sewage line? There will be none -(Interjection)- did you build recently?

The truth of the matter is that all these houses you see, they are using septic tanks and, therefore, if you want to invest to address those places, you will probably put a lot more money on emptying septic tanks and treating sewage.

The sewage line that we are talking about in many of those places will be like power lines that pass through some of the villages. You see them but they do not benefit you, and when it comes to emptying, that is where we are going to have a real crisis. In fact, in Namuwongo, most of the septic tanks are getting full. In some of the places, you can no longer sit comfortably. And if with the resources that we have, we have not been dealing with this, the trucks will come; they will run for months and that will be the end. 

I am asking myself: even if we give National Water this money as a grant, are they prepared to meet the cost of managing? What provisions are there? Are they going to impose costs on sewage use? Because I believe that there must be some cost integrated, whether into the water or something; otherwise National Water will not run. 

Finally, I saw that the Project Implementation Team (PIT) will be drawn from National Water and Sewerage Corporation. I know that this is something that National Water handles, but this is also about Kampala City Council. Is it possible that National Water will just do its thing without Kampala City Council being part? Can’t the project include one of the city council engineers to make sure that there is coordination between city council and National Water - not in the PIT which is in the report; because I am operating from the report. I can show you that the PIT is for National Water- I am using the report unless the committee reported wrongly. 

So, regardless of the corruption, the engineering reality and the management and coordination reality will require that KCC has a representation in this project. If it is about corruption, the one engineer cannot overpower people of National Water and Sewerage Corporation.

National Water; I think some two or so years ago, we had a big debate on National Water; it was reported to have made good profits. Part of the problem we were arguing about on the Floor was that National Water was given more or less the equivalent of a grant; it was capitalised and that recapitalisation was used to demonstrate that it was doing very well. 

This is money that should work and we do not want this thing where you give somebody money and he says it is inefficient. Let us give them money; the loan terms are very fair - 10 years; interest is 0.5 percent. At least pay the principal and let Government pay the interest, and demonstrate to them that when they get money, they can use it to make more money and expand. Otherwise, the scale of the problem, honourable colleagues, is huge that I am almost getting tempted to agree with hon. Okello-Okello that KCC is beyond salvage; maybe we should plan another city.

12.31
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): I want to thank the chairperson and the Minister of Finance for having presented this request of a loan, and I also want to thank the honourable members for the responses so far raised. I am sorry I came in late because I was a bit indisposed, and I did not get prior notice. I was called out of bed. So, if I missed some of the comments, I beg your pardon.

Issues that have been prominent; one was on encroachment of wetlands and we are also going to be using the wetlands. As it has been put by the hon. Chair of the Committee on National Economy, the issue of wetlands is a multi-sectoral one. There is no single sector or single person who will solve it because of the indiscipline the hon. Member pointed out. We must accept that we have somehow as Ugandans tolerated a degree of indiscipline and as such we have to work on it together. 

Somebody said that the Ministry of Water is supervising the construction of houses in the wetland; I think that is another misplaced statement because definitely, I cannot supervise. If I had my way, I would not even allow somebody to build there; but we have a problem of divided mandates. The allocation of plots is under the Ministry of Lands, which produces titles, and for building we have a full department in Kampala City Council that approves the plans and as such, we need all the stakeholders to come together. 

So, the issue of wetlands as you have been told, Members, has been taken around and I am waiting for the report of the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on National Economy to see how we are going to embrace this challenge. So, I leave it at that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, really, you know that each financial year this type of debate occurs, especially when we are dealing with kaveera; we have had it every year. We know it is multi-sectoral; why is nobody taking charge?  Who is the lead person in all this?  And how long are you going to say we are multi-sectoral and so all of us are not in charge? Who is in charge? Why doesn’t somebody take charge of this every year?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: The person in charge is the one issuing the titles.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, who is supposed to take charge of unravelling this mess? Where is the Environmental Police? We hear this debate every year.  

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Yes, Madam Speaker; we have talked about the environment and the Ministry of Environment is supposed to be in charge, and the agency of NEMA is supposed to be the actual implementer. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is supposed to arrest the people? 

MRS MUTAGAMBA: We have been there; we have produced papers and talked to everyone; we have moved to the areas and I keep saying that until all of us become disciplined, no single person is going to control the encroachment on wetlands. I want to say this because when we took the members of parliament to the wetlands, they themselves witnessed what was happening there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, has anybody been arrested and taken to court for dumping? Who has been arrested for dumping? Why don’t you arrest somebody and take them to court for dumping and then people will get the signal? (Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, it is good that you raised this matter because sometime ago, hon. Anywar reported about the wetland that is between Kawanda and the school as you go towards Bombo. And she said that she went to NEMA etcetera; you need to go there now; they have been bringing in soil from elsewhere to create a site where they can construct. The problem is that – and maybe it is by luck that El Nino is coming; and I pray that it is really good El Nino -(Laughter)– because when you make this point to Ugandans, they just don’t appreciate it. You block the water’s way and it will still have to go whether you like it or not. 

So I would like the hon. Minister – because that site’s problem was brought to her attention – to let us know what the problem is. And unfortunately, when you were responding to the Speaker you said that the Ministry of Environment and NEMA are supposed to be in charge, but are they supposed to or be in charge?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I also know that you sometimes get stuck on your way home. Just here where the ICD is after URA Headquarters, Nakawa, NEMA has authorised car depots to be established on wetlands and the road reserve. And these are way leaves to which we borrowed money and compensated people who had built on the way leaves. NEMA has authorised people and URA has licensed people and you were in charge. 

One time when Nyakana’s house was broken down, there was a Police unit which was established to work with NEMA in order to break down Nyakana’s house.   There were also Basoga and Itesot who were selling tomatoes in Banda where there was a market; they sent that Police unit and peoples’ property got destroyed. But what do you find there now; a drug factory! So, hon. Minister you have all the powers, why don’t you act, or you resign? (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: The Minister is trying to apportion blame that it is the people who issue the land titles. I wish the Minister could listen to the acting chairperson of the committee. Okay, there is a portion of blame they take, but what happens in these wetlands?

Madam Speaker, when Hon. Ibi Ekwau, MP Kaberamaido, raised the issue of people who were reclaiming a wetland near Kampala Parents’ School, people thought that it was a joke. This is how systematically people start advancing their interests to get land titles. They slowly reclaim the wetlands by pouring soil slowly and thereby creating a plot. Where is the ministry; where is NEMA at that point?  

After they have done that; they have reclaimed an area equivalent to half an acre or two acres, they go to KCC or the Ministry of Lands to claim for a land title. The surveyors go and survey the land, submit the papers, and Lands or KCC end up giving them a title. 

It should have been at the point when these people started dumping the soil that NEMA should have come on site. This has just happened here where the drainage system from Naguru Police and Ntinda Police, across the mango trees from Spear Motors, is permanently blocked when it rains because the so called investors have built a customs bonded warehouse just across the road, so the water cannot cross to proceed to Kinawataka area. Where is NEMA?

We recently, as the committee of Works and Infrastructure, stopped another one who was putting up a petrol station immediately after Kyambogo; they were putting it up on a wetland on a road reserve, but he has now moved to another place where I see the construction going on. Where is NEMA? We know the people who issue and approve land titles – Prime Minister help us; these are the culprits who should be arrested together with the people in NEMA. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, I think it is time that you instituted an Environmental Court, Environmental Police and Environmental Bailiffs to break those things the way they break people’s houses. Prime Minister, we are asking, who is in charge? (Laughter)

12.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was discussing that matter with hon. Migereko because I was away when you raised this question. What I have heard is very significant so I am going to hold an inter-ministerial meeting and ensure that the ministers take deliberate steps to ensure that these questions are addressed. 

The problem is that sometimes they are threatened by thugs so this matter has a security dimension but we are going to handle it without fear and favour. You have raised a very good point.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Prime Minister, for the position you have presented to the House, which was not a reassurance on what will come. I was a little worried concerning your statement that this has a security dimension. I think the dimension is not security but insecurity because those who act above the law cannot be acting on account of security. They are just causing insecurity to the minister and everybody and so it cannot be a security dimension. 

We have the relevant laws and organisations in this country to deal with people who do things illegally. But maybe because this matter is so important, I want to suggest that wetland areas of Kampala be clearly delineated, identified and fully surveyed and we bring that information in this Parliament and enact a law prohibiting any construction or activity in those places with clear penalties then we see what happens. If it is there then we have a serious insecurity problem.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: No, I think Prof. Latigo misunderstood my statement. What I said was that this issue has a security dimension. That is what I meant and I said we are going to handle it. I don’t think that we need another law as there are enough laws to handle this matter but it is a problem of implementation. That is why I said that I intend to hold an inter-ministerial meeting and we are going to handle the thugs.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: I thank my Prime Minister. Concerning THE survey of wetlands, I want to assure the august House that this financial year we have approved Shs 500 million to help us start on the surveys of wetlands around Kampala. This is the first time that we are getting this money. We have been budgeting for it but not been able to get it but this time at least, we have some money and once it is released, we are going to start on the wetlands on Bombo road, Kinawataka, Munyonyo and the rest; those wetlands that are surrounding Kampala.

There was a question as to whether we have a sanitation master plan. Yes, Kampala has got a sanitation master plan at Kampala City Council but it is yet to be internalised, understood and implemented. However, because of the urgency of sanitation in Kampala, we thought that as a ministry, we had a duty to come up with something that could at least put us on the road towards the sanitation master plan. That is why we are implementing our plan in phases so that Kampala City Council eventually comes in.

There was also concern as to whether we are going to do it alone without consultation with Kampala City Council. I want to assure this House that on the board of national water, we have got representation from Kampala City Council so whatever decision that national water takes, Kampala City Council is in the know. The engineers of Kampala City Council have got direct access to our engineers; they sit together and do the planning so we hope that this time when we start implementing, they are going to be with us.

Regarding availability of land and rampant allocations, that is not our mandate. We don’t allocate land and we cannot do much about it. That is the mandate of Kampala City Council and the Ministry of Local Government but we always find ourselves stuck with titles that have been allocated in wetlands. We have written a number of times to the Minister of Lands to cancel them. Some of them have been cancelled but because of the indiscipline that we talked about, others are being produced maybe not within the ministry but outside the ministry, people are doing something funny.

Concerning septic tanks in Nakivubo, Kinawataka and Nalukolongo, we are going to have treatment plants that will get their materials from sewerage collection tanks. These are going to help us because at the moment, we don’t have an organised system of collecting sewerage through tanks. The onus is on the individual but we want to introduce a system where we know that a septic tank is routinely emptied. 

We shall be giving certificate of emptying so that people know that they are supposed to service their septic tanks after every so often just like we do with our cars. If we come to you, whether you call us or not, you are supposed to empty your tank. That will reduce the spillage of septic tanks that we are experiencing now.

Concerning affordability of tariffs, if we get this money as a loan to National Water, National Water is required to work commercially so they will have to factor the costs of the project into the tariffs. We hope this Parliament and the government are going to be kind enough to give this loan that we are requesting for as a grant to the national water so that we do not have to increase the cost. One thing people do not understand is the costs of sewage which are higher so people keep on complaining. We would not like to add more to that.

Location of the treatment plants: why we are putting them in the wetland? Again, the answer is simple because sewage does not go uphill it has got to go gravitating. And once we have built a treatment plant, it will make sure that the sewage does not pollute the surrounding environment. That is our commitment and we shall make sure it happens.

An honourable member wanted to know whether we were going to supervise the implementation. Yes, those of you who looked at the project proposal at the committee level must have seen the various stages that we are going through even from our sponsors: the African Development Bank and the other development partner who have given us money. They are very rigid on the implementation. So, we are going to make sure that implementation is supervised. However, we would like to call upon any other interested party, especially a committee of Parliament, to make sure that from time to time, they take us on to find out whether we are implementing. I wouldn’t mind and I promise that from time to time, we shall be briefing Parliament about how we are progressing with the implementation.

I have talked about the drawings and plans. Hon. Okello was requesting for drawings and plans. We did not bring them here because they were availed to the committee. I am sure the committee must have perused through them and confirmed that they are going to be used and they approved them. But if there is need, we can always produce one plan and pin it somewhere in this Parliament so that everybody can get acquainted with what we are going to be doing. 

Concerning issues of debt relief, I will leave the Minister of Finance to answer that. 

Compensation of property owners under the sewer line; that is not within our budget. I hope the Prime Minister will also help us because we all know there are road reserves, which are mandated and everybody should know this. If anybody is caught within the road reserve I, personally, as a Minister of Environment, I don’t think that person should be compensated. But if the Prime Minister has something to say - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to conclude this matter. We have four other loans. 

MRS MUTAGAMBA: There was a concern that National Water seems to be praising itself for good work although it was capitalised. Yes, I really want to take pride in the performance of national water because there are so many institutions that have been capitalised. I think our performance has been exemplary and we have continued to respond to the challenges of providing water. Now we are talking about the challenges of providing sanitation services and we want to assure you that we shall do it perfectly. Thank you very much.

12.53
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyaddondo County North, Wakiso): I have some small issues to clear. Maybe what we did not mention in this report is that when the Chinese were building Nakivubo Channel, we did not foresee that it left the waterways clear. So, water is heading into the lake and other unscrupulous Ugandans are also directing their sewage systems into the storm water system. When it rains, the rain combines with the sewer systems; the unscrupulous people have directed the storm water into it, and that creates the dirty water. 

But what this project is going to do at the same time is to create the Nakivubo sewer system, which will treat both the storm water from Nakivubo Channel and then the sewerage system. It is well-designed by our engineers. 

Concerning compensation issues, somewhere on page 7 it is also mentioned that prior to the commencement of construction, there has to be evidence of land transfer and land use permits to the National Water and also proof of compensation for persons whose properties, crops and trees have been affected by the project. So, there is some money for financing compensation. We can see that National Water is going to finance around 12 percent. So in that 12 percent, I think there is this money for small compensations, but not for compensations of people who have deliberately built in the road reserves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think we need to conclude this matter. We have further loans, honourable members. 

MR SEBUNYA: National Water has shown us that it can work with all departments. Fortunately, I worked with National Water before I came here and recently when National Water was constructing Ggaba III and also laying a line from Ggaba to Naguru, it worked with people. The people were compensated and that project was concluded well. So, we also think that with this project, National Water will not work alone. Every work that is done in Kampala, at least city council is on board and I think they will work conveniently. I thank you and beg you to pass the loan.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion that government borrows 35 million Units of Account from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the Kampala sanitation programme.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, for your happy information, there seems to be a growing inclination that Kampala city needs to be taken over. That’s my good information from the debate. Let us go to NUSAF.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 66,900,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE SECOND NORTHERN UGANDA SOCIAL ACTION FUND PROJECT

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, I had asked you to consider delaying the NUSAF loan request up to Tuesday morning. Let me give my reasons, because I talked to the Speaker.

The reason is that this is a loan request to support activities in Northern Uganda. Most of the Members of the Lango Parliamentary Group have travelled upcountry because they lost a former minister. We could leave you to pass the loan but I think it is only fair that the community for which this loan is being requested are represented when the loan is being debated. It is important. Therefore, I do not know what the hurry is between this morning and Tuesday morning. What is the big hurry? I am just requesting that we consider that loan on Tuesday morning when the Members are there. It is only fair that we do that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My Office has been accused of delaying work. So I decided to put the work here. Yes, hon. Wakikona, what do you have to say?

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my brother Prof. Latigo. The NUSAF II loan’s implementation date was supposed to be 1st September. The government signed the agreement with the World Bank and you are aware of the US $450 million which comes through Finance for this purpose but because we had to meet the Greater North Parliamentary Group, which is chaired by hon. Okot Ogong, the MP for Lango and professor, all these have participated in the discussions concerning NUSAF II. All views have been captured and put in the system. Even my sister, Rebecca Amuge, participated. (Laughter) 

On the side of government, this matter also went through the caucus and all Members participated. But now the World Bank, although they have signed those papers, cannot release the money until a resolution of Parliament is sought. And if we delay then they will not release the money. So this is a matter which I am requesting my brother, Prof. Latigo and other brothers to agree to so that we debate and finish with it. Thank you very much. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, government knows that in the last Parliament, I used to be the one who would sometimes write committee reports such that loan requests are passed on this Floor. Hon. Migereko, you know that. (Laughter) Therefore, it cannot be that anything I do is an attempt to delay. I have just given consideration to the fact that tomorrow and tomorrow but one, are weekend days. The only day that you would say is a day of delay is Monday. If you have already delayed from 1st September, one more day is not a problem. But it helps you a lot, Mr Minister, when the people you work with stand up here in the House to thank you. Otherwise, if government thinks my request is not appropriate, I withdraw it. 

MR MIGEREKO: I can understand the sentiments of the hon. Leader of the Opposition. It is true that this is a loan where we would have wanted everybody to be around because it touches on a huge percentage of the population of Uganda. It is also true that consultations have been taking place at practically every stage and the consultations have always been well attended. 

We have been having serious pressure in regard to when we can draw on these resources and time does not appear to be on our side. According to the discussions we have been having, there is the debate on the statement of His Excellency the President, which was scheduled to start on Tuesday. The indications I had received were to the effect that the debate would start on Tuesday and it could take two or three days. 

On our side, therefore, we had hope that all these important loans would be dealt with before Tuesday so that we do not lose any more time. If hon. Latigo and other Members feel strongly inclined to postpone this debate to Tuesday, Madam Speaker, you will have to help us here; and then we can call on the UDB loan and we deal with it. 

MRS KIRYAPAWO: I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Migereko. We do not plan for death; death just comes any time. Today we are talking about somebody from Lango region dying; supposing before Tuesday or by Tuesday another region losses somebody who is very important, shall we continue to postpone debate on this loan? This is the clarification I need. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I am getting very firm instructions from the Leader of Government Business that we handle the NUSAF loan.

1.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, this loan is being supported; hon. Okot supports it 100 percent; I do not see any problem whatsoever. We want to get it out of the way so that we handle the Northern question.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sometimes the problem we have is not paying attention. When I stood up here, I made a request; I did not make a remark. Anybody who was keen would note that I made a request and the reasons that I gave were genuine. I am even surprised by her response. I said clearly that I have no intention of delaying the loan. 

I made a proposal that if government explains that, “Look, we can no longer delay”, I cannot be in the way of government. But I beg that each time people stand up, let us not just look at their bold heads but listen to what they say. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition and government for agreeing that we should move on. I also have a problem; there was serious indictments against my office in your reports during the Budget that we do not do work. So, I also have to set my obligations. Proceed, Minister of Finance.

1.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (MICRO FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My condolences to my brothers and sisters of Lango who lost their dear one. I beg to present a government request to Parliament to borrow SDR 66,900,000 from International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group for financing the Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project.

“WHEREAS loan agreement for SDR 66,900,000 is to be concluded between the Government of Republic of Uganda and the International Development Bank (IDA) of the World Bank Group for purposes of financing the Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project (NUSAF II);

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, government is authorized to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions;

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by government has to be authorized by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan of their approval and authorization;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the government is hereby authorised to secure the said loan of SDR 66,900,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group upon the terms and conditions stated therein.” 

I beg to move.

1.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): I would like to first of all congratulate you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, upon going through the hectic budget process. 

As the committee delegated with the responsibility from plenary, we present the report of the Committee on the National Economy on the request by government to borrow SDR 69,900,000 from the IDA of the World Bank Group for financing the Second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project. 

This is a report on the said request of SDR 66,900,000 from the IDA to finance NUSAF II. The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance. According to Article 159 of the Constitution and rule 152(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, the committee  considered and scrutinised the request and now report as follows: 

We did interface with the Ministry of Finance – I will skip the methodology. 

I now lay on the Table the minister’s brief on the loan request, the project appraisal document, the implementation completion report and the loan financing agreement. 

Background

Northern Uganda has experienced economic stagnation arising out of more than two decades of instability. The insurgency in the region has taken tremendous toll on the population and the economy in the region. At the height of the insurgency, in the early 1990s, an estimated 1.6 million citizens had been forced to leave their homes in the Northern and Eastern Uganda into the IDP camps for fear of being attacked or abducted. 

In financial terms, the cost of the conflict to the national economy is estimated at about US $1.2 to 1.3 billion, which is more than three percent of the national GDP, which costs include meter expenditure, reduced economic activity, loss of skilled labour, tax revenue, environmental degradation and loss of investments in the region. As a result, Northern Uganda remains the poorest region in Uganda with some of the worst human development indicators in the country. 

The Financial Year 2004/06 national household survey puts the proportion of people living in poverty at 61 percent, twice the national poverty level of 31 percent.

In response to these challenges, the government, in the year 2002 proposed the US $100 million fund to the National Uganda Social Action Fund Project I as part of the broad agenda for the reconstruction of the North.

The objective of NUSAF I was to empower communities in the 18 districts, but extended to 29 other districts in Northern and Eastern Uganda, by enhancing their capacity to systematically identify, prioritise and plan for their needs within their own value systems and to ultimately improve the economic livelihood and social cohesion among the communities.

This community-driven development enabled community groups to organise themselves, identify and prioritise their needs and develop funding proposals.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, chairperson of the committee, I think the Members can read some of those things.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me now move to the observations. It can now be conveniently observed that NUSAF I –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for advising the chairperson of the committee that we can actually read some of these things. However, I notice that we have problems within our rules. I would like to request you to exercise your powers to let the sections that are not read by the chairperson be captured by the Hansard. I am saying this because in the past we have had problems in trying to track some of the debate text that is not read because the rules say that only what has been spoken here is captured. That is why I request that you exercise your powers to direct the Hansard to capture the entire report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have no problem with that; the Hansard will capture the entire report; they will reproduce it in full.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Ekanya for that concern. As I was saying, I now move on to the observations – see page 3.

On that page, we have observed that one of the outputs was creating a harmonised platform within which the communities could become active players in the decentralised service delivery system with the support of the local governments.

The second output was about strengthening transparency in local government service delivery. 

The third one was about promoting community reconciliation.

Although NUSAF made significant contributions, widespread poverty, vulnerability and challenges in service delivery still remain significant on the ground. Building lessons from these, it is hoped that NUSAF II will contribute to resolving some of these challenges.

The Rationale

The World Bank engagement with Government of Uganda in Northern Uganda dates back to NURP I. While a number of project interventions were successful, follow up recommendations stressed the need for more community involvement in the design and implementation of the activities.

The design of NUSAF I, therefore, focused on community-demand driven interventions that combined direct community financing, public assets and providing support to the disadvantaged groups. The World Bank’s long term engagement in Uganda provides multi-sectoral capability, analytical and catalytically advantages and ability to support coordination between government donors and CSOs development actors. All these are necessary ingredients for the successful implementation of the programme in a fragile environment of peace, recovery and development plan, now popularly known as PRDP.

The Project Overview

In regard to this, I will go straight to how we intend to measure the progress. The indicators to be used to monitor the progress of the project will include: increase in the income of the target beneficiaries who are the households in percentage terms; the personal - days provided in labour intensive public works programmes; and gross enrolment in primary education. Members should be aware of the big challenges of completion and retention for UPE and USE in this region after the war. The fourth indicator will be presence of a population with access to all-seasons roads in percentage terms. The fifth parameter will be the presence of a population with improved access to safe water.

The Project Component

The project has got three components: the livelihood investment support; the community infrastructure rehabilitation; and the institutional development component.

The livelihood investment support component includes: Public Works Programmes (PWP) and the household income support programme.

The PWP will be funded at US $20 million constituting 20 percent of the total cost of the project, while the household income support programme will be financed to the tune of US $40 million comprising 40 percent of the total project cost. This means US $60 million will go to the livelihood investment support component.

The community infrastructure rehabilitation component will, among others, have rehabilitation of the existing community infrastructure such as schools, water points, access roads, skills training and health centres.

On page 6 of the report, it is indicated that the project will undertake complementary investments to maintain and improve the existing education infrastructure such as staff quarters, classrooms, sanitation facilities, basic solar lighting systems and furniture based on sector norms and standards as guided by the sector ministries. This component will be financed to the tune of US $30 million, which is 30 percent of the total project cost.

The final component of the institutional development has a component of project implementation support, the transparent accountability and anti-corruption programme. This is to be financed to the tune of US $1 million, which is one percent of the total project cost.

The loan terms and conditions are largely concessional, adhering to the usual IDA financing arrangement, which is financing the SDR of US $66.2 million with a maturity period of 40 years, including a ten-year grace period.

The service charge as usual is 0.75 per annum on disbursement and outstanding balances.

Conditions

The following conditions are attached:
    1. Government has to establish Technical Support Team (TST) and make it operational in form and substance satisfactory to the IDA.
    2. The government must have approved TST coordinators, a financial management specialist and a procurement specialist, whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference should be satisfactory to the IDA.
    3. The government has to submit to the IDA, the NUSAF II operational manual in form and substance satisfactory to IDA.
    4. Provisions to the IDA of the legal opinion of the Attorney-General of Uganda on the legal validity of the loan documentation.
    5. Appointment and maintenance by Government at district and sub-county levels, key staff with qualifications and terms of reference satisfactory to the IDA, including among others, the chief finance officer, district environment officer and sub-county community development officer.
    6. Submission to the IDA the requisite progress implementation report on a regular basis. These will include quarterly progress and annual audit reports. And here, we would like to call upon the implementing ministries to bring on board the responsible Committee on Presidential Affairs and other related committees, so that at the implementation stage, Parliament is brought on board to ensure there is percolation on the performance of these loans. 

Project Implementation

The project will be implemented over a period of five years from 2009 to 2014. At the central level, the Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Office of the Auditor- General shall be responsible for ensuring project resources are budgeted for and disbursed within the MTEF and with projects accounts audited.

The Office of the Prime Minister will have overall responsibility for implementing and accounting for the project funds, and coordinating activities under all project components, except the transparency, accountability and anti-corruption components, which will be handled by the office of the Inspector-General of Government.

The observations
    1. The peripheral districts that were affected as a result of the war in the North have not been catered for under NUSAF II as it was earlier conceived in the PRDP.
    2. We also observed that there are various Government interventions in Northern Uganda, hence the need for Government to carry out mapping to avoid duplication of projects. We did mention here last time when we passed a loan from the World Bank for USE, that there were so many interventions including those by third party civil society organisations in the region, which were not initially well planned. It is important to avoid duplication and we need this information to be centrally captured.
    3. NUSAF I was poorly managed by the leaders at the grassroots due to lack of stakeholders’ involvement, clear access criteria and implementation modalities. We expect that NUSAF II will move on improved grounds.
    4. Although enrolment increased in the NUSAF communities by 19 percent for UPE and four percent for USE, efforts need to be sustained for a while longer in order to be able to realise the actual impact on pupils’ performance and the overall education quality, if we are to achieve the objectives of UPE and USE in relation to the MDGs.
    5. Although there was increased access to good quality and toilet/latrine facilities under the water and sanitation sub-components, there was no significant reduction on diarrhea incidences and such related diseases.

The committee recommends that:
Government formulates a programme to cater for peripheral districts that were affected as a result of the war in Northern Uganda.

The programme and project mapping should be done in order to avoid duplication of projects in Northern Uganda given the fact that various NGOs and CSOs are offering services in Northern Uganda.

Cases involving perpetrators who mismanaged NUSAF I funds should be expeditiously handled by the courts of law. Government should develop a strict measure to ensure NUSAF II funds are not mismanaged as well.

This is a good reminder because in the Office of the Prime Minister, which houses this project, there is a department, which should be helping this country in terms of following up on the use of monies from all loans. So, since this loan falls under their docket, this office should work with Parliament committees and Ministry of Finance to monitor the performance of different loans that we borrow.

More resources under NUSAF II should be geared towards water and sanitation with emphasis on household sensitisation.

The committee appreciates the plight of our brothers and people in Northern Uganda and challenges faced while appreciating the progress during NUSAF I. 

Noted also is the progress by government in mobilising resources for purposes of supporting NUSAF II project, its objectives, components, targets and implementation arrangements, which have been designed to deliver the project to the beneficiaries. 

It is the committee’s prayer that we support and recommend the approval of the request by Government to borrow the Special Drawing Rights of US $66.9 million from the IDA of the World Bank Group for financing the second NUSAF project that will help to improve the plight of our people. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I direct now that in addition to the presentation of the Chair, the Hansard reflects the full text of the report. Since there has been quite a bit of consultation, let us use five minutes per person.

(Full text of the report to be found in Annex I of Issue 30)

1.30
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you. I support the passing of this loan but with a lot of caution because NUSAF I did not help some of us very much, especially some regions which had most of their populations still in the camps. When the committee made its observations, emphasis was on the periphery districts forgetting those districts which were greatly affected, especially, Acholi sub-region. Remember during the implementation of NUSAF I, most of the Acholi communities were still in the camps and it did not help them very much. It was mainly vulnerable group support, the BGS which people tried to get, and even the design was not very suitable for the people who were still in the camps. Those who went to monitor NUSAF in the Teso sub-region at that time found most of the people at home and so they benefited, and now the emphasis is on the periphery districts. Let us take great concern about those other districts which did -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. The loan is for the NUSAF areas and the observations are saying that in addition to the NUSAF areas look at the periphery areas as well. That is what they are saying. 
 
MS AOL: Okay then, I wish it were put categorically clear that some districts did not benefit in the NUSAF I and would like to benefit right now in NUSAF II, Acholi sub-region inclusive.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give to you is that throughout the time of assessment, needs assessments have been carried out extensively in all these areas and more so in the areas where the people are going back home. If you go and look at the details, you will find those areas have a big dosage of what to benefit from this programme. I beg that we approve this loan because the work plans are already waiting. The people are ringing to ask about when we begin. So, the earlier we do it, the better for you. I thank you. 

MS AOL: Thank you honourable minister for the information. My second concern is on page 8 about observation No. 3. NUSAF I was poorly managed by the leaders at the grassroots. This is true although very many times, some people have been very protective of those leaders at the grassroots level. So this time round, as we go to NUSAF II, I think the lessons learnt from NUSAF I should help us do the implementation better. 

We must also accept that NUSAF I had a lot of problems – there are people who do not want to accept this. Yesterday we discussed NUSAF II, and I still did not feel very comfortable with the NUSAF II being part and parcel of the PRDP because PRDP is normally put as a framework. The timeframe for PRDP is 2009 – 2012 while NUSAF is 2009 – 2014. When we have a framework it should have a longer time frame so that those other programmes which fit within the timeframe should – well NUSAF II would have fitted very well in the PRDP as a framework, if it was the one with a shorter timeframe. So, on that one, we still need more explanation. Although there was an explanation yesterday - the minister was very satisfied with the explanation given by Hon. Loi Kiryapawo. But still when it comes to the –(Member timed out_)

1.36
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): I would like to thank the committee for this report and I fully support the borrowing of this money for NUSAF II. Madam Speaker, before I came here, I was one of the beneficiaries of this programme at the grassroots level. I would like on my own behalf to say that NUSAF programme I was quite successful and that is why I strongly support NUSAF II. If we corrected a few mistakes from NUSAF I, we would definitely implement NUSAF II very effectively. 

However, I would like to comment on observation three on page 8 of the report. Having observed that there was poor management by the leaders at the grassroots level, I would like to add that one of the issues is that the communities are not aware of the modalities to access funds under NUSAF because sometimes the community development officers at sub-county level do not tell them how they can access it. Sometimes it is the LCs or the secretaries in charge of finance at that level that struggle to tell them what to do. I recommend that awareness programmes - whether on radio or local newspapers - be put in place so that the local communities are aware of how they can access these funds. 

Recommendation four on page 9 states that, “More resources under NUSAF II should be geared towards water and sanitation.” We have said it as Parliament, but how will the local person know that that is our priority as Parliament? It, therefore, requires even us, the members of parliament, to go down and talk to our communities. But it requires mainly the community development officers at sub-county level to go down most of the time. For instance, in my own sub-county in Serere, it takes an effort for the CDOs to go to an area. They are most of the time moving around in Soroti on their NUSAF motorcycles and doing nothing in town instead of going to the grassroots. Even when we say that the Office of the Prime Minister should oversee other things and not accountability, some powers to oversee accountability should again be vested in the Office of the Prime Minister so that the minister responsible for NUSAF is able to go and ask for accountability and not wait for the IGG. 

Madam Speaker, again with recommendation eight, most of these officers who misuse NUSAF funds are still at large and I think the committee should work with the Office of the IGG to ensure that these people are brought to book. They are waiting for more funds in NUSAF II so that they can do something about it before they finally leave. As soon as these funds go, I am sure these officers, some of whom are in my district in Soroti, will jump on these funds and misuse them before they finally run away. 

Finally, I would like to say that the Office of the Prime Minister should make sure that people who are handling NUSAF II are employed specifically for that purpose. I will again give an example of Soroti. Sometimes a NUSAF officer is in acting capacity, but he is the trading officer. So, he is just an acting officer and not fully employed. I strongly recommend to the Office of the Prime Minister to ensure that a person specifically given the job to oversee NUSAF is employed as a full-time officer for that office. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.40 
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I am speaking as the chairperson of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum. (Applause) I support the request by government that this loan be approved by members of parliament. I have many reasons for supporting it, but before I do that, allow me to commend the Government of the Republic of Uganda for their efforts in mobilising resources for our people. We thank you, very much. 

We are grateful that right now we see government becoming very serious and I think we need to support them. For many years, government has been talking, but I now see action because they have already allocated Shs 100 billion and the money is in the Office of the Prime Minister. Twenty five per cent of that money has already been disbursed to districts in the greater North. Congratulations to the Government of Uganda. We thank you. This is the seriousness that we want and this is what we have been talking about. 

Today, I see the Government of the Republic of Uganda again coming out with US $100 million - this is very good and as Members of Parliament, we need to support it. Let us not let government say that we are not supporting them. Let us wholeheartedly support them and see how this is going to be implemented.

I am supporting this because as the Chairman of the Greater North, I have been interacting with the Office of the Prime Minister. I can inform you that the Office of the Prime Minister is more organised than before and they are capable of handling this money. I have interacted with the technocrats, with the minister and with the Prime Minister, and I think the will is there. The systems have been put in place and the operational manual will not let us down. So, we need to support government and approve this loan. 

This time round, all the stakeholders are going to be on board unlike in NUSAF I where Members of Parliament were not involved. This time, we want all the stakeholders to be involved and once members of parliament are involved, we are the ones to go and monitor because we know that money has already gone there and as a Chairperson of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum, we are ready to mobilise and monitor this money. The members of parliament will be informed and involved and I think this time we will have value for money. I urge members to support this loan.

Let me conclude and we can then move the motion -(Laughter)- I do not have to speak about the problems that we have in our region. You know that the poverty level in our region is the highest in the whole country - at 70 percent. I see 61 percent here, but it is at 70 percent. I know that many of our people sleep in mud and wattle houses and 90 percent lack information and support. With NUSAF II, I believe our people’s status will be improved. I do not have to say much because we do not even have to argue about this because it is all clear. Let us give government the benefit of doubt and support this loan and move forward. I thank you very much. 

1.45
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report, but at the same time, I sincerely thank the Government of Uganda and the Word Bank for recognising and supporting the people of Northern Uganda - the least developed region in the country though the percentage which is given there is shown as 61. 

It is important for us to state the correct figures. Some areas like Karamoja go beyond 80 to 90 per cent of the people living below the poverty line. This is why when we thank the Government of Uganda and the World Bank, we really have a point - 90 percent is nearly three times the national average which is 31 percent. When you find people living at 90 percent, you really sympathise with them.

However, NUSAF I demonstrated to the communities a new phenomenon of development in which the people themselves were to identify their needs and prioritise and also be able to manage implementation of those projects, which was really a new idea. That was excellent.

However, there were some challenges which I believe NUSAF II should be able to critically look into: The elite group within these communities became cleverer and were exploiting these other rural communities. They were writing projects and finally they were the ones to benefit. In the future, when such projects come up, they need to be taken to those communities so that they are mentioned to those most important beneficiaries. Are you aware of those people so that the wrong ones will be identified?

The community management committees within the communities were also a problem. Some of them were tricking the communities. So, NUSAF II should look into these community management committees if we are looking at a very successful NUSAF II.

My proposal is this - in future when there is a mid-term review of such projects, a report should be availed to all the partners including the communities. The communities are always left out so they do not know what happened. I propose that at least for NUSAF II, that should be taken into consideration. Thank you.

1.48
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support this loan request and also capture a few observations. The first one is to do with the peripheral districts that were affected by the war. You will allow me on your behalf, Madam Speaker – because you are in the Chair, there is no way you can put your case right away - Kamuli and Namutumba districts were among those districts that were affected, but I feel bad when these districts are not taken care of. You recall the UBOS report that quoted Busoga as being the poorest region in the country; it has a rooting within these particular effects of the war. If at all NUSAF had included these districts, in a way we could be slightly better off than we are now. 

It is my humble prayer that those districts that suffered and acted as shock absorbers to the Northern Uganda war victims be considered just as districts that suffered within the Luweero Triangle have benefited. A district like Kayunga which is very far from Luweero itself where the war was has benefited.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to give my brother information that we fully support them and we know Busoga is actually suffering. But I would like to inform you that Government can still organise Busoga Social Action Fund (BUSAF) (Laughter) and we shall support you when they bring it here. We urge you to support us so that next time we support you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Okot-Ogong. It is good I am in support of the loan, but the fact is that we should argue our case that something must be done just as colleagues were cautioning and urging Government to closely monitor these funds.

Last month I was in Soroti and as we were approaching Awoja River, I saw a signpost reading “Awoja Youth Project”. Reluctantly, I made a stop over and went to interact with the youth to find out what the project was all about. There was nothing apart from a signpost. The youth told me they were planning for them to have a brick making project near Awoja Bridge. That did not end there. Two months ago, we were going to bury a mother of the Woman MP for Bukedea, Hon. Rose Akol, and then we saw signposts in Bukedea - NUSAF project and I was vigilant, but I could not see anything apart from the signposts saying “NUSAF”. It is my humble prayer that these projects be seen instead of signposts communicating for them.

Last year, I was in Kitgum in a village called Omia Nyima. There was a borehole that was being claimed by three NGOs. AMREF had put a signpost saying constructed by AMREF; Red Cross put a signpost and then the district was also claiming the same borehole. If this country is to prosper - if we are to move on, we should monitor all resources closely. That is the only way we can benefit from these resources that we are passing in this House. I thank you.

1.53
MR LOUIS OPANGE (INDEPENDENT, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee and the government for bringing this NUSAF II project whose implementation has been long awaited. 

NUSAF is aimed at empowering the communities, improving their households and fighting illiteracy because once the household income is improved even the three major diseases will be handled. 

When you look at NUSAF I, it was actually implemented well in some areas and poorly in some districts. The reason why it was being implemented very well in some areas is that there was involvement of members of parliament. They chose to be part and parcel of NUSAF. In some areas, members of parliament were not involved and if anything, they were neither near the fire nor the smoke; they were just hearing that there was NUSAF and this was a problem.

I feel there is need for affirmative action in some of these areas like Northern Uganda. Northern Uganda means Acholi, Lango and Karamoja where the elites and politicians took advantage of the illiteracy and got the money which was not utilised to improve the welfare of the communities. In some projects, money was banked. They wanted money in Kampala whereas such NGOs were supposed to be in Karamoja. I thank the Office of the Prime Minister which stood firm and discovered some of these anomalies and saw to it that the rightful people benefited from this money.

I want to look at the implementation of NUSAF. There is need to have a secretariat as was in NUSAF I. However, the problem with the procedures was that there were a lot of challenges in the implementation of NUSAF, namely, the altering of the beneficiaries, the politicisation of the programmes and also enterprise selection. So, there is need for the government to take interest and use the existing structures. For example, if a community wants a school, it is the duty of the government to say, “Yes, that community needs a school and there is money in NUSAF II.” The government should actually take affirmative action to have that locality get the school. 

If for example there is a youth sharing hall - for us these are all tangible things. The government should standardise the structures because in NUSAF I, the laboratories in Pallisa District are not the same as the school laboratories in Teso and they are not the same in Northern Uganda. The money involved is the same, that is, Shs 130 million, but some structures are smaller. So there is need to standardise our structures.

I am aware of the stakeholders. There is need for policy committees because the performance of NUSAF I was actually determined by the interest of the policy committee. If the policy committee is weak, then do not expect any benefits from NUSAF II. I urge the Prime Minister to nominate the policy committee considering the political environment now. There is NRM and then there is the Opposition. If the whole policy committee is NRM, then there is nothing you can benefit from that. There is need for checks and balances. The Opposition should be given slots on the policy committee. The aim of this is to be transparent. 

I can see hon. Migereko shaking his head. I know, obviously, the fishmongers do not fear flies and, therefore, when there is a problem, they do not mind it. So when we implemented NUSAF I, during the evaluation, we discovered that the demands were overwhelming.

We need to promote equity. Recently, when we released Shs 1.5 billion for Pallisa District, there was an allegation that the Prime Minister’s Office changed the plans and some sub-counties got zero in PRDP. But in NUSAF, I feel this Parliament should be given the list of how much is allocated to each sub-county. If Shs 13 billion is allocated to Pallisa District, what is the implication? Is equity applied so that the amount for each sub-county is known? The programme and the enterprise selection within that sub-county should be based on the money which is already allocated to the sub-county. This will bring equity and NUSAF will be successful.

1.59
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, the World Bank has really done a very big job to advance Uganda a lot of money since time immemorial. They deserve a very big appreciation. I want to thank them so much for supporting Uganda whenever we go to them.

As far as this committee report is concerned, on NUSAF II, on page 5 and 6, the committee has given us the components of this second phase of NUSAF and they have tried their best to give us each component and what amount of this money will go to each component. However, when I went ahead to do a little bit of mathematics, I realised that about 10 per cent of this money we are borrowing today is not accounted for. I wonder, because in the first component on page 5, it is taking about 40 per cent and on page 6, the second component is taking about 30 percent. That is already 90 percent and then there is one percent down there in the second last paragraph on page 6. That makes 91 percent. So, some nine per cent of this money is not being accounted for. I wanted the committee chairperson or the minister to clarify that.

I say this because the experience with NUSAF I has given us a very big lesson. Some of us saw a lot of money in NUSAF I going into administrative costs, which I would not want to happen with NUSAF II.

Acholi sub-region has not reaped much from NUSAF I and I really -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: This is information on a document I laid on the Table, but there was a mistake that the total institutional development has two components: the project implementation support has SDR 9 million and the TAK has SDR 1 million. So, it actually becomes SDR 10 million and therefore 10 percent. 

MS AKELLO: You can imagine; if someone had not seen that, that would go unnoticed and nobody would make an account of that. I hope that was not part of my time because that was administrative information.

I was stressing a point on administrative costs. I wanted a very comprehensive report from the Office of the Prime Minister telling us how much of this money we are borrowing today will go into administrative costs, especially how much money would remain at the OPM such that –(Interruption).

MR MENHYA: I am not from the Office of the Prime Minister but I am the chairperson of the Presidential Affairs Committee, which has the mandate to co-ordinate the affairs of the Office of the Prime Minister.

Yesterday we had a meeting with the Minister for Northern Uganda and his technical team and we posed that question to them. The committee was concerned and wanted to find out how much money was going to institutional support against programme budget or cost. We were informed that 9.1 percent of this money was going to support the institution in terms of administration costs and other related issues. From a technical point of view, as a committee we were told that is really good enough and we thought that 9.1 percent was a good figure.

MS AKELLO: Madam Speaker, that is why I wanted to know. At least nine percent is not too much when compared to the past experience with NUSAF I in which about 40 percent went to administrative costs. You can imagine such a big amount of money and 40 percent goes into workshops that may not result into having projects down there for the people.

I want to thank the committee for highlighting cases of perpetrators who mismanaged NUSAF I and saying that they should be brought to book, on page 8. When I was driving to office, I heard something about 100 of this category going to be prosecuted and so on. I believe that they are not only 100. I know of people who got employed by NUSAF I as their first jobs but they have built bungalows in Kampala and storied buildings.

MS AOL: I would like to give you information. While a lot of technical officers in NUSAF are being brought to book, the politicians are being left at large and some of them are going to be lead people in monitoring NUSAF II. This is really an irony. I am saying it here because I know I am protected - I have the immunity of Parliament. I will not say their names but even the Office of the Prime Minister and the minister know them.

MR WAKIKONA: When you say the Office of the Prime Minister knows them and they are quiet, is it not a bit offensive on us and misleading? Yesterday we discussed this matter very well and I continue appealing to honourable Members of Parliament to be free; if you know of anybody whom we have left out, whether a politician or not, get a letter and write to the OPM and we shall handle the matter.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I would like you to mention these people now.

MR EKANYA: I want to help my sister. The names of these people are in the report of the Auditor-General. I have been a chairperson of Local Government Accounts Committee; get the reports and you look at the former politicians, the RDCs, LC V chairpersons of those districts, and the names are there. 

I can tell you some of them, like the former RDC of Pader; his name is there in the report which we even got and tabled –(Interjections)- I cannot remember his name. There is the former RDC of Kitgum, and even some of them are Members of Parliament here. The names are in the report which we discussed but government is not taking action. Some of them were CAOs, they contested and they have even been promoted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is very serious; we debated that report but what were your recommendations? 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, it is only the report of 2000 and 2001 that has been adopted. The report of 2001 to 2005 has not been adopted. The 2000-2001 recommended, for example, that they were supposed to be arrested. One person was even supposed to refund Shs 200,000,000 but instead got a promotion.

MR WAKIKONA: The moment the Auditor-General’s report is given to Parliament, it goes to the Public Accounts Committee and a report comes here and appropriate measures are taken. Therefore, we cannot interfere. Sometimes PAC can clear a case which has been reported to them when they verify that there is no evidence attached to somebody being arrested. So, let us leave this matter with PAC. Once PAC brings a letter here, we shall come again to answer those things and appropriate measures will be taken against those who have offended. Now this is a loan, my friend, Okupa.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I just want to clear this because the record of Parliament should be correct. The honourable minister talked about PAC et cetera. The main activities at the local government level, where the biggest concerns are, are actually the concerns of the Local Government Accounts Committee and that is where there have been serious problems. We will accept to deal with these things administratively. So we can just end the usual “who stole what” and we follow it up, rather than us debating it here in Parliament; it will not help us. We will deal with that after the loan has passed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, maybe that begs the question: who actually follows up when we adopt these reports? After Parliament adopts these reports, who is in charge of following up and implementation? 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, when Parliament takes decisions here, they are supposed to be acted upon by government and we have always acted on these. Many of you have been listening to His Excellency the President discuss the issue of corruption. He has singled out some of the problems to do with corruption in local administration. Keep your ears to the ground and you will be hearing very soon what is going to follow, particularly in regard to those who have been misappropriating funds intended for the local communities. So, keep your ears on the ground, hon. Ekanya.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you posed a question in regard to who follows up these issues when the reports of the Public Accounts Committee are adopted. Originally, government was supposed to issue what they call treasury memoranda to this effect. However, when we passed the Audit Act last year, the Auditor-General is supposed to follow up to what extent the recommendations have been implemented by government and submit a report here, but that is after one year.

Also our committee, the Committee of Government Assurances, is supposed to help us follow up these matters and give progressive reports on how far government has gone in implementing the recommendations that have been adopted. We put all this in the Audit Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I would one day want to see in the anti-corruption court the report of Parliament of the Local Government Accounts Committee used as a basis. (Applause) That would show that some work is going on. 

MS AKELLO: To conclude, Madam Speaker, that is why sometimes some people justify mob justice because justice delays to be delivered. There is a saying in my language that, “Cet gwok kinguku ma pud lyet,” meaning that when something goes wrong, it has to be handled there and then – when the ironies still hot. We are now debating the second phase of NUSAF but the other case of NUSAF Phase I has not yet been handled and they are walking freely. Nobody knows what will happen, and this will give a go ahead to those who are salivating to do the same in the second phase.

Finally, last month I was at the World Bank and they told me that they were in the final stages of handling this loan. So, I asked them to take interest and find time to evaluate some of these projects that they give us. They have agreed to carry out evaluation with NUSAF II on a timely basis. 

2.14
MS REBECCA OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to begin by saying that as a Christian, the Bible tells us that everything works out for good. When the Leader of the Opposition wanted us to postpone because the members of the Lango Parliamentary Group are supposed to go for burial, it was ruled that we continue. 

God knew that the late hon. Joseph Okune was part of NUSAF I and he did a very good job. So, whatever has been said on his death, even if it was sarcastic, we do not take it personally. We know that it will be used to say that by the time he was being sent to his grave, NUSAF II was also being passed. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I do not think that anybody took issue with the death of hon. Okune. 

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, hon. Otengo is a highly respected person in this House. For her to impute improper motives on the part of this House is something that we do not take in good light. For the record, it is extremely important that we all take note of the fact that the demise of Mr Joseph Okune is a big blow to all of us in this country and in no way did anybody sound cynical in regard to this most tragic development. 

It is only proper that the record is put straight and hon. Rebecca Otengo withdraws those remarks –(Interjection)– yes, she should withdraw the remarks because there was no cynicism and nobody made reference to the death of Joseph Okune –(Interjection)– nobody was sarcastic. There was nothing cynical in the statements that were made while debating your proposal to postpone debate of NUSAF. Madam Speaker, I beg that these remarks by hon. Rebecca Otengo be withdrawn. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, this was a very personal matter. I do not see how the Government Chief Whip comes in it. When you demand a withdrawal and the statement did not come from you, you make it general. Let the person who thinks that hon. Otengo’s statement makes what she did -(Interjections)- No! She talked for herself! I think it is not fair that you engulf the NRM in the mischief of an individual. 

Death is a very painful thing. When you hear hon. Otengo talk like that, you can clap your hands, you can do anything - in our place when somebody comes to mourn and the person says, “So and so killed my uncle”, we say, “Let that person mourn”. But if you say it after, then they ask, “Can you explain what you are saying?” In the heat of the moment, you say, “Let that person mourn”. I think hon. Otengo coming from Lango, let her mourn and we proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to appeal to you because I am also part of this House. I think that whenever we have been informed officially that somebody has died, I have come here and informed you that, “So and so has died”. These are people I have never seen, people I do not know but someone should have come to me in the morning and said, “Madam Speaker, please announce so that we honour hon. Okune.”

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: It was announced yesterday in this House. We even stood.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then this House has mourned Mr Okune.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam, for the record once again, this House observed a moment of silence in respect of the late Joseph Okune. So the feelings of pain and grief that are shared by the relatives and all those who are very close to the late Okune have also been shared by this House.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Madam Speaker, earlier on I asked that this matter be put to rest. It is me who raised it; I did not raise it so that the House should do any particular thing. I was just asking this because of the absence of some of our members. There was no other reason but that. My idea was that, let them be present to participate in the debate, and I presented it in good faith. 

Mrs Kiryapawo got up and said, “Everybody dies, should we then stop debating?” Obviously, the idea was that we do not stop debating on account of death but on account of absence of the members. They could have gone to something else not death, but I thought that it would be good if members from those sub regions would be there to participate. That matter was resolved so there is nothing to withdraw. In fact, if anybody were upset, if you remember my last statement, it tells you that I did not take what was said lightly but we ended the matter. The issue of withdrawal does not arise.

MS OTENGO: Madam Speaker, like it has been said, I do not take it personally. Government has already sent somebody to represent their side at the burial. That is why I said as a believer, I do not take it personally. 

I would like to thank the Office of the Prime Minister for having taken care of Northern Uganda especially the Minister for Northern Uganda Reconstruction. This is a member who is always on the ground, and I would like to report that he even has a name in Lango. I would like to thank you.

I would like to look at the components. When we talk of a public works programme, I want to report that DANIDA and World Food Programme have already implemented this. I want the government to look at the examples of DANIDA and World Food Programme and see how this can work. 

I also want to let you know that this is an area where money can be stolen if you do not look at it critically. When you handled the issue of household income support, you talked of female headed homes but you forgot about the child headed homes. 

I also want you to know that the money, which was stolen most, was for the vulnerable groups - the 30 percent in NUSAF. As such, when you look at vulnerable groups and income generating activities for households, you must know that this is an area that some people are targeting. They are going to use the vulnerable groups so that they can steal money from them. So I would advise that this area be looked into.

The chairperson talked of periphery districts. I have said it several times in various forums that I do not know the criteria we used when we selected districts for PRDP. If the IDPs were supposed to be tracked to the places where they went, then Busoga should have been the first district to be taken care of. Our people crossed from Acholi, Lango and went up to Kyoga. In most cases, they went to Kamuli District, but Busoga did not appear anywhere. So when hon. Milton Muwuma talked about Busoga, I thought he had read my mind. We, the people of Northern Uganda, are urging government that the people of Busoga showed a lot of hospitality to our people when they had this problem, so Busoga should be given special attention when we are embarking on the programme for Northern Uganda reconstruction.

I looked at the technical teams, which have been given to us. I want to say that sometimes these teams go with technical errors. They are going to use the local community so they need to be tracked as these are the people who are going to connive with the local leaders to steal money meant for our people.

The chairperson talked of the local leaders who stole money. I also want them to know that there are people who connive with these local people. There is something like a kickback, which we cannot debate but we can track.

I want to thank you for having brought in the Office of the Auditor-General in this programme this time. My proposal is that the Auditor-General must keep on monitoring this programme, not at the end when we get the report after money has been stolen. If it was possible, we would have had a special audit team from the Office of the Auditor-General to look at NUSAF II and even PRDP.

On page 9, No. 4, the committee recommends that money be given for water and sanitation. I also see that many NGOs and even the ministry have been given money. This can lead to duplication, so I want us to differentiate who is doing what. Like hon. Muwuma said, there are people who will use a programme given by another agency and they say they are the ones who have given it. 

I know that people have claimed three or four different agencies because they want to eat the money. So I believe that Ministry of Water and Environment as well as PHC funds had money for sanitation. 

I want us to look at health, especially maternal health, as a specific area which we are supposed to handle. I wanted the area of education to be clearly spelt out especially girl-child education. I know it has been mentioned but it has not come out clearly as we have been debating with the Prime Minister. However, I believe that if we monitor what is happening, we would still manage to incorporate education of girl children.

Finally, on transparency and accountability, I fully support this and I want local anti corruption organisations to be supported and the Office of the Prime Minister to have interest in this area. This will aid the success of NUSAF II to be better than NUSAF I and the rest of the programmes which have gone to Northern Uganda. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity.

2.28
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a technical problem. I have raised this matter day in and day out for the last ten years or so that I have been in this Parliament. Our rules are very clear; they say that the chairpersons of the committees will present reports with the minutes. If you look at these minutes, they do not have details. These are not minutes of a committee that deliberated on this loan throughout. The members have not signed; it is only the clerk and the chairperson. This is not acceptable. We need to improve our method of work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do the rules say there?

MR EKANYA: The rules say that the chairperson of the committee, while presenting a report, will lay on the Table all the minutes of the discussion with the report. It is there and she can quote it. I find a big problem. These are the documents that have been laid here and I say I am having a technical problem. I support this but I want us to improve our system of work because there were several meetings that took place. Let the minutes show so that we can analyse them.

Secondly, the World Bank has changed strategy because of complaints by third world countries. Instead of conditionalities now they introduced a new terminology which is “no objection”. 

Look at the project appraisal documents and the conditions which are here - because of time, I just want to summarise. The chairperson of the committee should have presented documents confirming that the government has prepared and met these conditions. I am raising this because this loan will delay to be disbursed. Government will say we have already given the people of Northern Uganda money and it will not be on the ground. 

In summary, one of the conditions is that there is supposed to be an operational manual. The operational manual that has been laid here is a draft. The Leader of the Opposition was saying that this will cause delays when government just has a draft. When shall we have a final one in order to have the money disbursed? The people of Tororo want this money yesterday. So, are we the ones requesting for a delay?

You also need a financial management handbook. Where is this handbook? You need a community procurement handbook. Where is this handbook? You need a household income support programme handbook. Where is it? You need a public works programme handbook. Where is it? You need an administrative handbook. Where is it? You need an environmental management and social safeguard handbook. Where is it? You need a transparency, accountability and anti corruption handbook. 

Madam Speaker, all these are requirements before the money is disbursed. Unless these are completed, the money will not be disbursed. Let me tell you the implications. We think that the World Bank is the donor but we are the people giving them money. Using my phone, I have done simple calculations. We are the donors, and I agree with President Museveni one hundred percent -(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you my brother, hon. Ekanya, and Madam Speaker. All documents which are being talked about have already been submitted to the World Bank. The copies you have here are what we submitted to the World Bank and they have been accepted. They are waiting for a resolution of Parliament to begin the implementation. There are no drafts to the World Bank anymore.

MR MUKITALE: I have some additional information, Madam Speaker. I did present the minutes myself. I laid them on the Table but I do not know if it is procedurally right for the honourable to access these documents prior to - But most importantly, on page 7 of our report we have gone ahead to give the six conditions, including what will be required by the ministry. Since then, we have talked to the ministry and found out what progress has been made in as far as getting all these is concern. 

If you check page 7, condition No. 1 to No. 6, if you were here when I was presenting this report you will know that we have already mentioned the probing. We also went through to scrutinise this loan and find out the preparedness of the ministry and Office of the Prime Minister as far as this loan is required. So, I wanted to confirm that actually, we have a heap of all these other documents but we had to lay on the Table the implementation plan and the financing agreement, as I did. I thought I should give this information.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. If the government has done all that is required, you should have brought them here.

I am saying all this because we in the third world countries are the donors. They are saying that the condition for the loan is a service charge of 0.7 percent per annum on disbursed and outstanding balance. Today you go to a bank, get money, and then they give you a quarter of it because you need to make a road and you are charged interest on what is outstanding. This money is for 40 years and has 10 years grace period. If you calculate 0.7 percent for 50 years, we are going to give these people US$ 37.5 million. That is just service charge alone in terms of interest. The loan is US$ 100 million. Just roughly calculating, with effect from today when we approve this loan, we are going to start paying a service charge for non disbursed money.

One of the reasons I am saying this is because we still have a draft. With 10 years grace period, you are adding 40 years to 10 years and that is 50 years. If you calculate 0.7 percent in 50 years, we are paying US$ 37 million. The word is here, and very clearly, that the service charge is 0.7 percent per annum on disbursed and outstanding balance - outstanding in the World Bank! This is criminal and unacceptable. If the World Bank has not released money, we should not pay the service charge.

This is the action Nigeria and Ghana took, and it is part of the agreement African governors signed under the Paris Declaration of Ownership. The World Bank now has a new technicality. If the World Bank does not have money and if the Prime Minister’s Office prepares a document which is good, they will say “no objection”. We are not ready to release this money because the Auditor-General has not done his work. The procurement has not been done as per the first phase of the money that was released. I want to call upon the government to review this policy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to say that hon. Ekanya has been consistent on this matter. He has said it previously, and I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance is taking an interest in how we negotiate and structure those loans. This is the third time he has talked about this matter on different loans but the structure is the same. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I had noted the concerns of hon. Ekanya. My only dilemma was that the negotiation procedure takes a long time. If a loan is negotiated along those lines and comes to this level of passing a resolution in Parliament, it becomes very difficult for the Minister of Finance to commit herself and say that we are going to change. So, my role here was to note so that when I go back to the ministry, we sit with our technical people who lead us during negotiations to re-negotiate the conditionalities. 

We have been changing. Initially, the World Bank’s conditionalities were killing us, if you realise that, hon. Ekanya. So, we will continue showing them that we are actually uncomfortable with some of the conditionalities, which make the loans very expensive to service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I am happy that you are there. This makes some difference because we have been saying this for long.

MS NANKABIRWA: Most obliged.

2.40
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report, which to me is very clear and informative. There are only two issues, which I would like to commend the committee on.

For the first time, the committee has put before this House the predicament of Northern Uganda. They say: “Northern Uganda remains the poorest region in Uganda with some of the worst human development indicators in the country.” I cannot agree with the committee less. This is a fact, which some of us would not like to recognise. I thank the committee.

I would also like to thank the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the step it has taken to redress some of the abnormalities, which have gone on for a long time in Northern Uganda. The NUSAF I, as some people have said, did not work well in some parts of Northern Uganda. I want to refer to Apac District as an example. There, NUSAF I did not do well because of inefficiencies and patronage. 

Also, I would like to urge the Office of the Prime Minister to really follow up and monitor the implementation of NUSAF II in these districts where NUSAF I did not work well. I would like to urge the Minister of State for Northern Uganda to keep abreast with the utilisation of this Fund. 

I would like to agree with the committee on page 8, observation No. 4. It is true NUSAF might have done some good in some districts. Increase by 19 percent in UPE and 4 percent in secondary education is nothing compared to the rest of the country. I think if NUSAF II is implemented efficiently, some of these problems will be redressed. And I think as time goes on, Northern Uganda may have the opportunity to catch up. Although it will be a slow process, slow but sure, I think it would be better than nothing. I thank you very much. 

2.43
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Hon. Milton Muwuma did mention some issues regarding the performance of NUSAF in Soroti District, and my colleague, the MP for Serere, rose to say that it was not true. 

Yes, it is true that under NUSAF, Soroti District did well, but it was like a one-eyed man among the blind. There were gaps. So, hon. Milton was not out of order when he said that. Personally, I had a problem with some of the NUSAF officials’ district leadership regarding the implementation of some of the NUSAF projects in Kasilo County. It was a big challenge. I received threats because I stood on the way of some people who thought that they would make money from the people of Kasilo County, but I emerged the victor. 

I was surprised that the person who was responsible was transferred from Soroti. I wrote many letters regarding this matter and thought that serious action would be taken against the people who were mismanaging NUSAF projects in Kasilo. What they used to do was to connive with contractors. Because of semi-literacy or illiteracy levels of the people who were appointed at committee level, they would tell them that you are not supposed to go and buy materials, we shall deliver them ourselves. And they had specific shops in Soroti town where they would send them to pick materials at inflated costs. This is what the Office of the Prime Minister should try to avoid in NUSAF II. I would be your great ally in this area, especially in Kasilo.     
 
I want to appeal to the colleagues who come from areas which are going to benefit from NUSAF II that let us not just leave the district or the Prime Minister’s office to do this. We must have direct and personal interest in our areas if we are to have meaningful development there. (Applause) 

Under NUSAF I project we have many activities that have remained incomplete; some of them are white elephants. Corruption in this country has gotten imbedded in our community that you even see corrupt people being glorified - even in church, because they make big contributions; and people clap for them and say, “Hallelujah.” Such money from ill-gotten wealth; they even build churches and they are recognised as very serious Christians! This is a shame. 

We must join the Prime Minister’s office to ensure that this comes to a meaningful implementation. And Prime Minister’s office, be open to us when we ask for any information; or when we write to you, please take action against those people who mismanage these projects. 

I also read here about the teams and offices that have been set. I hope they took into consideration the issues that we raised in the meeting in Hotel Africana about employment; because at that time there were fears that the money would get back to Kampala in one way or another. We are not saying that people from other parts of the country should not get employed in this project, but to what extent should they access jobs in that area; because in a way, if you employ people who come from those areas, they will be able to put resources back to the community, thereby helping the community in that area. That is my humble request to you.

We had also proposed that deputy commissioners should be under PRDP and it should also apply to NUSAF projects so that we know that these people are based there, just like hon. Wakikona is doing in the North. That way they are able to make on-spot checks of any anomalies on the ground. We are very grateful to the Prime Minister’s office and hon. Wakikona –(Member timed out_)

2.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you. I would like to thank the government and the Office of the Prime Minister for this loan. 

When NUSAF I was under consideration in the Committee on National Economy of the Seventh Parliament, it had a big problem. It had followed NURP and NURP had been badly handled in terms of how contracts were awarded, and people ate the money to the extent that some members had actually refused to be on that committee. It was fortunate that those days people were selected to be on that committee. For the entire Northern Region, I was the only member on that committee. My argument then was: let us pass this loan but make sure that the money is used properly. We passed the loan and after we passed it, the first person to handle that loan was hon. Agadi Didi. So, because of my contribution in the committee, each time there was a meeting with the World Bank he asked that I would go with him, and I argued certain basic things. 

I told them that if this is a social fund, it is nice that you leave the people to make a choice on what they want. However, when the choices made are too diverse, there is no linkage or impact. I argued the same thing with PMA and NAADS. I said then that if you choose that NAADS funds should go to districts, focus on something limited; there would be linkage and there would be learning experiences to share. 

I now want to make this appeal that in this NUSAF, particularly in the component relating to income generation, there should be clear guidelines that limit the choice of what can be done. It allows you first of all to train those who would handle that money; though they are many, you can train them effectively. It also allows you to oversee it. If you come to one project and they tell you this and you go to another project and they tell you something else, you know immediately that something is not right somewhere. 

If we leave it that each individual group that applies for this money you give them without consideration of that guidance, I can assure you that this money will not have impact even if it is efficiently managed. The reason is very simple – US $100 million looks very much but do not forget that it is for 40 districts for five years. Now, if it is for 40 districts, it means that the average amount of money that goes to a district per year is US $500,000. That is not much money. If you take away the administrative costs and what they call linkage, the actual amount may come to something like US $300,000. With that money, if you want it to be effective, you must have a focus. 

Secondly, you must make sure that in focusing that money, it is effectively and efficiently used. I am very happy with that component on oversight that talks about transparency and so on. I would want that particular element to be strengthened. 

At that time, we argued that rather than leave the district leaders to implement, involve the Members of Parliament in the districts. The technocrats said no because they know that we are probably more open eyed and have more at stake because if I “eat” one project, I may lose the whole constituency. However, the district leaders can “eat” a project from another district and if they lose, they only lose at sub-county level. So we, the Members of Parliament, have more at stake in this than even our district leaders. 

Furthermore, many of us have experience from work and therefore we can have input on how the money is managed. So, for the oversight element and how the money is managed at the district, I would ask the Prime Minister that rather than having representation of the Parliamentarians at the management level, let us work out mechanisms where Members of Parliament can periodically have access to the review process of proposals and awarding of grants to groups. If we do that and limit our expenditure to a few things that cover a wide range within the community, then this loan will have an impact. Otherwise, I thank you very much for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that this House approves the loan as requested.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have spent almost four hours on these two loans so we did not use our time very optimally today. I am proposing that we adjourn to Tuesday, 10 O’clock, and if I am here with the chairperson and the minister, we shall proceed. So the House is adjourned to Tuesday. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 2.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 September 2009, at 10.00 a.m.) 
