
Wednesday, 23 September 2009
Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
    PRAYERS
(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)
The House was called to order.
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and in the public gallery we have students and teachers of Green Field Secondary School represented by hon. Bintu Jalia Abwooli from Masindi. You are welcome to your Parliament. And we also have pupils and teachers of St Charles Lwanga International Secondary School, who have also come to see what goes on here. You are welcome. (Applause)

BILLS 
SECOND READING
THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

2.50
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2009 be read the second time.

2.50
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Ms Rose Akol): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, on 16 September 2009, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development read for the first time the Appropriation Bill, 2009. Subsequently, the Bill was referred to the Budget Committee for detailed scrutiny and to report to the House.  

On 17 September 2009, the Budget Committee met to scrutinise the Appropriation Bill, 2009. The meeting was attended by the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of general duties; the Minister of State for Health in charge of general duties; technical officials from the ministries of Finance and Health; and chairpersons of sessional committees. 

The committee scrutinised the Appropriation Bill, 2009 vote by vote, and established that the figures as indicated in the Bill were those that the Committee of Supply had supplied to the spending agencies. The committee was, however, informed that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development intended to move some amendments during the Committee of Supply on Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Vote 116 - National Medical Stores; and Votes 501 to 764 - Local Governments. 

The committee was informed that the proposed amendments were motivated by the following considerations: 

Agricultural Extension Workers

Government took a decision to convert the existing extension staff into contractual workers under NAADS. This conversion had a budgetary implication of Shs 3.424 billion, which was budgeted for under Vote 008. 

Under the Vote-on-Account, Shs 1.141,433 billion was appropriated out of the budget for extension workers of Shs 3.324 billion budgeted under Vote 008. The committee was informed that the money has already been spent to pay the salaries of the agricultural extension workers for the month of July to September 2009. 

The committee noted that when Parliament was supplying the Financial Year 2009/10 Budget, Parliament shifted the entire Shs 3.324 billion from Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and did not take into account the money already spent under Vote-on-Account through Vote 008. Therefore, the funds available on the item to be transferred to Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, is Shs 2.282,666 billion. 

This amendment was the way forward at the time we were meeting as a committee, but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will explain the current position because it seems to have been overtaken by events. The figures quoted of Shs 15.779 billion from Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and Shs 46.926 billion for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will, therefore, have to change because the amendment has been overtaken by events. However, the committee had agreed to the proposed amendment to be moved by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as at the time we concluded this report.  

Budget for Medicines under Local Governments

The committee noted that in the past, 70 percent of the budget for the primary healthcare medicines was always appropriated to local governments and 30 percent to National Medical Stores through the Ministry of Health as a credit line. Parliament recommended that the policy should be changed so that 70 percent of the budget for medicine is deposited with the National Medical Stores and 30 percent is sent to local governments. The government agreed to the recommendation for immediate implementation during this Financial Year 2009/10.

However, when Parliament was supplying the budget to local governments, it supplied 70 percent of the PHC drug budget to local governments. Moreover, during the Vote-on-Account, a third of the 70 percent PHC medicine budget was availed to local governments. 

In order to correct the anomaly to meet the appropriation, in line with the changed policy, Shs 12.4419 billion has to be recalled from local government and availed to Vote 116 - National Medical Stores. This is to ensure that 66.7 percent of the Primary Heath Care (PHC) medicines budget for local governments is transferred to National Medical Stores as a credit line. 

The minister will provide a schedule indicating the figures to be appropriated to the local governments as a result of the new policy change. This amendment has also been overtaken by events and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will explain the current position.

The committee supports the intention of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in introducing the amendment which will help in addressing the rampant shortages of medicines in health centres. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee. The motion is for the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2009 to be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

Clause 1
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 1, agreed to.
Clause 2, agreed to.
Clause 3, agreed to.
Clause 4, agreed to.

The Schedule
MRS BBUMBA: Mr Chairman, on the schedule, under Vote 008 and following what the chairperson of the budget committee has said, I want to move an amendment to the budget of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be restored to the original position of Shs 49,209,373,577 billion and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries budget –

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me, when you say, “to be restored,” how do we restore it?

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Chairman, one of the proposed reforms for improving efficiency and effectiveness of NAADS is to employ agricultural extension workers. And converting the agricultural extension workers into contractual workers under NAADS entails a number of things, among which is identifying those that qualify to be retained under NAADS and those who have to be laid off. And the process is expected to be completed after some time. 

As an urgent measure, it has been agreed that the salaries and operational funds amounting to Shs 3.4242 billion for extension staff – it had been agreed that that money be provided for under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and out of this, Shs 0.5 billion was to facilitate the district service commissions. And that another package for those to be laid off of Shs 4 billion was to be provided under the Ministry of Public Service.

During the Vote-on-Account, an amount of Shs 1,141,333,333 was appropriated out of the budget for extension workers of Shs 3.42 billion budgeted under Vote 008. A grant credit covering this amount was issued by the Auditor-General as required by law and the funds warranted were disbursed. 

In addition, dividends by the ministry responsible for public service –(Interjections)- the proposed transfer of funds has legal implications because it implies recentralising the production services at the sub-county level for the decentralised staff. This will require a change in the current payroll processing procedures and the appropriate staff will be appointed by the Public Service Commission on transfer of service. 

This process will delay the implementation of the government decision to convert agricultural workers at the sub-county level to National Agricultural Advisory Services by December 2009, and timely payment of salaries, leading to supplementary funding. 

Therefore, when Parliament was supplying the budget last week, it shifted the entire amount of Shs 3.42 billion from Vote 008 to Vote 010 without taking into consideration the amount that had been appropriated under that vote, and this does not address the concerns given above. 

This is, therefore, to propose that Parliament amends the financial year budget as already supplied to stay the transfer of Shs 3.424 billion so that the conversion exercise is concluded as scheduled. And with that amendment, the recurrent budget for Vote 010 for Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should, therefore, be reduced to Shs 13,496,756,000 while for Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development goes back to Shs 49,209,373,577. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, to help us understand what you stated here, what do you propose? Look at the Schedule and tell us that we should remove such and such a sum from Vote so and so and take it – we do not intend to change anything. We are only transferring the figures from one vote to the other. Can you help us on that?

MRS BBUMBA: Yes, Mr Chairman. I am proposing to relocate Shs 1,141,000,333,333 from Vote 010 to Vote 008.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, can you do that in your Bill? Where are you saying we take it?

MRS BBUMBA: From Vote 010 to Vote 008.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is seconded.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, for record purposes, the minister talked about Shs 13 trillion from the Ministry of Agriculture, but what I am seeing here is only Shs 13 billion. What did she mean? We need to correct that for record purposes.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it was Shs 13 billion. Hon. Members, I hope you have adjusted your figures. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In the committee report, there is the area of budgeting for medicines under local governments. I would like to request the minister to give the necessary changes to enable us complete the debate.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there any change on the vote for local governments?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes; in regard to medicines and drugs.

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank my colleague for raising this issue. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe we should first pronounce ourselves on the first adjustment. I now put the question to the adjustments as put forward by the Minister of Finance.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Chairman, while supplying the budget for the Financial Year 2009/2010, it was recommended that the remaining funds for medicines after Vote-on-Account, which had been supplied under the local governments, be transferred to National Medical Stores during the execution of the budget. However, after discussions with the Budget Committee of Parliament, it was agreed that we move this fund during the appropriation of the budget.

We have been assured by the Minister of Local Government and the Minister of State for Primary Health Care that Primary Health Care conditional grants are protected under Article 193(3) of the Constitution, which states thus: “Conditional grants shall consist of monies given to local governments to finance programmes agreed upon between the government and local governments, and shall be expended only for the purpose for which it was made and in accordance with the conditions agreed upon.”

In view of this, it is not possible to transfer the funds from local governments to National Medical Stores. It requires an agreement with the local governments. You may wish to also note that the local governments have already passed their budgets so transferring this fund from them will cause a significant impact on their budget executions.

In order to take into consideration the concerns of the Budget Committee, the management of this fund will be sorted out administratively namely; the concerned Government departments will be required to purchase 70 per cent of the drugs from National Medical Stores.

I would like to add that the inter-ministerial committee that is charged with the administration of this fund will have to reach an agreement, which will make this a requirement.

I would like to say that my ministry will ensure that the funds are disbursed directly to National Medical Stores, after the local governments have completed the procurement process. We are suggesting this because we appreciate the need to cure the mischief. 

Many of us are aware of the shortage of drugs in our health centres and hospitals. We all know there have been complaints that this money is misappropriated by the local governments.

What we are proposing is to arrange a direct purchase without causing a constitutional crisis, but at the same time, without the local governments getting access to the money to misappropriate. I, therefore, propose that Parliament maintains the financial year 2009/2010 budget for the local governments and National Medical Stores as already supplied. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what are you proposing? I am asking this because as far as the Bill is concerned, this should have been reflected on what was agreed upon in the Committee of Supply. But I think your proposal is that the money that had been transferred pursuant to the others you have stated, be returned to the original –

MRS BBUMBA: Mr Chairman, I am proposing that the status quo remains. Only that administratively, we are going to caveat it to protect it from being misappropriated.

THE CHAIRMAN: I agree that the status quo remains. However, what happened in the Committee of Supply was that because of that policy that we are following, the money was voted to a different ministry. So, when you say that the status quo should remain, it means that you will again transfer the money, which is – because appropriation is just ceiling or putting in an instrument of what was done in the Committee of Supply.

When we dealt with the Committee of Supply, we agreed on the policy. Therefore, what should have been reflected should have been that a certain ministry’s funds had been transferred to another ministry? That is what happens. My understanding is that you are now saying that the money be returned to its original position. That should have been your statement.

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, I just want to explain that during the session of Committee of Supply, what was supplied to local governments was as per the old policy. We supplied 70 percent of the budget for PHC, under public service and local governments – all of it was supplied. The 30 percent is what remained for National Medical Stores. That is the status quo that the minister is trying to explain. 

What she is saying is that the difference now is that the 66.7 percent, which is supposed to go to National Medical Stores will be handled administratively. But that for purposes of appropriation, we do it in accordance with what we did as Committee of Supply when we supplied to these accounts.

THE CHAIRMAN: Does that mean that we did not do anything during the Committee of Supply? You see, having agreed with the policy, we ought to have taken that money somewhere else during Committee of Supply. Otherwise, why should you come here to say this? If we did not do anything, then there is no need to make such a statement. 

I think the justification was that if you send this money to the local governments, it will have problems. They might use the money for other things and fail to buy drugs. Therefore, to ensure the drugs are purchased, we said that let this 70 per cent be taken there – this is what we said. (Applause) But I would be contended if you ask us to reverse the policy to let the money get back to where it was supposed to go.

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think you will recall that when the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments presented the report, we immediately adopted it as a Committee of Supply. Under that adoption, all the monies including the monies budgeted for local governments were supplied and that included the money for PHC.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where did it go?

MR AHABWE: It went to local governments.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, it is different when talking about the report of the committee. Didn’t the figure that was read follow the policy that we had supported? It is a simple thing – you may be right, but what I am saying is that it is very simple for us to adjust the figures accordingly. I believe that will be enough to sort out this problem. The people who release the money will know that under the command of Parliament, that money has been reversed. But if that satisfies you, I can go ahead and put a question to it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Chairman. This issue was extensively debated in the Social Services Committee, whereupon we did agree with the Ministry of Health – I am actually surprised that the Minister of State for Primary Health Care came here and used a wrong constitutional provision because the purpose of the fund is not changing. Therefore, the argument that the Constitution bars us does not arise.

The problem here is that there is a network of people who benefit from this money -(Applause)– we can even name them. So, the resistance to this policy measure has got other reasons behind it.

What we are saying –(Interjections)- if you can allow me explain what this matter is all about. We are saying that the money for drugs in this country has been shared in this way - 70 per cent of the budget for drugs goes to the districts and hospitals through the PHC fund. The guidance has been the districts would spend up to 50 per cent of the PHC fund on drugs while hospitals spend 40 per cent of it still on drugs.

However, what we found out as a Committee of Social Services was that districts used to spend only between 10 to 15 per cent on drugs and the rest of the money would be spent on travel allowances, councilors’ privileges and so forth. (Applause)

We also found out that 30 percent of the money for drugs was being received through the credit lines. Previously, this money would be channelled from the Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Health before getting to National Medical Stores.

The other thing we found out, and which I think the Public Accounts Committee agrees with us, was that the Ministry of Health has been diverting this money to other areas like travel for officials in the ministry.

But we did agree that, one, we create a vote for National Medical Stores so that the money for the credit line moves directly –(Applause)- from Ministry of Finance to National Medical Stores.

Two, we also agreed that 70 percent of the budget for drugs goes directly to National Medical Stores. We did that after establishing that National Medical Stores has now got a competent management, which can do a good job. This would leave only 30 percent of the money with the districts.

We did that because we found out that the standing regulations were that the districts would order for drugs from National Medical Stores. So, in case NMS did not have drugs, it would provide a certificate of non-availability to the districts and hospitals to enable them buy such drugs from the private sector.

However, we noticed that the districts had been forging these certificates. So, if all of us are set to help this country, we should agree with this policy measure. The arguments being raised in respect of the Constitution and ring-fencing the money do not arise. We are not changing the purpose of this money; we are only saying that it be sent to National Medical Stores by Ministry of Finance so that drugs can be available in our health facilities most of the time. 

The other things we discovered was that district officials have been colluding with officials from Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Health to misappropriate this money. I do not think Parliament should be part of that circus. I thank you very much. (Applause)

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I have carefully listened to my brother, Dr Chris Baryomunsi. He is saying there is a problem at the districts. But he is also saying there is a problem at the National Medical Stores –(Interjections)– yes, just a minute. He said that there is a problem in the Ministry of Health –(Mr Kubeketerya rose) Please!

THE CHAIRMAN: No, he is just interpreting what he has captured from Dr Baryomunsi’s contribution. That cannot invite a point of order.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Chairman, when our committee presented this report, all ministers responded to it like they did in respect of other reports. 

So, is it in order for the hon. Ahabwe, the State Minister of Local Government, to appear as if he was not here to give us that information and now wants us to drive in reverse gear by changing what we already agreed upon? At the time we agreed, Ministry of Local Government did not say anything. Is he in order to now start confusing us by quoting the Constitution?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I have no sufficient facts to rule on the kind of order you have raised. But my understanding is that he was only trying to interpret what hon. Baryomunsi had said and he is entitled to his interpretation.

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. What I am trying to say is that, he said there is a problem in terms of procurement between local governments and the National Medical Stores. He also said there is a problem between the Ministry of Health and National Medical Stores in terms of procurement even for the 30 percent of the money. He concludes by saying the National Medical Stores is now okay and that they can handle not just 30 percent but even 70 percent. 

We are saying that in this new position we recognise that there are weaknesses. However, we are saying that the Ministry of Finance, with an understanding between the Ministry of Health and Local Government Finance Commission, should disburse the money for the medicines directly to the National Medical Stores. The local governments can then procure the drugs for which money has already been paid directly from the Ministry of Finance. That is what we are saying, and to me there is no contradiction. It is in our interest as local governments to have efficient and effective service delivered to our people, and I think it is in the interest of Parliament as well. 

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Chairman, we have had problems with drugs in the health centres and hospitals and Parliament tried to find a way of healing this problem. What they said is that whenever we send PHC money to the districts, 50 percent of that money is supposed to be for drugs. However, at the district, not all that 50 percent has been used for drugs. Some of it has been misappropriated. 

What Parliament said is that instead of sending that money, the 50 percent, to the districts, 70 percent of that 50 percent should be sent directly to NMS for medicines. The districts will then have to buy their medicines from NMS and NMS will have enough money to purchase all the drugs that are needed for the districts. In the past, Ministry of Health sometimes paid NMS late and they did not have enough cash flow to buy the drugs, which were needed in the districts. I am not a lawyer, so I cannot make an interpretation but basically that is what we are asking for here. 

MRS BBUMBA: I think we are all on the same page but using different routes. We all want value for money, we want the medicines to be procured in a transparent manner, and we want to cure the misappropriation of money for drugs at the district. The reason we were proposing that the money remains where it is and we carry out book entries is because there was a petition from the Local Government Finance Commission. When we looked at that petition - it came late - we were worried that we were going to have constitutional problems, especially with Article 193(3). However, if there is no problem with that, we do not mind where the money is but what we want is value for money; that is all.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we should take this that way because the mover has conceded to keep that position. (Applause)

MS AKOL: Mr Chairman, still on the schedule, on page 12 of the Appropriation Bill, Vote 229 is repeated. There should be Vote 229, and then Vote 230 but below it is Vote 229, which is repeated. It should be Vote 231. I thought it is important that we amend.  

THE CHAIRMAN: To delete one?

MS AKOL: The lower one should be Vote 231 and not Vote 229.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. You correct it. The last one should be Vote 231. So, I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman and colleagues, I propose an amendment to the development budget supplied on Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Which page?

MR OMACH: It was not supplied but I beg your indulgence, Mr Chairman. I withdraw it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable members, I propose that the schedule as amended stand the schedule to the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.
The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.30
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to)
(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.30
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2009 and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.31
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report from the committee of the whole House on the Appropriation Bill, 2009. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING
THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2009

3.31
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2009 be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill entitled the Appropriation Bill, 2009 be read the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2009”.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill is passed and this concludes the process of the Budget. (Applause)

I want to adjust the Order Paper to allow the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to make a statement. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.33
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you. I stand here to give a statement on El Nino, which is anticipated to be pronounced starting next month, October.

Reports from the Department of Meteorology predict occurrence of El Nino during the month of October to December, and there is a possibility of it extending to the usually dry months of January and February 2010. The country will receive between normal to above normal rainfall tending to flooding in areas prone to floods. This is likely to negatively affect various socio-economic activities in the country and the East Africa region at large.

Potential impacts include: loss of lives, both human and livestock; destruction of crops and infrastructure; disruption of transport resulting from floods; landslides and gusty winds; outbreak of waterborne diseases and so on.

It is further forecast that El Nino will be followed by El Nina, which is its opposite. It is characterised by severe rainfall deficits and drought leading to food shortages. 

Despite the above effects, there are some positive aspects of the occurrence of El Nino. Since nature will have given us rain, it should be seen as an opportunity that can be effectively utilised before we go into El Nina. Farmers can be advised, and are now hereby advised, to focus on water resistant crops or crops that require enough water to thrive like rice, sugarcane, tree planting and so on. Where planting is going on, areas that are likely to suffer water logging should be avoided especially with root tubers that are susceptible to water. 

Similarly, there will be enough pasture and water for animals. So, much as it is a threat, on the other hand if properly managed, the water surplus could be put to good use. 

Water levels in lakes and rivers are likely to rise, which may increase our capacity for production of hydro electricity. Water harvesting should be done for use in the dry season.   

Preparedness Measures Undertaken

Here, I would like to call upon all Members of Parliament, all leaders, both religious and civil, and all conscious human beings to take note. 

The Office of the Prime Minister has co-ordinated the various sectors and a contingency plan has been developed to prepare for and respond to the emergency. A collective budget is being put together and will be presented for consideration. I would like to inform Parliament that this afternoon Cabinet considered the situation and it is ready to put in all that is necessary to make sure that we reduce vulnerability. 

The institutions involved include: 
    • The Office of the Prime Minister. 
    • The Ministry of Works - and you know why. The Ministry of Works deals with transport, communication, and roads.
    • The Ministry of Health, dealing with health matters like increasing waterborne diseases. 
    • The Ministry of Education: during the months of October, November and December, it will be a period of exams so they have got to make sure that exams proceed and if need be, change the examination centres to meet the challenges. 
    • Ministry of Water and Environment. Concerning this ministry and wholesomeness of water, last time in 2007 we had to introduce machines that could process water for distribution. 
    • Ministry of Internal Affairs. Some individuals tend to take advantage of situations of this nature. 
    • Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for obvious reasons. 
    • The Ministry of Finance must be abreast with the situation. 
    • Ministry of Trade and Industry. 
    • Ministry of Local Government, and here I would like to expand this. The local governments are expected to be on full alert particularly in those areas where flooding is highly expected like in the regions of Teso, Karamoja, the East and North, but also not to ignore the western region like in Bundibugyo where landslides occur, and even the central region. We expect full alert and participation of all the leaders, councillors, chairpersons, RDCs, and as I said earlier on, religious leaders as they communicate in places of prayer.
    • Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. We know that the winds may break down –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Just read the names of these ministries because we know their portfolios.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Sir. 
    • National Environment Management Authority. 
    • Uganda Police.
    • Road Authority. 
    • National Water and Sewerage Corporation. 
    • Department of Meteorology, of course. 
    • Kampala City Council. Mr Speaker, allow me to say more about Kampala City Council. 

The drainage in Kampala City is appalling. The City Council must clean up all the drains so that they do not waterlog. There is no reason why there should be flooding at the Clock Tower. There is no reason why any place in Kampala should be waterlogged. It is because the drains are not unblocked. They must be cleaned up so that water can flow. The Mayor and all his staff are hereby called upon to do their duty.

Others include: IOM, UNDP, UN-OCHA, UNICEF, WHO - which is not registered there but very much with us - World Food Programme, FAO, FUSE Net, OXFAM, UJCC. 

Districts and ministries have been informed about the occurrence and preparedness measures to be undertaken at the different levels under the different sectors. There should be rehearsals of what to do. 

This is not in the text, but I would like to inform Parliament that we are also going to have training with the assistance of the World Bank in Kampala, in the east and in the north between the 1st and 15th October. This is in preparation for this expected El Nino. A co-ordination structure has been established and trainings are going on to enhance the capacity. 

Assessments have started since some of the trigger points have been seen. We have already read in the papers about the Kyenjojo incident on 16th September where over 100 households were made homeless because of winds. Field assessment reports will come out as soon as we get them. Public awareness is being conducted, and I request the co-operation and support of all Members of Parliament in preparation and response when these anticipated disasters occur.

I recall that in 2007 I was being almost roasted here because Members of Parliament especially from the Teso sub-region had not been warned and that we had done nothing. We are now better prepared, and I think that now everybody should be responsible, from individuals to the very top, which is the government at the centre. There should be no excuse that we do not know; we all know now. Let us do our bit and let radio stations be used by Members of Parliament. Let all leaders participate in awareness and preparedness. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for the statement. We have a motion from the Member of Parliament from Mawokota South. Are you prepared?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO SUPPORT THE GORILLA CONSERVATION AND NATIONAL TOURISM CAMPAIGN

3.44
MR JOHN BOSCO LUBYAYI (NRM, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to support the Gorilla Conservation and National Tourism Campaign; under rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: It is supported.

MR LUBYAYI: “WHEREAS section 5 (o) of the Uganda Wildlife Act, Cap. 200 empowers the Uganda Wildlife Authority to disseminate information and promote public education and awareness of wildlife conservation and management; and 

WHEREAS the United Nations declared the year 2009 as the Year of the Gorilla, the aim of which is to raise awareness across the globe on the need to conserve gorillas, which are considered one of the widest endangered species; and 

WHEREAS genetic analysis shows that 98.4 percent of gorillas’ DNA structure is similar to that of a human and this close kinship makes them stand out in the animal kingdom, yet gorillas remain an endangered wildlife species and are continually threatened by disease, armed conflict, destruction of its habitat and commercial trade; 

NOTING THAT the conservation of gorilla populations is necessary to prevent their extinction and that the current conservation efforts need to be widened as trends suggest that all great ape could become extinct in the wild within this century; and 

FURTHER NOTING that there is need to promote conservation of this endangered species, with the world’s population of mountain gorillas currently standing at 720 up from the dismal figure of 220 in the early 1970s, and according to the 2006 Gorilla Census, it was established that Uganda has about 340 gorillas living in 30 gorilla groups or families in Bwindi; and 

FURTHER NOTING that Uganda, having the largest population of mountain gorillas in the world, has extended its mountain gorilla conservation efforts to involve the whole world through the theme Friend-A-Gorilla Initiative;  

CONSIDERING THAT the conservation of the mountain gorillas in Uganda has proved to be a very big tourist attraction and proceeds from gorilla tourism have directly benefited the communities around Bwindi Impenetrable Forest and also the communities around Mt Mgahinga National Park; and 

CONSIDERING THAT gorilla tourism has benefited the communities around by providing direct and indirect employment opportunities and infrastructure development in form of roads, schools and hospitals, the standard of living around tourist sites such as Buhoma and Nkurungo has greatly improved; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament collectively supports the ongoing gorilla conservation and national tourism campaign.” 

I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, I move this motion in this way and justify it because the United Nations declared 2009 a year of the gorilla so that globally, all nations become aware of the importance of the gorillas and support conservation and development programmes geared towards addressing threats to the survival of gorillas. 

Uganda, as already said, hosts over half of the mountain gorillas in the world. Gorillas contribute significantly to the national economy through gorilla-tracking permits. Communities around Bwindi are getting income from handicrafts, which they sell to tourists; some have invested in accommodation facilities, while others have drama groups that are hired to entertain the tourists.

Gorillas generate the biggest share of our tourism income. For example, their income finances 54 percent of the Uganda Wildlife Authority operations. 

The coming of the Nsongi Family where some gorillas will be habituated is expected to increase the number of permits from 32 to 40 since each family is only allowed eight permits per day for health reasons. This means that income from gorilla tracking will rise from the current US $225 million per year to US $600 million. 

It is also known that tourism is the number one foreign exchange earner and currently contributes four percent to GDP. 

Gorilla eco-tourism is the cornerstone of the tourism industry in Uganda. Most importantly, it has created direct employment for over 100,000 Ugandans.

In 2008 alone, 800 tourists visited Uganda because of the gorillas. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.52
MR STEPHEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I second the motion. Allow me, first of all, to inform you that I am standing in for hon. David Ebong who is not around. Also, allow me to give information to this House that the name gorilla is derived from a Greek word “Gorilla”, meaning “hairy woman”. 

Today, there are only ten countries in the world with naturally-occurring gorilla populations. Mountain gorillas are only found in three countries: Uganda, Rwanda and the DRC. They are critically endangered and currently there are only about 720 mountain gorillas left in the world. Of the 720, the largest number is found in Uganda. 

The initiative of the Uganda Wildlife Authority to mark the UN Year of the Mountain Gorilla codenamed Friend-A-Gorilla is therefore a welcome development and must be supported by all. 

The mountain gorilla is endangered due to several factors, which include: clearing of forests, wars and hunting by human beings because the mountain gorilla cannot survive outside its natural habitat. As we have heard, it is only found in three countries; Uganda, Rwanda and the DRC. So this Parliament is doing the right thing to applaud the Uganda Wildlife Authority for their code named campaign Friend-A-Gorilla, which aims at conserving the mountain gorilla.

Yesterday in the New Vision I noticed that the mountain gorilla is indeed friendly. I saw a young mountain gorilla called Muyambi with one of the international tourists who have come to support this effort, Friend-A-Gorilla. The mountain gorilla was resting its arm on the back of Mr Penning, one of the tourists. This clearly shows that the gorilla is a friendly animal and this campaign must be supported by all.

The gorilla is the closest kin of the human being. This makes it such a unique animal that its extinction would not only be a problem to the human being but also to conservationists who must come up very clearly to support this. 

As you have heard, we are getting a number of tourists and one of the reasons is this animal, the mountain gorilla. Almost 80,000 tourists last year alone, as the mover of the motion said, came to Uganda specifically to go and see the mountain gorilla. 

There have been accusations against the tourism sector that they lack innovation in promoting tourism. I remember there was an initiative of “Uganda, Gifted by Nature” and it was attacked by many people. So this initiative of Friend-A-Gorilla is international and has been supported by many people. Hollywood stars are already in the country to support this initiative and it has been given an international facelift. So, Uganda is in the spotlight because of the gorilla through this initiative called Friend-A-Gorilla. Therefore, Parliament today should support this motion and the resolution to have this gorilla conserved through the initiative of the Uganda Wildlife Authority. Parliament should also support all those people who are coming up to help in the conservation of gorillas. 

Finally, there is some information I wanted to pass over to the House. This information can be accessed on www.friendagorilla.org and has activities about Friend-A-Gorilla. The national launch of Friend-A-Gorilla will take place on Saturday, 26 September at Kololo Airstrip followed by a fundraising gorilla gala, which will also take place on the evening of the same day. Honourable Members are advised and encouraged to fundraise towards the conservation of the mountain gorilla in Uganda. We should not leave this to only tourists and foreigners – you should take interest in conserving the mountain gorilla. Mr Speaker, I beg to support the motion. Thank you very much.

3.57
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you. I would like to congratulate our colleagues – the two Members of Parliament that have moved this motion. This is a very important aspect in this country because as you, the know world over, the largest industry is tourism and in the world, the Pearl of Africa, Uganda is endowed with the best elements of tourism but we are lacking the zeal, the capacity and sometimes the willingness to turn around these elements which we have in our society so that we become the biggest beneficiaries of tourism in the world. If we could, beginning with Members of the Parliament of Uganda, this would really be the point because I have seen issues of industralisation and we have this element given by nature which we can turn around and we become the wealthiest – leave alone this oil you are talking about because it is nothing compared to the endowment we have in Uganda which we can utilise in form of tourism to boost our income. 

In 2008, tourist arrivals went down by 8 percent and in 2007, I think because of CHOGM it went up by 19 percent. If you look at the figures of income in these two years and you compare them with other sectors, you will realise that if we put more effort into tourism, we will benefit and increase our income and if you compare them with the other sectors, you realise that if we put more efforts into tourism, we shall benefit and increase our income. 

On the side of gorillas, honourable colleagues, we have a special endowment in gorillas but as you know, gorilla gorilla, beringei - as they call them, are at a very big risk as articulated by the mover and the seconder. As a country and as a Parliament, we need to come out and support this imitative of the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the international community in preserving the gorilla gorilla, beringei. What can we do today as Members of Parliament? Let us take the lead and I would like the mover to amend the motion and just like we contributed for football, if each Member of Parliament –(Interjections)- yes. Honestly, we must lead by example. Even if you contributed Shs 30,000 or Shs 20,000 –(Interjections)- you can imagine, these are the Ugandan leaders we have in Parliament who are supposed to be the most income generating and they are behaving like this! Mr Speaker, I propose that.

Finally, I would like to caution on two things. One is because most tourists come here for gorillas in Uganda, we are habituating. For example, Rwanda has habituated all its gorillas and that is risky because we are changing the gorillas from their natural environment. I would like to call upon the Uganda Wildlife Authority to carry out habituation in a very careful manner so that we leave the bulk of our gorillas behaving in the normal way they are supposed to behave. 

Second and last, on the monopoly of the people handling the permits – I would like the Uganda government, the ministry of tourism to review the monopoly of one group, individual or firm handling the permits of gorilla tourism. This is becoming very unfair and we think we are losing a bit of money and sometimes efficiency is not attained. I think we should allow competition by reviewing the contract that the Uganda Wildlife Authority signed with this monopolist handling the gorilla permits. I want to thank you and encourage honourable members to participate. All of us have been invited through our e-mails and I would encourage us to support this initiative and it should not be the outsiders leading but the Parliament of Uganda. I thank you.

4.01
MR EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you. I stand to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to support the gorilla conservation and national tourism campaign. 

As you are aware, tourism is now the highest foreign currency earner in our country and out of that foreign currency, over 80 percent comes from gorilla tourism and, therefore, this motion comes at a time when Uganda is heavily being marketed because we have over 50 percent of the mountain gorilla population in the whole world. 

I was in Canada a few months ago –(Interjections)- yes, in Canada and one of the things that interested me the most was they knew about Uganda because of the gorillas. I was asked, “How are the mountain gorillas?”, and I was able to say, “The mountain gorillas are doing very well.” So, it is also a selling point for our country because Uganda is now known because of its mountain gorillas. 

Mr Speaker, it also enhances the conservation of our forests because before the gorilla was known about in Mgahinga and Bwindi, there was a lot of destruction of the forest around that time. But now because the gorillas are there and they need the forest to thrive and survive, those areas are now thriving, particularly Bwindi and Mgahinga because I understand they are also being considered as world heritage sites. Having more than 50 percent of the gorilla population in Uganda is a very big challenge to us. If the gorillas become extinct, Uganda would be one of the biggest losers of this tourism and this precious item of gorillas. 

Some countries - I would not like to mention them – that are bordering us and have very few gorillas are able to benefit from gorillas more than us because of their marketing procedures and that is why I would like to support my colleague, the MP of Mbarara Municipality that we as Parliament must take the lead. We should make a humble contribution towards the conservation of gorillas in this country because if we do not, we shall not be contributing as leaders and as Members of Parliament -(Interjections)- yes, let it be voluntary but let the minister concerned and his team move a paper around so that we make a humble contribution to support the Uganda Wildlife Authority and to support the Ministry of Tourism.

Mr Speaker, my colleagues have already mentioned that there is the Friend-A-Gorilla Initiative that has been initiated by the Ministry of Tourism and the Uganda Wildlife Authority and it is taking place this week. Invitations are already in the Members’ pigeon holes. By the way, I am also an honorary warden for wildlife. So as a member, I would like to appeal to honourable members to support this initiative so that our gorillas do not perish but will be a resource to us. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We have a lot of business to handle; this was something that just came in. I think I should give just two more Members an opportunity to contribute. 

4.06
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. Looking at what we have in this country, we need to improve our tourism and since we are talking of the hairy women - they said that in their language “gorilla” means hairy women - so, I stand to support the motion for the hairy women of this country –(Laughter)– to ensure that they are conserved.

Not only should the gorillas be conserved in this country but so should the many other attractions which bring in money. It is very sad when you have a cow and you never give it food. So, the Ministry of Tourism is like a cow which you keep milking without feeding. We know that what you sow is what you reap and we are now looking at the gorilla which has been giving us money for a very long time, but which none of us has been thinking of. 

I have gone to some areas like Rwanda where resources are spent on gorillas. If you see the amount of resources invested in the gorilla, you will just get amazed because what they reap is in billions of dollars. I now ask the Minister of Tourism and my government: surely, should we have waited for the United Nations day to promote the gorilla in the country? Why should we wait for international days? Are we being awakened because international conferences or days are coming? We should always be on the look out to ensure that what gives us money is always fed. 

I also want to tell you that much as we are going to celebrate this day, most of the infrastructure that attracts tourism - the road infrastructure, hotels, and water is catered for - we are looking at the gorilla but what of the other attractions like culture? I have visited areas where you find that just a simple thing brings in billions of money but the way we plan does not really reflect what we say that we are gifted by nature. If we had continued to advertise and if we had continued to work on the attractions properly, then we would be getting good yields now. 

I also want to comment on what my colleague said that as Parliament we need to contribute some money. We have been contributing money to different programmes but we have never contributed to things to do with maternal health. (Applause) As you think of Members contributing to the different issues, can we also have contributions on issues to do with maternal health? Women and children are dying; they also need to be conserved. So, let us not only conserve the gorillas but the women and the children too. They are dying in great numbers and we need them on board. I thank you very much. 

4.12
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. Government supports this activity because it gives us publicity. People come to this country and enjoy our publicity and they also realise that some of the things, which appear on the internet trying to tarnish our country, are not correct. So this is a great opportunity and I invite you to Kololo on Saturday. I will be the guest of honour, and I hereby agree to contribute Shs 1,000,000 on behalf of Parliament. 

I have asked many Members of Parliament whether they go to parks to see animals, and many of them have said it has not really occurred to them. So, we lack that culture; we take animals for granted. But I think it is important to change our culture and go to parks and actually enjoy the beauty and uniqueness of these animals. I support the motion. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think the motion has been supported. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $10 MILLION CREDIT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE AVIAN AND HUMAN INFLUENZA PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE PROJECT

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that Parliament do resolve to authorise Government to borrow US $10 million credit from the International Development Association of the World Bank for the Avian and Human Influenza Preparedness and Response Project. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Chairperson.

4.15
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mrs Erinah Wangwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A request was presented to Parliament to authorise the US $10 million loan from the IDA of the World Bank, by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 1 April 2009 and this matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy. Therefore, we would like to report as follows:

Methodology

The committee scrutinised the loan documents, that is, the project implementation plan, the loan agreement, the loan appraisal, the responses that were given to us by the ministry; and the report by the ministry on the diseases. I wish to lay these documents on Table. They are all in this file.

The committee also held meetings with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Health and the Office of the Prime Minister.

The committee also carried out on-spot assessment of the project sites, that is the National Influenza Laboratory at the Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe, the National Animal Disease Diagnostic and Epidemiology Centre, Mulago Referral Hospital, especially the proposed site for the project, Entebbe Hospital and the proposed site for construction of isolation units at the former health education building near UNHRO offices in Entebbe. These are our findings:

Background

In 2003, an outbreak of the animal and human influenza virus was reported in East Asia and a highly pathogenic strain of the said virus was identified as being responsible for the large scale epidemic outbreaks and deaths in wild and domestic fowls.

Avian influenza is primarily a viral disease of birds and over 200 million domestic poultry worldwide have died as a result of Avian Influenza. 

The established mode of transmission of the virus is from animal to human and the disease also affects human beings. The virus continues to stir serious human concerns because of the potential threat of it mutating into ways that allow human to human transmission.

According to the World Health Organisation, there were 387 known human cases between 2003 and 2008, of which 245 persons have died on account of viral infection.

Because of the human and economic threat of the influenza virus, a global alliance spearheaded by World Health Organisation, the World Organisation for Animal Health, the Food and Agriculture Organisation and the World Bank, decided to tackle the problem jointly. To this effect, a global plan to eradicate the disease was formed.

Developed countries contributed to a Global Aviation Influenza Trust Fund. 

The global alliance encouraged and supported every country interested in drawing up an integrated national action plan for the preparedness and response to the Avian Influenza. Any developing country that came up with an integrated national action plan for preparedness and response to the influenza would benefit from grants under the Global Trust Fund and the World Bank.

Uganda’s action plan was approved by the global alliance in March 2008. As a result, Uganda qualified to access the grant funds from Global Trust Fund and credit from the World Bank. The project was approved on 19 June 2008 and the offer has already had two cancellations to its deadline, which is in April and May this year.

Objectives of the Loan

The loan of US $10 million is to fund Uganda’s integrated national action plan for preparedness and response to Avian Influenza whose total cost is estimated at US $14.32 million. Uganda will receive US $4 million grant from the Avian and Human Influenza Trust Fund.

The project is not only targeting Avian Influenza. It will generally enhance Uganda’s capacity for disease diagnosis and surveillance. The project will thus help the country to build a strong base for handling other viral diseases that affect both humans and animals, both domestic and wild, including the Swine Flu.

The objective of the loan is to build capacity of the country to prevent entry of the disease and in the unfortunate event of entry, to detect and respond early in a most efficient and effective manner in order to eradicate it before it causes significant damage.

The rationale is that it is cheaper to prevent an outbreak or prepare to reduce the effects of an outbreak than it is to handle the actual outbreak of the epidemic.

Project Components

The project has four components, namely: animal health; human health; communication and co-ordination; and monitoring and evaluation. 

The Animal Health Component

The main objectives of the animal health component are:
    1. To build capacity of the country to prevent entry of the disease as detailed in the main objective before.
    2. To strengthen animal health and disease surveillance. 
    3. To upgrade laboratories and stock supplies and medicines.
    4. To build human resource strength and capacity. 
    5. To secure communication equipment to enable access to all corners of the country. 
    6. To facilitate surveillance of migratory and resident wild birds, and improve isolation centres/quarantine facilities for monitoring animals to be exported or imported.

The project will in particular upgrade the National Diagnostic and Epidemiology Laboratory Centre in Entebbe, and also the National Veterinary Laboratory in Entebbe. The laboratory will be upgraded to a bio-safety level; three facilities would be able to carry out confirmatory diagnosis at molecular level of many diseases, including, Avian Influenza; taking into account the risk to staff working in the laboratory, the clients and the environment. This is more important given the fact that the current laboratory has a low bio-security level, putting scientists working on samples, the clients and the environment at high risk. 

The modern laboratory will be equipped with kits and reagents as well as protective equipment and sampling equipment. The laboratory at the National Referral Facility will collaborate and co-ordinate with regional and international reference laboratories for quality assurance. District laboratories will be provided with rapid detection kits to enable them screen samples for routine surveillance and rapid response. 

A modern laboratory is a great asset to our economy especially in enhancing our exports. International trade in livestock and livestock products requires that the exporting country carries out internationally accepted tests to satisfy trade regulations. 

Currently, Uganda is disadvantaged in the export of animals and animal products because of lack of proof that our products are of high quality. Therefore, the equipped national livestock laboratory will prove to the external market the absence of certain diseases, and thus boost our exports. It will also prove to us whether our imports of livestock products are of quality.

The Human Resource Capacity Building

The project will further assist in training staff in surveillance, epidemiology, handling modern equipment and reagents, communication skills and responding to outbreaks. 

The curriculum at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine will be improved to ensure that graduates come out with the necessary competencies to meet the modern challenges in the field of emerging and re-emerging diseases.

Support to the Uganda Wildlife Authority 

In order to guard against outbreaks brought about by migratory birds and animals, UWA will be provided with live bird capture equipment to enable surveillance and resident wild birds. A Global Positioning System (GPS) will be provided to districts and national parks that currently lack them.

Improving poultry products, marketing and processing systems

Many Ugandans, especially women, make a living through poultry farming. Uganda’s poultry census stands at 39.2 million domesticated birds. It is estimated that over 2 million chickens will be saved per year as a result of the project intervention. 

The project will support public hygiene in poultry slaughter facilities, poultry product outlets, live bird markets and backyard poultry production system. 

Quarantine Facilities

Part of the proceeds of the loan will be used for rehabilitating quarantine facilities at the National Disease Diagnostic and Epidemiology Centre. However, the centre has been encroached on by the Civil Aviation Authority.

The Human Health Component 

The main objectives of the health components are - Please ignore No.1 and we move to No.2, which will then be No.1: 
    1. To further strengthen the animal health and surveillance, national veterinary services and provision of better human health services by establishing isolation units, upgrading laboratories and provision of supplies and medicines.

    2. To substantially reduce the threat caused to the human population in Uganda by the highly pathogenic Avian Influenza Virus and other zonotic diseases. 

It is important to remember that in the past three years, a number of zonotic diseases have caused epidemics in the country, for example, Marburg Fever, Ebola, Plague, Rabies, Brucellosis and Anthrax. This, therefore, calls for strengthening the health system to detect early, and respond quickly to contain, not only Avian Influenza but a large range of other diseases.

Thus the key interventions under the human health component on the Avian and human Influenza project are:

        1) Strengthening the research and diagnostic capacity by upgrading the National Influenza Laboratory at the Uganda Virus Research Institute to bio-safety level III.

        2) Expanding surveillance to cover targeted referral hospitals and community-based surveillance.

        3) Developing Influenza control guidelines.

        4) Building isolation facility units for highly infectious diseases in at least two regional referral hospitals in each of the four regions in the country.

        5) Provision of pharmaceutical and emergency supplies.

        6) Activating the Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Rapid Response Team.

        7) In accordance with World Health Organisation, International Health Regulations 2005, establishing a functional and permanent health desk to screen all incoming travellers at Entebbe International Airport and other major points of entry.

Communication Component

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Health will establish a communication centre and a communication strategy where they will publicise and disseminate information concerning Avian Influenza through supporting media campaigns, training farmers, households, local government officials, religious and cultural leaders.

Institutional Arrangement

The project will be implemented within the existing Government structures and will last for four years. The project coordination team will consist of technical officials from the three ministries responsible for project implementation, namely, Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Health; and Office of the Prime Minister. The Office of the Prime Minister shall provide overall management and coordination of the project activities.

Legal Framework 

One of the critical outputs of the projects is the development of a sound policy and legal framework for the control of epidemic diseases in Uganda. A clear and sound policy to deal with vaccination, compensation and cost sharing in disease control will be enacted. For example, a policy to address the situation of health workers dying in the course of treating Ebola victims is long overdue.
 
Conditions of the Loan 

The total credit is special drawing rights of US$ 10 million. The loan attracts a commitment charge rate payable on a non-withdrawn balance of 0.5 percent per annum. 

The loan further attracts a service charge on the withdrawn credit balance of 0.75 percent, and the loan has a maturity period of 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years from the date of signing the financing agreement. Other conditions have been fulfilled by the government as detailed in that paragraph.

Observations

The committee raised concerns over the delays that twice caused cancellations of the extensions. The committee noted that the scare of Avian flu is not as rampant as the scare of infectious diseases, and raised concern as to why Ministry of Agriculture was getting more funds from this project instead of Ministry of Health, especially given the fact that floods have been predicted and there are various diseases associated with the floods especially cholera.

It was noted that most equipment and buildings in Entebbe under the research component are donations. Therefore, the committee were concerned as to whether Government is not interested in investing in the research.

It was also further noted that Civil Aviation Authority has encroached on the land meant for the National Animal Disease Diagnostic and Epidemiological Centre.

The committee noted with concern that the project lacked a special programme component aimed especially at sensitising the women, given the fact that it is the women who generally take care of the sick both in hospital and at home; and, they stand a high risk of contracting these diseases. 

Please ignore observation No. 6 because it was cleared. 

Observation No. 7: the committee further noted the absence of an adequate and relevant policy to protect and compensate the health workers from the tragedies they encounter in their line of duty. 

Our recommendations were as follows:
The government always has to work expeditiously towards bringing the loans to Parliament for scrutiny and approval to avoid such instances of cancellations due to debts as was the case with this project, because it impacts poorly on the country internationally.

The committee recommends that re-allocations of funds be carried out in favour of the Ministry of Health which is facing a much bigger challenge as far as this project is concerned.

Government is urged to invest more and increase funding in research, and Civil Aviation Authority should desist from encroaching on the National Animal Disease Diagnostic and Epidemiological Centre’s land.

The government is urged to incorporate in its project activities a component to cater for the specialised training and sensitisation of women who are the basic caretakers of the sick in matters of primary health and precautions. Please ignore No.6  

The government is further urged to develop an all encompassing policy to deal with the protection and compensation of health workers, especially those who get infected while executing their duties. 

Given the noble objectives of the project and the loan terms that are concessional and favourable to Uganda, the committee recommends that the House do approve and authorise Government to borrow US$ 10 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for the Avian and Human Influenza Preparedness and Response project. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, madam chairperson.

4.36
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I stand to support this motion to allow government to borrow this money, but I would like to make the following comments - very genuine comments. 

One is the issue mentioned by the committee, where it observes that the land belonging to the epidemiology centre has been encroached upon. I think this country has to really be very serious. The other time we were struggling when someone was trying to privatise the Virus Research Centre; now it is the epidemiology centre. What is it that is happening to Ugandans leaders? What kind of greed is this? And, what are we looking for? How do you sell a National Virus Research Centre to a private person? 

I want the Ministry of Agriculture to note this; it is in a huge crisis: the country has no seed stock. The hon. Rwamirama, Minister of Agriculture, and my friend, knows that we are sitting on a time bomb. We have no seed stock; we privatised the Uganda Seed Scheme and put it in the hands of the private sector; you cannot imagine what is happening in this country! 

We are on the brink of collapse in terms of the national seed stock for planting, because what has happened is that these private people are even no longer raising appropriate seed; they are importing seeds from Tanzania and Kenya; people are just at their mercy. They go and get any seed of poor quality, put some kind of paint on it and say it is treated seed; and the production has gone down. What kind of human beings are we? What will our people say, because if Uganda depends almost 100 percent, on agriculture, and we have no seed stock, yet we have put the production of seed in the hands of a private person, who as I speak now has put us in a crisis - Ministry of Agriculture, what are you going to do? And be honest because you are in trouble; let us come to your rescue. 

So, this is the same thing we are facing in the circumstances. When you say Civil Aviation is encroaching, what is it encroaching upon? They should not even think about it because if we do not really take note of our actions and omissions, you and me, one of these days this population will rise up against us who are seated here because it is becoming tricky; some of the things are not understandable. I do not know how the Ministry of Agriculture is going to restore the seed stock in this country. 

I would like to conclude and say, yes for us as Parliament we shall support you, but you as the Executive also have a shortcoming because when you have a crisis it is as if you are handling it personally. Bring it to this House; bring it to the Speaker and we shall apprehend - whether it is Civil Aviation; whether it is Kigyagi; whether it is who, this Parliament should be able to deal with them in a decisive manner. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.40
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support this loan request, but I would also like to make a few comments.

First of all, as we support this loan request, we again need reassurance from the ministries of Health and Finance, because there has been agitation from this Parliament that there should be a loan request to address issues of maternal health. So, we shall support this loan, but we would want Finance and Health to assure this Parliament because there was that anxiety within this House on the issue of maternal health.

Having said that, the committee observes that Agriculture is getting more money, and probably for information, I think out of the US$ 10 billion, about US$ 7 billion is going to Agriculture and US$ 3 billion is going to Health in this loan request. 

This Avian Flu is a reality affecting the country, but the first case of Avian Flu occurred in 2003. It occurs when there is mutation; when the virus which is ordinarily in birds crosses to infect human beings and it usually takes a long time. 

This project proposal and project document were written in 2006. I have read the document and I think if the technical people were asked to write the document today, I am sure they would write something different from what is contained - because little information was known just three years after the first case of Avian Flu. So when you look at the proposed activities, I think they are the hardware and software aspects. The hardware, like the construction of isolation units within our hospitals like Mulago, Entebbe Hospital and eight regional referral hospitals, although they are not named. We would like the Ministry of Health to tell us which regional referral hospitals will benefit from this loan, and if the laboratory at the Uganda Virus Research Institute will be upgraded. Then, we shall get results.

I would also like to say that the committee adopted us as the social services committee to visit the various sites, and we were convinced that we shall get results at that level, and it was the same for Agriculture. But when you look at what I will call the software activities, there are a lot of workshops and trainings which I am not very convinced will all be giving us outputs. 

So I just want to caution the ministries which are going to implement this loan that they need to be very careful and ensure that they structure activities to benefit Ugandans; because, a lot of money is being spent on workshops and so forth. 

This is why I said that if I was asked to write the project document today, given the knowledge we have on this condition, probably I would change some of the activities and probably give the Ministry of Health more money because in Agriculture it is poultry that is affected, which is a small component of the sector. 

In Health, it is going to build the capacity of the ministry in containing epidemics in addition to Avian Flu, in order for the ministry to be able to handle all other epidemics like the Swine Flu, which we were talking about yesterday. So I want to agree with the recommendation of the committee that if it is possible, the ministries need to sit down and see whether re-allocation of the money within the two benefiting ministries could be done so that we get maximum impact from this loan.

The chairperson, while presenting, said that they had dropped observation No. 6 on page 11, which states that: “Note was taken of the lack of a co-ordination team to co-ordinate the activities of the ministries and government departments involved in the implementation of the project.” 

I don’t know why you are dropping that observation because these two ministries are being coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister. But I think that there are still weaknesses in the Office of the Prime Minister in terms of bringing the two ministries together, because we realised this as we moved around. So I would like to urge that you maintain that observation because even the coordination of preparation of this document –(Interruption)

MR KIGYAGI:  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that although this observation has been dropped, you remember we passed here a loan of US $72.2 million for the Farm Income Enhancement and Tree Planting Project which was between the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture. This same point came up and that loan took a long time to be operationalised. 

You remember they told us that they had a coordination team; but when they went to the ground, they begun fighting and that loan might not have a very big effect because it took a long time to appoint the coordinator and even when he was appointed, I am not sure whether the activities that were carried out were well facilitated. I have actually put a question to the minister who will answer at an appropriate time. I thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing to give information on the Farm Income Enhancement Project where my honourable colleague is alleging that there was fighting between the two ministries. There has never been fighting as far as that project is concerned. The roles are clearly spelt out: the Ministry of Water and Environment is mandated to handle the tree planting component and water shed management. Issues to do with small scale irrigation, soil fertility management and marketing are under Agriculture and we are moving on very well. I thought I should clear that.

MR MUKITALE: Some additional information. Thank you very much, hon. Vice-Chairman of the Social Services Committee for giving way. I am giving information regarding dropping observation No. 6. Whereas we dropped it so that we would not seem to be opposing the loan, we have since talked to the Social Services Committee, the Agriculture Committee and to the Presidential Chairperson who is in charge of the Office of the Prime Minister and said that within the implementation of the project, OPM can step up coordination and interest. This is because initially we really had a problem with them but we have since found Mr Kazungu and others who are responsible.

The other information is that whereas the project was conceived in 2003, the implementation plan was for November 2008 and it has since addressed a lot of changes. The preparedness we are talking of is not only for Avian Influenza. There are re-occurrences of other epidemics. We need these laboratories and isolation centres, which actually will increase the country’s preparedness for these incidences. I thank you so much.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I still maintain that the information we gathered was that the Office of the Prime Minister didn’t do a very good job in preparing these documents for this loan so it is just to caution the office that they need to do more especially when we start implementing this project.

Lastly, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is preparing a policy on sanitary and phyto-sanitary issues, which have to do with hygiene for food and other products. Recently, we had a meeting with the ministry officials to educate us about this policy. We found that there are very many issues, which are similar to what this loan request is going to address and one of their challenges is that they don’t have resources. 

I just want to plead with government that if it is possible, they should look at some of the activities and see how this ministry can benefit. I think that would help us take this policy, which the ministry is preparing, forward. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.50
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion but also to express my concern about what has been happening and my fear about this loan. As has been expressed by my colleagues, there are some loans that have been approved by this Parliament but the implementation has left a lot to be desired. 

I agree with the hon. Minister of Water and Environment about the Fifoc component in the Ministry of Water and Environment that has been handled well especially the tree planting but I don’t support her, and she knows it, on the issue of agriculture. This is because the money that was meant for the small irrigation schemes is not going to be used for this. It is going to be used by the big schemes. Therefore, the small areas that had initially been targeted to be served by the irrigation schemes are not going to benefit because there was a problem of implementation of the Fifoc programme in agriculture.

My problem –(Interruption)

MR RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the issue raised is not to do with this loan but to do with the loan which hon. Namuyangu was explaining. It was considered that the small demonstration pumps were not going to assist the public and would not make tangible impact so we redesigned them to make those big schemes to benefit many farmers and make economic sense. That is why there was restructuring of that programme and that is one of the reasons it delayed. 

I want to make it clear to this House that the delay was not because of misunderstandings but because we realised that government was going to make simple demonstration without making impact to the farmers. We have since embarked on four big irrigation schemes in the country to make serious economic impact and we are designing a mechanism to make more meaningful irrigation schemes for increased agriculture production. I thank you.

MR BUKENI: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable minister has been honest enough to say that the small areas that were targeted when the project was being initiated are not going to benefit. This is because in the case of Mubuku, for example, there are no local people around who are going to benefit. It is only going to serve an area, which is not owned by the people yet the target was where our people are.

The other issue is that of laboratories, which they are saying will be district hospital laboratories. We have had problems of epidemics but you find that even in referral hospitals, the regents that are there return negative results when in reality there is a problem. 

The hon. Minister of Health knows that when we had a problem in Mbale last time, the results that were being given by the facility in Mbale were negative yet there was a problem. It took a long time to move the specimen from Mbale to Entebbe or some place to have the results positive when people were dying.

I hope that this project will put in place facilities in these laboratories, which can address all this. A problem like Avian Influenza, by it occurring in Bushenyi where it was least expected to start from means that it can start from anywhere. Therefore, all areas must be prepared whether the North East or any other place because it can start from anywhere as given by the example of what has happened in Bushenyi.

The other issue is that it is my hope that since the Office of the Prime Minister is the coordinating centre, it will also involve other ministries. Due to our porous international boundaries, it is very difficult to target a given area; either it is Entebbe International Airport, Malaba or Katuna and people from neighbouring countries cross from any point. That is why I suggest that the Prime Minister’s Office coordinates all other agents of government to be able to monitor people who come in. 

When the report about the gorillas was being presented together with the resolution, they said about 98.4 percent of their DNA proves that the gorillas have similar characteristics with human beings. I do not know whether they cannot suffer from this disease, especially if they are busy caressing foreigners who may carry the disease. However, the issue is that we should monitor all the entry points and protect all the areas so that we are not taken unaware by this disease. I support the motion.

4.57
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

This Avian Flu is a very deadly disease and it can strike any time. I support the loan because the flu is affecting two distinct large groups of animals; the birds and the human beings. If you consider the side of the birds - which have the highest population - we have beautiful birds like the Crested Crane, the Ostrich and other varieties, including our own chicken. So, if we do not prepare ourselves to prevent this disease, we shall lose these animals. 

If I consider poultry, our projects, which generate money, particularly for women and persons with disabilities, are poultry. If we are not prepared and these birds die, we shall lose a lot in our economy and income-generation for our different groups. 

If you look at the human virus - I was listening to the radio and they said it affects mainly people who have got hypertension and diabetes. And a very big number of us have such diseases so once we prevent it, we shall save ourselves from dying.

I support the idea and I would like to see that the centres for research, the laboratories and the areas, which are near the borders, especially referral hospitals like in Arua, which is bordering Sudan and Congo, should be a priority. Also, there should be research centres in areas like Koboko, so that we can monitor incoming people who are infected and also the birds, which are moving to and from the borders.

I would like to request these two ministries to really use this money for the benefit of the people and the project. Quite often the disease strikes but they relax, take their time and by the time the disease appears, we shall have wasted money for nothing. I am appealing to the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Health to make sure that this money is used properly to prevent this disease from coming to Uganda. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.00
MS PHERRY KABANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of the Committee on Economy and I just want to give you my observation. 

First of all, as a matter of urgency - 

MR KIGYAGI: Information, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, I know she has said she is a Member of the Committee on Economy, but let us hear what she has.  

MS KABANDA: Yeah, I have declared before time. I urge members to take this as a matter of urgency and pass this loan because I saw the state in which - first of all, Mulago isolation centre is in a pathetic state. We should really pass this loan and get this construction done.

My other observation was the site in Entebbe. When we went to Entebbe, I found out that there is an urgent need to have a site - I mean an isolation centre constructed. Then after speaking to the members of staff of Entebbe Hospital, I realised that the place has too many scattered units: they have Entebbe Hospital, they have Grade B and then they have this facility near Botanical Beach. It is in the centre of almost very many important facilities like the Ministry of Agriculture. They have a restaurant nearby and PGB sleeping next door. So I asked them: “How are you going to isolate people within communities?” I think there is a need to think of another place or location for that isolation centre.

I also talked to the members of staff and they told me Entebbe Hospital has four acres of free land. They said they would be very happy to build an isolation centre within Entebbe Hospital and I am requesting the Minister of Health to consider their request seriously. Thank you very much.

5.02
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand up to join my colleagues to support this loan but I have some few suggestions I want to make as the loan is being implemented.

I am glad this project is going to be implemented through a multi-sectoral approach and I, therefore, initially urge the respective ministries and departments to fulfil their obligations in implementing this project. 

On page 6, the committee reports that Uganda has not featured prominently in the export of animals and animal products because we do not have adequate equipment to ensure that we have the quality that can be accepted on the world market. I think this is an issue that derails the country from prosperity. Honourable members will appreciate that Uganda is one of the leading countries in the production of animals and animal products. I believe today our population for animal production per year for cattle is close to 20 million and yet we are not on the international market when countries like Botswana with a population of 2.7 million cattle per year are exporting a lot of their animal products to the world market. Therefore, I urge the ministry that if we are going to establish a laboratory to ensure quality for our animal products, please ensure that this is effected effectively. 

When you look at the poultry sector, many of people in this country are engaged in poultry keeping which is one of the areas where our population is actually generating revenue. 

When we are talking about disease surveillance and diagnosis, the local chicken or birds that are produced here are naturally more resistant to disease than those that are imported. I urge the ministry concerned that more research should be done in support of the locally produced birds in this country because they would be more resistant to disease than those ones that are imported. This will go a long way in improving our production and productivity from these poultry products.  

I want to end by emphasising the recommendations which this committee has made. I join my colleague, hon. Kigyagi, to say that this Parliament should follow the question of land, which is housing the Department of Epidemiology in Entebbe, and if there is any interference by the Civil Aviation Authority, we should investigate it to the end. The question of interfering with land that is housing national facilities has gone beyond and it is this Parliament that must ensure that this stops and this recommendation by the committee is highly supported by this House. We should not support it in this House alone but make a follow up to ensure that this land remains for this important institute.

Given the precarious situation we have particularly in the disease control and surveillance, we believe that the Ministry of Health must be equipped with the necessary equipment and the Ministry of Animal Industry and the Ministry of Trade and Tourism are all empowered to ensure that we can have disease control. With this, we believe that our population will indeed increase productivity because we shall spend less on importation of drugs or in the production of drugs and indeed our animal production will increase and we increase incomes for our population. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is time we end this debate. We have sufficiently covered it. Agriculture - okay, the chairperson.

5.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Oliver Wonekha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. 

I stand up to support the request for this loan and especially that it is not only targeting Avian Influenza but also Swine Flu and others. It has also been pointed out that it will be addressing diseases that are not only for humans but also for animals, both domestic and wild. It is not so long ago that we saw Anthrax killing a lot of the hippos in the wild. Let us all support this loan, keeping in mind the current challenges of climatic change. There is a resurrection of diseases that we had thought we had gotten rid of but are now with us. If this is one measure that can help us to deal with disaster in terms of diseases, let us go ahead and approve this loan. 

In upgrading the laboratory, I do support that the loan be passed to address the issue of bio-security for the scientists. My committee, together with the Committee on National Economy, visited the two laboratories at the Uganda Virus Research Institute and the one at the Ministry of Agriculture. Those people really cried out to us that government is neglecting them and I think this is an opportunity to have that issue addressed. 

The global trend today is on standards: national standards, regional standards, global standards; and this norm is going to address the issue of having internationally accepted tests being carried out on the livestock to satisfy trade regulations. Of course, without complying with these standards, we will not really participate and benefit from the national, regional and global markets.

Finally, on the issue of land, indeed the Ministry of Agriculture is prone to encroachment but when my committee together with that on National Economy were in Entebbe, we were assured by the Minister of Agriculture that negotiations were going on and that the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Works were addressing the issue. So, I think it is in our interest that we hear what exactly is happening. Has the land been taken? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise government to borrow US $10 million credit from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for the Avian and Human Influenza Preparedness and Response Project. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have many loans which are really tied to our finances and tomorrow we may have to deal with the loan, which is listed as No. 3 under notice of business to follow. But we urge the management of the committees responsible to make executive summaries of their reports. You can talk about issues briefly and then we go to a full debate and this will help us to clear as many resolutions as possible because from what I see here, there are about eight and that is the only way we shall be able to deal with these motions.

I think we have exhausted what we are supposed to do today and, therefore, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. to continue with the business that has been listed. I thank you very much.
 
(The House rose at 5.14 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 September 2009 at 2.30 p.m.)

